Letters of Gregory of Nyssa (Gregory of Nyssa)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 VI.--Letters.

 Letters [2161] .

 ------------------------

 Letter I.--To Eusebius [2162] .

 When the length of the day begins to expand in winter-time, as the sun
 mounts to the upper part of his course, we keep the feast of the
 appearing of the true Light divine, that through the veil of flesh has
 cast its bright beams upon the life of men: but now when that luminary
 has traversed half the heaven in his course, so that night and day are
 of equal length, the upward return of human nature from death to life
 is the theme of this great and universal festival, which all the life
 of those who have embraced the mystery of the Resurrection unites in
 celebrating. What is the meaning of the subject thus suggested for my
 letter to you? Why, since it is the custom in these general holidays
 for us to take every way to show the affection harboured in our hearts,
 and some, as you know, give proof of their good will by presents of
 their own, we thought it only right not to leave you without the homage
 of our gifts, but to lay before your lofty and high-minded soul the
 scanty offerings of our poverty. Now our offering which is tendered for
 your acceptance in this letter is the letter itself, in which there is
 not a single word wreathed with the flowers of rhetoric or adorned with
 the graces of composition, to make it to be deemed a gift at all in
 literary circles, but the mystical gold, which is wrapped up in the
 faith of Christians, as in a packet [2163] , must be my present to you,
 after being unwrapped, as far as possible, by these lines, and showing
 its hidden brilliancy. Accordingly we must return to our prelude. Why
 is it that then only, when the night has attained its utmost length, so
 that no further addition is possible, that He appears in flesh to us,
 Who holds the Universe in His grasp, and controls the same Universe by
 His own power, Who cannot be contained even by all intelligible things,
 but includes the whole, even at the time that He enters the narrow
 dwelling of a fleshly tabernacle, while His mighty power thus keeps
 pace with His beneficent purpose, and shows itself even as a shadow
 wherever the will inclines, so that neither in the creation of the
 world was the power found weaker than the will, nor when He was eager
 to stoop down to the lowliness of our mortal nature did He lack power
 to that very end, but actually did come to be in that condition, yet
 without leaving the universe unpiloted [2164] ? Since, then, there is
 some account to be given of both those seasons, how it is that it is
 winter-time when He appears in the flesh, but it is when the days are
 as long as the nights that He restores to life man, who because of his
 sins returned to the earth from whence he came,--by explaining the
 reason of this, as well as I can in few words, I will make my letter my
 present to you. Has your own sagacity, as of course it has, already
 divined the mystery hinted at by these coincidences; that the advance
 of night is stopped by the accessions to the light, and the period of
 darkness begins to be shortened, as the length of the day is increased
 by the successive additions? For thus much perhaps would be plain
 enough even to the uninitiated, that sin is near akin to darkness; and
 in fact evil is so termed by the Scripture. Accordingly the season in
 which our mystery of godliness begins is a kind of exposition of the
 Divine dispensation on behalf of our souls. For meet and right it was
 that, when vice was shed abroad [2165] without bounds, [upon this night
 of evil the Sun of righteousness should rise, and that in us who have
 before walked in darkness [2166] ] the day which we receive from Him
 Who placed that light in our hearts should increase more and more; so
 that the life which is in the light should be extended to the greatest
 length possible, being constantly augmented by additions of good; and
 that the life in vice should by gradual subtraction be reduced to the
 smallest possible compass; for the increase of things good comes to the
 same thing as the diminution of things evil. But the feast of the
 Resurrection; occurring when the days are of equal length, of itself
 gives us this interpretation of the coincidence, namely, that we shall
 no longer fight with evils only upon equal terms, vice grappling with
 virtue in indecisive strife, but that the life of light will prevail,
 the gloom of idolatry melting as the day waxes stronger. For this
 reason also, after the moon has run her course for fourteen days,
 Easter exhibits her exactly opposite to the rays of the sun, full with
 all the wealth of his brightness, and not permitting any interval of
 darkness to take place in its turn [2167] : for, after taking the place
 of the sun at its setting, she does not herself set before she mingles
 her own beams with the genuine rays of the sun, so that one light
 remains continuously, throughout the whole space of the earth's course
 by day and night, without any break whatsoever being caused by the
 interposition of darkness. This discussion, dear one, we contribute by
 way of a gift from our poor and needy hand; and may your whole life be
 a continual festival and a high day, never dimmed by a single stain of
 nightly gloom.

 [2161] The first fourteen of these Letters have been once edited; i.e.
 by Zacagni (Rome, 1698), from the Vatican ms. See Prolegomena, p. 30.
 They are found also in the Medicean ms., of which Bandinus gives an
 accurate account, and which is much superior, on the authority of
 Caraccioli, who saw both, to the Vatican. Zacagni did not see the
 Medicean: but many of his felicitous emendations of the Vatican lacunæ
 correspond with it. They are here translated by the late Reverend
 Harman Chaloner Ogle, Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford (Ireland
 Scholar), who died suddenly (1887), to the grief of very many, and the
 irreparable loss to scholarship, on the eve of his departure to aid the
 Mission of the Archbishop of Canterbury to the Armenian Church. The
 notes added by him are signed with his initials.

 [2162] Sent as an Easter present to Eusebius, bishop of Chalcis, in
 Coele-Syria, a staunch Catholic, who attended the Council of
 Constantinople. For this custom amongst the Eastern Christians of
 exchanging presents at the great festivals, cf. On the Making of Man
 (p. 387), which Gregory sent to his brother Peter: Gregory Naz. Letter
 54 to Helladius, and Letter 87 to Theodore of Tyana.

 [2163] apodesmo.

 [2164] Evidently an allusion to the myth in Plato.

 [2165] The chusis tes kakias is a frequent expression in Origen.

 [2166] A corrupt passage. Probably some lines have been lost. A double
 opposition seems intended; (1) between the night of evil and our
 Saviour's coming like the Sun to disperse it; and (2) between walking
 in darkness and walking in light on the part of the individual (H. C.
 O.).

 [2167] en to merei, or "on her part" or "at that particular season." To
 support this last, Col. ii. 16, en merei heortes, may be compared, as
 Origen interprets it, "in a particular feast," c. Cels. viii. 23: "Paul
 alludes to this, when he names the feast selected in preference to
 others only part of a feast,' hinting that the life everlasting with
 the Word of God is not in the part of a feast, but in a complete and
 continuous one.' Modern commentators on that passage, it is true,
 interpret en merei "with regard to," "on the score of." But has
 Origen's meaning been sufficiently considered?

 Letter II.--To the City of Sebasteia [2168] .

 Some of the brethren whose heart is as our heart told us of the
 slanders that were being propagated to our detriment by those who hate
 peace, and privily backbite their neighbour; and have no fear of the
 great and terrible judgment-seat of Him Who has declared that account
 will be required even of idle words in that trial of our life which we
 must all look for: they say that the charges which are being circulated
 against us are such as these; that we entertain opinions opposed to
 those who at Nicæa set forth the right and sound faith, and that
 without due discrimination and inquiry we received into the communion
 of the Catholic Church those who formerly assembled at Ancyra under the
 name of Marcellus. Therefore, that falsehood may not overpower the
 truth, in another letter we made a sufficient defence against the
 charges levelled at us, and before the Lord we protested that we had
 neither departed from the faith of the Holy Fathers, nor had we done
 anything without due discrimination and inquiry in the case of those
 who came over from the communion of Marcellus to that of the Church:
 but all that we did we did only after the orthodox in the East, and our
 brethren in the ministry had entrusted to us the consideration of the
 case of these persons, and had approved our action. But inasmuch as,
 since we composed that written defence of our conduct, again some of
 the brethren who are of one mind with us begged us to make separately
 [2169] with our own lips a profession of our faith, which we entertain
 with full conviction [2170] , following as we do the utterances of
 inspiration and the tradition of the Fathers, we deemed it necessary to
 discourse briefly of these heads as well. We confess that the doctrine
 of the Lord, which He taught His disciples, when He delivered to them
 the mystery of godliness, is the foundation and root of right and sound
 faith, nor do we believe that there is aught else loftier or safer than
 that tradition. Now the doctrine of the Lord is this: "Go," He said,
 "teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
 the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." Since, then, in the case of those who
 are regenerate from death to eternal life, it is through the Holy
 Trinity that the life-giving power is bestowed on those who with faith
 are deemed worthy of the grace, and in like manner the grace is
 imperfect, if any one, whichever it be, of the names of the Holy
 Trinity be omitted in the saving baptism--for the sacrament of
 regeneration is not completed in the Son and the Father alone without
 the Spirit: nor is the perfect boon of life imparted to Baptism in the
 Father and the Spirit, if the name of the Son be suppressed: nor is the
 grace of that Resurrection accomplished in the Father and the Son, if
 the Spirit be left out [2171] :--for this reason we rest all our hope,
 and the persuasion of the salvation of our souls, upon the three
 Persons, recognized [2172] by these names; and we believe in the Father
 of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who is the Fountain of life, and in the
 Only-begotten Son of the Father, Who is the Author of life, as saith
 the Apostle, and in the Holy Spirit of God, concerning Whom the Lord
 hath spoken, "It is the Spirit that quickeneth". And since on us who
 have been redeemed from death the grace of immortality is bestowed, as
 we have said, through faith in the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
 Spirit, guided by these we believe that nothing servile, nothing
 created, nothing unworthy of the majesty of the Father is to be
 associated in thought with the Holy Trinity; since, I say, our life is
 one which comes to us by faith in the Holy Trinity, taking its rise
 from the God of all, flowing through the Son, and working in us by the
 Holy Spirit. Having, then, this full assurance, we are baptized as we
 were commanded, and we believe as we are baptized, and we hold as we
 believe; so that with one accord our baptism, our faith, and our
 ascription of praise are to [2173] the Father, and to the Son, and to
 the Holy Ghost. But if any one makes mention of two or three Gods, or
 of three God-heads, let him be accursed. And if any, following the
 perversion of Arius, says that the Son or the Holy Spirit were produced
 from things that are not, let him be accursed. But as many as walk by
 the rule of truth and acknowledge the three Persons, devoutly
 recognized in Their several properties, and believe that there is one
 Godhead, one goodness, one rule, one authority and power, and neither
 make void the supremacy of the Sole-sovereignty [2174] , nor fall away
 into polytheism, nor confound the Persons, nor make up the Holy Trinity
 of heterogeneous and unlike elements, but in simplicity receive the
 doctrine of the faith, grounding all their hope of salvation upon the
 Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,--these according to our judgment
 are of the same mind as we, and with them we also trust to have part in
 the Lord.

 [2168] Marcellus of Ancyra had been deposed in the Council of
 Constantinople in 336, for teaching the doctrine of Paul of Samosata.
 Basil and Athanasius successively separated from their communion all
 who were united to Marcellus; and these, knowing that Valens the
 Emperor had exiled several bishops of Egypt to Diocæsarea, went to find
 them (375) and were admitted to their communion. Armed with letters
 from them, they demanded to be received into that of the other bishops
 of the East, and at length Basil and others, having examined the matter
 closely, admitted them. Gregory followed Basil's example, being assured
 of their Catholicity: and to justify himself wrote this letter to the
 Catholics of Sebasteia.

 [2169] idios, i.e. as a distinct matter from the previous apologia; or
 perhaps "privately."

 [2170] peplerophoremetha; a deponent, the same use as in Rom. iv. 21,
 of Abraham, plerophoretheis hoti ho epengeltai k.t.l.: cf. plerophoria
 pisteos, Heb. x. 22: plerophoria tes elpidos, Heb. vi. 11. The other
 N.T. use of this word, as an active and passive, is found 2 Tim. iv. 5,
 "fulfil thy ministry;" 2 Tim. iv. 17; S. Luke i. 1, peplerophoremenon,
 "most surely believed" (A.V.): in all which the R.V. follows the
 Vulgate interpretation. In the Latin translation of this passage in
 Gregory, "(professionem) quâ sacris nos Scripturis ac Patrum traditioni
 penitus inhærere persuasum omnibus foret," the meaning put upon
 plerophoreisthai by A.V. in the last text is adopted, "we are fully
 believed to follow," with a very harsh construction.

 [2171] There is some repetition and omission here. Gregory ought to
 have said in one of the clauses, "Nor is Baptism in the name of the Son
 and Holy Ghost sufficient, without the name of the Father" (H. C. O.).

 [2172] gnorizomenen looks as if it ought to be gnorizomenais, and the
 Latin translator renders accordingly (H. C. O.).

 [2173] The same preposition eis is used after baptisma, pistis, and
 doxa.

 [2174] monarchia, i.e. the One First Cause or Principle. See p. 84,
 note 7.

 Letter III.--To Ablabius [2175] .

 The Lord, as was meet and right, brought us safe through, accompanied
 as we had been by your prayers, and I will tell you a manifest token of
 His loving kindness. For when the sun was just over the spot which we
 left behind Earsus [2176] , suddenly the clouds gathered thick, and
 there was a change from clear sky to deep gloom. Then a chilly breeze
 blowing through the clouds, bringing a drizzling with it, and striking
 upon us with a very damp feeling, threatened such rain as had never yet
 been known, and on the left there were continuous claps of thunder, and
 keen flashes of lightning alternated with the thunder, following one
 crash and preceding the next, and all the mountains before, behind, and
 on each side were shrouded in clouds. And already a heavy [2177] cloud
 hung over our heads, caught by a strong wind and big with rain, and yet
 we, like the Israelites of old in their miraculous passage of the Red
 Sea, though surrounded on all sides by rain, arrived unwetted at
 Vestena. And when we had already found shelter there, and our mules had
 got a rest, then the signal for the down-pour was given by God to the
 air. And when we had spent some three or four hours there, and had
 rested enough, again God stayed the down-fall, and our conveyance moved
 along more briskly than before, as the wheel easily slid through the
 mud just moist and on the surface. Now the road from that point to our
 little town is all along the river side, going down stream with the
 water, and there is a continuous string of villages along the banks,
 all close upon the road, and with very short distances between them. In
 consequence of this unbroken line of habitations all the road was full
 of people, some coming to meet us, and others escorting us, mingling
 tears in abundance with their joy. Now there was a little drizzle, not
 unpleasant, just enough to moisten the air; but a little way before we
 got home the cloud that overhung us was condensed into a more violent
 shower, so that our entrance was quite quiet, as no one was aware
 beforehand of our coming. But just as we got inside our portico, as the
 sound of our carriage wheels along the dry hard ground was heard, the
 people turned up in shoals, as though by some mechanical contrivance, I
 know not whence nor how, flocking round us so closely that it was not
 easy to get down from our conveyance, for there was not a foot of clear
 space. But after we had persuaded them with difficulty to allow us to
 get down, and to let our mules pass, we were crushed on every side by
 folks crowding round, insomuch that their excessive kindness all but
 made us faint. And when we were near the inside of the portico, we see
 a stream of fire flowing into the church; for the choir of virgins,
 carrying their wax torches in their hands, were just marching in file
 along the entrance of the church, kindling the whole into splendour
 with their blaze. And when I was within and had rejoiced and wept with
 my people--for I experienced both emotions from witnessing both in the
 multitude,--as soon as I had finished the prayers, I wrote off this
 letter to your Holiness as fast as possible, under the pressure of
 extreme thirst, so that I might when it was done attend to my bodily
 wants.

 [2175] This Letter must have been written, either (1) After the first
 journey of Gregory to Constantinople, i.e. after the Council, 381; or
 (2) On his return from exile at the death of Valens, 378. The words at
 the end, "rejoiced and wept with my people," are against the first
 view.

 [2176] 'Earsou. The distance prevents us conjecturing "Tarsus" here,
 though, Gregory was probably coming from the sea (and the Holy Land).
 But "Garsaura" is marked on the maps as about 40 miles south of Nyssa
 with the "Morimene" mountains (Erjash Dagh) intervening. (Nyssa lay on
 a southern tributary of the Halys, N.W. of Nazianzum.) The Medicean ms.
 is said by Migue to read heauton here--"we left behind us." Nothing is
 known of Vestena below.

 [2177] Adopting the conjecture of the Latin translator bareia for
 bracheia. His translation, however, though ingenious, would require
 something different in the Greek. It runs "jamque nubes, quæ nostro
 impendebat capiti, postquam acri vehementique vento abrepta alio delata
 fuit, hiemem peperit." As the text stands hupolephtheisa cannot bear
 this translation (H. C. O.)

 Letter IV.--To Cynegius [2178] .

 We have a law that bids us "rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep
 with them that weep": but of these commandments it often seems that it
 is in our power to put only one into practice. For there is a great
 scarcity in the world of "them that rejoice," so that it is not easy to
 find with whom we may share our blessings, but there are plenty who are
 in the opposite case. I write thus much by way of preface, because of
 the sad tragedy which some spiteful power has been playing among people
 of long-standing nobility. A young man of good family, Synesius by
 name, not unconnected with myself, in the full flush of youth, who has
 scarcely begun to live yet, is in great dangers, from which God alone
 has power to rescue him, and next to God, you, who are entrusted with
 the decisions of all questions of life and death. An involuntary mishap
 has taken place. Indeed, what mishap is voluntary? And now those who
 have made up this suit against him, carrying with it the penalty of
 death, have turned his mishap into matter of accusation. However, I
 will try by private letters to soften their resentment and incline them
 to pity; but I beseech your kindliness to side with justice and with
 us, that your benevolence may prevail over the wretched plight of the
 youth, hunting up any and every device by which the young man may be
 placed out of the reach of danger, having conquered the spiteful power
 which assails him by the help of your alliance. I have said all that I
 want in brief; but to go into details, in order that my endeavour may
 be successful, would be to say what I have no business to say, nor you
 to hear from me.

 [2178] Cynegius was "prefect of the prætorium," from 384 to 390. Cod.
 Medic. has on the title, Ieri& 251; Egemoni: but this must be wrong. It
 was this Cynegius, not then Prefect of the East, whom Libanius was to
 lead however unwilling, to the study of eloquence (see end of Letter
 xi.). The four Prætorian Prefects remained, after Diocletian's
 institution of the four Princes, under whom they served, had been
 abolished by Constantine. The Prefect of the East stretched his
 jurisdiction "from the cataracts of the Nile to the banks of the
 Phasis, and from the mountains of Thrace to the frontiers of Persia."
 From all inferior jurisdictions an appeal in every matter of
 importance, either civil or criminal, might be brought before the
 tribunal of the Prefect; but his sentence was final: the emperors
 themselves refused to dispute it. Hence Gregory says, that, "next to
 God, Cynegius had the power to remove his young relative from danger."
 How intimate Gregory was, not only with the highest officers, but at
 the Court itself, is shown in his orations on Pulcheria and Flacilla.
 He must have been over sixty when this letter was written.

 Letter V.--A Testimonial.

 That for which the king of the Macedonians is most admired by people of
 understanding,--for he is admired not so much for his famous victories
 [2179] over the Persians and Indians, and his penetrating as far the
 Ocean, as for his saying that he had his treasure in his friends;--in
 this respect I dare to compare myself with his marvellous exploits, and
 it will be right for me to utter such a sentiment too. Now because I am
 rich in friendships, perhaps I surpass in that kind of property even
 that great man who plumed himself upon that very thing. For who was
 such a friend to him as you are to me, perpetually endeavouring to
 surpass yourself in every kind of excellence? For assuredly no one
 would ever charge me with flattery, when I say this, if he were to look
 at my age and your life: for grey hairs are out of season for flattery,
 and old age is ill-suited for complaisance, and as for you, even if you
 are ever in season for flattery, yet praise would not fall under the
 suspicion of flattery, as your life shows forth your praise before
 words. But since, when men are rich in blessings, it is a special gift
 to know how to use what one has, and the best use of superfluities is
 to let one's friends share them with one, and since my beloved son
 Alexander is most of all a friend united to me in all sincerity, be
 persuaded to show him my treasure, and not only to show it to him, but
 also to put it at his disposal to enjoy abundantly, by extending to him
 your protection in those matters about which he has come to you,
 begging you to be his patron. He will tell you all with his own lips.
 For it is better so than that I should go into details in a letter.

 [2179] diegemasin. "He believed in fidelity, and was capable of the
 sublimest, most intimate friendships. He loved Hephæstion so fervently,
 that....he remained inconsolable for his loss."--F. Schlegel. Achilles
 was his hero: for he too knew the delight of a constant friendship.

 Letter VI.--To Stagirius.

 They say that conjurors [2180] in theatres contrive some such marvel as
 this which I am going to describe. Having taken some historical
 narrative, or some old story as the ground-plot of their sleight of
 hand, they relate the story to the spectators in action. And it is in
 this way that they make their representations of the narrative [2181] .
 They put on their dresses and masks, and rig up something to resemble a
 town on the stage with hangings, and then so associate the bare scene
 with their life-like imitation of action that they are a marvel to the
 spectators--both the actors themselves of the incidents of the play,
 and the hangings, or rather their imaginary city. What do I mean, do
 you think, by this allegory? Since we must needs show to those who are
 coming together that which is not a city as though it were one, do you
 let yourself be persuaded to become for the nonce the founder of our
 city [2182] , by just putting in an appearance there; I will make the
 desert-place seem to be a city; now it is no great distance for you,
 and the favour which you will confer is very great; for we wish to show
 ourselves more splendid to our companions here, which we shall do if,
 in place of any other ornament, we are adorned with the splendour of
 your party.

 [2180] thaumatopoiountas...thaumatopoiias; something more than ordinary
 mime playing, or than the optical illusion of tableaux-vivants, but
 less than what we should call conjuring seems to be meant (H. C. O.).

 [2181] ta katallela ton historoumenon

 [2182] oikistes autoschedios

 Letter VII.--To a Friend.

 What flower in spring is so bright, what voices of singing birds are so
 sweet, what breezes that soothe the calm sea are so light and mild,
 what glebe is so fragrant to the husbandman--whether it be teeming with
 green blades, or waving with fruitful ears as is the spring of the
 soul, lit up with your peaceful beams, from the radiance which shone in
 your letter, which raised our life from despondency to gladness? For
 thus, perhaps, it will not be unfitting to adapt the word of the
 prophet to our present blessings: "In the multitude of the sorrows
 which I had in my heart, the comforts of God," by your kindness, "have
 refreshed my soul," [2183] like sunbeams, cheering and warming our life
 nipped by frost. For both reached the highest pitch--the severity of my
 troubles, I mean, on the one side, and the sweetness of your favours on
 the other. And if you have so gladdened us, by only sending us the
 joyful tidings of your coming, that everything changed for us from
 extremest woe to a bright condition, what will your precious and benign
 coming, even the sight of it, do? what consolation will the sound of
 your sweet voice in our ears afford our soul? May this speedily come to
 pass, by the good help of God, Who giveth respite from pain to the
 fainting, and rest to the afflicted. But be assured, that when we look
 at our own case we grieve exceedingly at the present state of things,
 and men cease not to tear us in pieces [2184] : but when we turn our
 eyes to your excellence, we own that we have great cause for
 thankfulness to the dispensation of Divine Providence, that we are able
 to enjoy in your neighbourhood [2185] your sweetness and good-will
 towards us, and feast at will on such food to satiety, if indeed there
 is such a thing as satiety of blessings like these.

 [2183] Ps. xciv. 19.

 [2184] diaphorountas. This letter is probably written during his exile,
 (375-8) and to Otreius, the bishop of Melitene. See Letter 14, note.

 [2185] ek geitonon.

 Letter VIII [2186] .--To a Student of the Classics.

 When I was looking for some suitable and proper exordium, I mean of
 course from Holy Scripture, to put at the head of my letter, according
 to my usual custom, I did not know which to choose, not from inability
 to find what was suitable, but because I deemed it superfluous to write
 such things to those who knew nothing about the matter. For your eager
 pursuit of profane literature proved incontestably to us that you did
 not care about sacred. Accordingly I will say nothing about Bible
 texts, but will select a prelude adapted to your literary tastes taken
 from the poets you love so well. By the great master of your education
 there is introduced one, showing all an old man's joy, when after long
 affliction he once more beheld his son, and his son's son as well. And
 the special theme of his exultation is the rivalry between the two,
 Ulysses and Telemachus, for the highest meed of valour, though it is
 true that the recollection of his own exploits against the
 Cephallenians adds to the point of his speech [2187] . For you and your
 admirable father, when you welcomed me, as they did Laertes, in your
 affection, contended in most honourable rivalry for the prize of
 virtue, by showing us all possible respect and kindness; he in numerous
 ways which I need not here mention, and you by pelting me with [2188]
 your letters from Cappadocia. What, then, of me the aged one? I count
 that day one to be blessed, in which I witness such a competition
 between father and son. May you, then, never cease from accomplishing
 the rightful prayer of an excellent and admirable father, and
 surpassing in your readiness to all good works the renown which from
 him you inherit. I shall be a judge acceptable to both of you, as I
 shall award you the first prize against your father, and the same to
 your father against you. And we will put up with rough Ithaca, rough
 not so much with stones as with the manners of the inhabitants, an
 island in which there are many suitors, who are suitors [2189] most of
 all for the possessions of her whom they woo, and insult their intended
 bride by this very fact, that they threaten her chastity with marriage,
 acting in a way worthy of a Melantho, one might say, or some other such
 person; for nowhere is there a Ulysses to bring them to their senses
 with his bow. You see how in an old man's fashion I go maundering off
 into matters with which you have no concern. But pray let indulgence be
 readily extended to me in consideration of my grey hairs; for garrulity
 is just as characteristic of old age as to be blear-eyed, or for the
 limbs to fail [2190] . But you by entertaining us with your brisk and
 lively language, like a bold young man as you are, will make our old
 age young again, supporting the feebleness of our length of days with
 this kind attention which so well becomes you.

 [2186] Perhaps to Eupatrius (Cod. Medic.).

 [2187] The text here seems hopelessly corrupt. Or the meaning may be,
 "Our main text shall be his exultation at the generous rivalry between
 Ulysses and Telemachus, though his mention of his exploits against the
 Cephallenians shall also contribute to illustrate our discussion;" but
 this can hardly be got out of the Greek. The reference is to Odyssey,
 xxiv. 514. Gregory was evidently fond of Homer: the comparison of
 Diomede to a winter torrent (Iliad, v. 87) is used De Virginit. c. 4:
 and Menelaus' words about the young and old (Iliad, iii. 108), c. 23:
 and in Letter II. of the seven edited by Caraccioli (Letter XV.)
 describing the gardens of Vanota, Od. vii. 115, xiii. 589. For other
 quotations from the classics see Letters XI. and XII. of this Series
 (H. C. O.).

 [2188] ballontes, with allusion to the darts hurled by Ulysses and
 Telemachus (H. C. O.).

 [2189] Reading mnesteres, for the unmeaning krateres; "they are suitors
 not so much for the hand of Penelope as for her money" (H. C. O.). The
 Medicean has brosteres, "devourers." Just below the allusion is to
 Melantho's rudely threatening Ulysses, and getting hanged for it.

 [2190] hupo tes tou geros aponoias, an irrelevant phrase, and, as not
 necessary to the sense, here omitted in translation (H. C. O.).

 Letter IX.--An Invitation.

 It is not the natural wont of spring to shine forth in its radiant
 beauty all at once, but there come as preludes of spring the sunbeam
 gently warming earth's frozen surface, and the bud half hidden beneath
 the clod, and breezes blowing over the earth, so that the fertilizing
 and generative power of the air penetrates deeply into it. One may see
 the fresh and tender grass, and the return of birds which winter had
 banished, and many such tokens, which are rather signs of spring, not
 spring itself. Not but that these are sweet, because they are
 indications of what is sweetest. What is the meaning of all that I have
 been saying? Why, since the expression of your kindness which reached
 us in your letters, as a forerunner of the treasures contained in you,
 with a goodly prelude brings the glad tidings of the blessing which we
 expect at your hands, we both welcome the boon which those letters
 convey, like some first-appearing flower of spring, and pray that we
 may soon enjoy in you the full beauty of the season. For, be well
 assured, we have been deeply, deeply distressed by the passions and
 spite of the people here, and their ways; and just as ice forms in
 cottages after the rains that come in--for I will draw my comparison
 from the weather of our part of the world [2191] ,--and so moisture,
 when it gets in, if it spreads over the surface that is already frozen,
 becomes congealed about the ice, and an addition is made to the mass
 already existing, even so one may notice much the same kind of thing in
 the character of most of the people in this neighbourhood, how they are
 always plotting and inventing something spiteful, and a fresh mischief
 is congealed on the top of that which has been wrought before, and
 another one on the top of that, and then again another, and this goes
 on without intermission, and there is no limit to their hatred and to
 the increase of evils; so that we have great need of many prayers that
 the grace of the Spirit may speedily breathe upon them, and thaw the
 bitterness of their hatred, and melt the frost that is hardening upon
 them from their malice. For this cause the spring, sweet as it is by
 nature, becomes yet more to be desired than ever to those who after
 such storms look for you. Let not the boon, then, linger. Especially as
 our great holiday [2192] is approaching, it would be more reasonable
 that the land which bare you should exult in her own treasures than
 that Pontus should in ours. Come then, dear one, bringing us a
 multitude of blessings, even yourself; for this will fill up the
 measure of our beatitude.

 [2191] For the climate, cf. Sozomen, H. E. vi. 34: "I suppose that
 Galatia, Cappadocia, and the neighbouring provinces contained many
 other ecclesiastical philosophers at that time (i.e. reign of Valens).
 These monks, for the most part, dwelt in communities in cities and
 villages, for they did not habituate themselves to the tradition of
 their predecessors. The severity of the winter, which is always a
 natural feature of that country, would probably make hermit life
 impracticable."

 [2192] For such invitations, cf. Greg. Naz. Epist. 99, 100, 102.

 Letter X [2193] .--To Libanius.

 I once heard a medical man tell of a wonderful freak of nature. And
 this was his story. A man was ill of an unmanageable complaint, and
 began to find fault with the medical faculty, as being able to do far
 less than it professed; for everything that was devised for his cure
 was ineffectual. Afterwards when some good news beyond his hopes was
 brought him, the occurrence did the work of the healing art, by putting
 an end to his disease. Whether it were that the soul by the overflowing
 sense of release from anxiety, and by a sudden rebound, disposed the
 body to be in the same condition as itself, or in some other way, I
 cannot say: for I have no leisure to enter upon such disquisitions, and
 the person who told me did not specify the cause. But I have just
 called to mind the story very seasonably, as I think: for when I was
 not as well as I could wish--now I need not tell you exactly the causes
 of all the worries which befel me from the time I was with you to the
 present,--after some one told me all at once of the letter which had
 arrived from your unparalleled Erudition, as soon as I got the epistle
 and ran over what you had written, forthwith, first my soul was
 affected in the same way as though I had been proclaimed before all the
 world as the hero of most glorious achievements--so highly did I value
 the testimony which you favoured me with in your letter,--and then also
 my bodily health immediately began to improve: and I afford an example
 of the same marvel as the story which I told you just now, in that I
 was ill when I read one half of the letter, and well when I read the
 other half of the same. Thus much for those matters. But now, since
 Cynegius was the occasion of that favour, you are able, in the
 overflowing abundance of your ability to do good, not only to benefit
 us, but also our benefactors; and he is a benefactor of ours, as has
 been said before, by having been the cause and occasion of our having a
 letter from you; and for this reason he well deserves both our good
 offices. But if you ask who are our teachers,--if indeed we are thought
 to have learned anything,--you will find that they are Paul and John,
 and the rest of the Apostles and Prophets; if I do not seem to speak
 too boldly in claiming any knowledge of that art in which you so excel,
 that competent judges declare [2194] that the rules of oratory stream
 down from you, as from an overflowing spring, upon all who have any
 pretensions to excellence in that department. This I have heard the
 admirable Basil say to everybody, Basil, who was your disciple, but my
 father and teacher. But be assured, first, that I found no rich
 nourishment in the precepts of my teachers [2195] , inasmuch as I
 enjoyed my brother's society only for a short time, and got only just
 enough polish from his diviner tongue to be able to discern the
 ignorance of those who are uninitiated in oratory; next, however, that
 whenever I had leisure, I devoted my time and energies to this study,
 and so became enamoured of your beauty, though I never yet obtained the
 object of my passion. If, then, on the one side we never had a teacher,
 which I deem to have been our case, and if on the other it is improper
 to suppose that the opinion which you entertain of us is other than the
 true one--nay, you are correct in your statement, and we are not quite
 contemptible in your judgment,--give me leave to presume to attribute
 to you the cause of such proficiency as we may have attained. For if
 Basil was the author of our oratory, and if his wealth came from your
 treasures, then what we possess is yours, even though we received it
 through others. But if our attainments are scanty, so is the water in a
 jar; still it comes from the Nile.

 [2193] This and the following letter appear to have been written when
 Gregory still publicly professed belles lettres. They are addressed to
 one of the masters whom Basil had had at Athens. For these see
 Socrates, H. E. iv. 26: it was probably Libanius; rather than
 Prohæresius, who did not live in Asia Minor, or Himærius who (according
 to Eunapius, Philosoph. Vit. p. 126) had become a Christian before the
 reign of Julian, and it is clear that this Letter is written to a
 pagan. The Cod. Medic. has Libanius' name as a title to both Letters.
 No Letter to Gregory certainly is to be found amongst Libanius'
 unpublished Letters in the Vatican Library, as Zacagni himself
 testifies: but no conclusion can be drawn from this.

 [2194] This passage as it stands is unmanageable. The Latin translator
 appears to give the sense required, but it is hard to see how it can be
 got out of the words (H. C. O.).

 [2195] isthi me meden echonta liparon (ms. lupron) en tois ton
 didaskalon diegemasin: but tou didaskalou perhaps should be read
 instead of ton didaskalon (H. C. O.).

 Letter XI.--To Libanius.

 It was a custom with the Romans [2196] to celebrate a feast in
 winter-time, after the custom of their fathers, when the length of the
 days begins to draw out, as the sun climbs to the upper regions of the
 sky. Now the beginning of the month is esteemed holy, and by this day
 auguring the character of the whole year, they devote themselves to
 forecasting lucky accidents, gladness, and wealth [2197] . What is my
 object in beginning my letter in this way? Why, I do so because I too
 kept this feast, having got my present of gold as well as any of them;
 for then there came into my hands as well as theirs gold, not like that
 vulgar gold, which potentates treasure and which those that have it
 give,--that heavy, vile, and soulless possession,--but that which is
 loftier than all wealth, as Pindar says [2198] , in the eyes of those
 that have sense, being the fairest presentation, I mean your letter,
 and the vast wealth which it contained. For thus it happened; that on
 that day, as I was going to the metropolis of the Cappadocians, I met
 an acquaintance, who handed me this present, your letter, as a new
 year's gift. And I, being overjoyed at the occurrence, threw open my
 treasure to all who were present; and all shared in it, each getting
 the whole of it, without any rivalry, and I was none the worse off. For
 the letter by passing through the hands of all, like a ticket for a
 feast, is the private wealth of each, some by steady continuous reading
 engraving the words upon their memory, and others taking an impression
 [2199] of them upon tablets; and it was again in my hands, giving me
 more pleasure than the hard [2200] metal does to the eyes of the rich.
 Since, then, even to husbandmen--to use a homely
 comparison--approbation of the labours which they have already
 accomplished is a strong stimulus to those which follow, bear with us
 if we treat what you have yourself given as so much seed, and if we
 write that we may provoke you to write back. But I beg of you a public
 and general boon for our life; that you will no longer entertain the
 purpose which you expressed to us in a dark hint at the end of your
 letter. For I do not think that it is at all a fair decision to come
 to, that,--because there are some who disgrace themselves by deserting
 from the Greek language to the barbarian, becoming mercenary soldiers
 and choosing a soldier's rations instead of the renown of
 eloquence,--you should therefore condemn oratory altogether, and
 sentence human life to be as voiceless as that of beasts. For who is he
 who will open his lips, if you carry into effect this severe sentence
 against oratory? But perhaps it will be well to remind you of a passage
 in our Scriptures. For our Word bids those that can to do good, not
 looking at the tempers of those who receive the benefit, so as to be
 eager to benefit only those who are sensible of kindness, while we
 close our beneficence to the unthankful, but rather to imitate the
 Disposer of all, Who distributes the good things of His creation alike
 to all, to the good and to the evil. Having regard to this, admirable
 Sir, show yourself in your way of life such an one as the time past has
 displayed you. For those who do not see the sun do not thereby hinder
 the sun's existence. Even so neither is it right that the beams of your
 eloquence should be dimmed, because of those who are purblind as to the
 perceptions of the soul. But as for Cynegius, I pray that he may be as
 far as possible from the common malady, which now has seized upon young
 men; and that he will devote himself of his own accord to the study of
 rhetoric. But if he is otherwise disposed, it is only right, even if he
 be unwilling, he should be forced to it; so as to avoid the unhappy and
 discreditable plight in which they now are, who have previously
 abandoned the pursuit of oratory.

 [2196] The custom of New Year's gifts (strenarum commercium) had been
 discontinued by Tiberius, because of the trouble it involved to
 himself, and abolished by Claudius: but in these times it had been
 revived. We find mention of it in the reigns of Theodosius, and of
 Arcadius; Auson. Ep. xviii. 4; Symmach. Ep. x. 28.

 [2197] Or, not improbably, "they contrive lucky meetings, festivities,
 and contributions."

 [2198] Pindar, Ol. i. 1: ho de chrusos, aithomenon pur hate diaprepei
 nuktos, megalanoros exocha ploutou.

 [2199] enapomorxamenon

 [2200] apokroton

 Letter XII [2201] .--On his work against Eunomius.

 We Cappadocians are poor in well-nigh all things that make the
 possessors of them happy, but above all we are badly off for people who
 are able to write. This, be sure, is the reason why I am so slow about
 sending you a letter: for, though my reply to the heresy (of Eunomius)
 had been long ago completed, there was no one to transcribe it. Such a
 dearth of writers it was that brought upon us the suspicion of
 sluggishness or of inability to frame an answer. But since now at any
 rate, thank God, the writer and reviser have come, I have sent this
 treatise to you; not, as Isocrates says [2202] , as a present, for I do
 not reckon it to be such that it should be received in lieu of
 something of substantial value, but that it may be in our power to
 cheer on those who are in the full vigour of youth to do battle with
 the enemy, by stirring up the naturally sanguine temperament of early
 life. But if any portion of the treatise should appear worthy of
 serious consideration, after examining some parts, especially those
 prefatory to the "trials," [2203] and those which are of the same cast,
 and perhaps also some of the doctrinal parts of the book, you will
 think them not ungratefully composed. But to whatever conclusion you
 come, you will of course read them, as to a teacher and corrector, to
 those who do not act like the players at ball [2204] , when they stand
 in three different places and throw it from one to the other, aiming it
 exactly and catching one ball from one and one from another, and they
 baffle the player who is in the middle, as he jumps up to catch it,
 pretending that they are going to throw with a made-up expression of
 face, and such and such a motion of the hand to left or right, and
 whichever way they see him hurrying, they send the ball just the
 contrary way, and cheat his expectation by a trick. This holds even now
 in the case of most of us, who, dropping all serious purpose, play at
 being good-natured [2205] , as if at ball, with men, instead of
 realizing the favourable hope which we hold out, beguiling to sinister
 [2206] issues the souls of those who repose confidence in us. Letters
 of reconciliation, caresses, tokens, presents, affectionate embrace by
 letters--these are the making as if to throw with the ball to the
 right. But instead of the pleasure which one expects therefrom, one
 gets accusations, plots, slanders, disparagement, charges brought
 against one, bits of a sentence torn from their context, caught up, and
 turned to one's hurt. Blessed in your hopes are ye, who through all
 such trials exercise confidence towards God. But we beseech you not to
 look at our words, but to the teaching of our Lord in the Gospel. For
 what consolation to one in anguish can another be, who surpasses him in
 the extremity of his own anguish, to help his luckless fortunes to
 obtain their proper issue? As He saith, "Vengeance is Mine; I will
 repay, saith the Lord." But do you, best of men, go on in a manner
 worthy of yourself, and trust in God, and do not be hindered by the
 spectacle of our misfortunes from being good and true, but commit to
 God that judgeth righteously the suitable and just issue of events, and
 act as Divine wisdom guides you. Assuredly Joseph had in the result no
 reason to grieve at the envy of his brethren, inasmuch as the malice of
 his own kith and kin became to him the road to empire.

 [2201] The Cod. Medic. has "to John and Maximinian." In this letter but
 one person seems to be addressed. Gregory here speaks, without doubt,
 of his books against Eunomius: not of his Antirrhetic against
 Apollinaris, which could have been transcribed in a very short time.
 Therefore we can place the date about 383, some months after Gregory's
 twelve Books against Eunomius, according to Hermantius, were published.

 [2202] Oratio ad Demonicum.

 [2203] See Against Eunomius, I. 1-9.

 [2204] i. e.the game of phaininda: called also ephetinda by Hesychius.

 [2205] en euphui& 139;.

 [2206] It is difficult to reproduce the play upon words in dexias, and
 skaioteti, which refer to the kata to dexion e euonumon in the
 description of the game of ball: the words having both a local meaning,
 "right," and "left," and a metaphorical one, "favourable," and
 "sinister" (H. C. O.).

 Letter XIII.--To the Church at Nicomedia [2207] .

 May the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, Who disposeth all
 things in wisdom for the best, visit you by His own grace, and comfort
 you by Himself, working in you that which is well-pleasing to Him, and
 may the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ come upon you, and the
 fellowship of the Holy Spirit, that ye may have healing of all
 tribulation and affliction, and advance towards all good, for the
 perfecting of the Church, for the edification of your souls, and to the
 praise of the glory of His name. But in making here a defence of
 ourselves before your charity, we would say that we were not neglectful
 to render an account of the charge entrusted to us, either in time
 past, or since the departure hence of Patricius of blessed memory; but
 we insist that there were many troubles in our Church, and the decay of
 our bodily powers was great, increasing, as was natural, with advancing
 years; and great also was the remissness of your Excellency towards us,
 inasmuch as no word ever came by letter to induce us to undertake the
 task, nor was any connection kept up between your Church and ourselves,
 although Euphrasius, your Bishop of blessed memory, had in all holiness
 bound together our Humility to himself and to you with love, as with
 chains. But even though the debt of love has not been satisfied before,
 either by our taking charge of you, or your Piety's encouragement of
 us, now at any rate we pray to God, taking your prayer to God as an
 ally to our own desire, that we may with all speed possible visit you,
 and be comforted along with you, and along with you show diligence, as
 the Lord may direct us; so as to discover a means of rectifying the
 disorders which have already found place, and of securing safety for
 the future, so that you may no longer be distracted by this discord,
 one withdrawing himself from the Church in one direction, another in
 another, and be thereby exposed as a laughing-stock to the Devil, whose
 desire and business it is (in direct contrariety to the Divine will)
 that no one should be saved, or come to the knowledge of the truth. For
 how do you think, brethren, that we were afflicted upon hearing from
 those who reported to us your state, that there was no return to better
 things [2208] ; but that the resolution of those who had once swerved
 aside is ever carried along in the same course; and--as water from a
 conduit often overflows the neighbouring bank, and streaming off
 sideways, flows away, and unless the leak is stopped, it is almost
 impossible to recall it to its channel, when the submerged ground has
 been hollowed out in accordance with the course of the stream,--even so
 the course of those who have left the Church, when it has once through
 personal motives deflected from the straight and right faith, has sunk
 deep in the rut of habit, and does not easily return to the grace it
 once had. For which cause your affairs demand a wise and strong
 administrator, who is skilled to guide such wayward tempers aright, so
 as to be able to recall to its pristine beauty the disorderly circuit
 of this stream, that the corn-fields of your piety may once again
 flourish abundantly, watered by the irrigating stream of peace. For
 this reason great diligence and fervent desire on the part of you all
 is needed for this matter, that such an one may be appointed your
 President by the Holy Spirit, who will have a single eye to the things
 of God alone, not turning his glance this way or that to any of those
 things that men strive after. For for this cause I think that the
 ancient law gave the Levite no share in the general inheritance of the
 land; that he might have God alone for the portion of his possession,
 and might always be engaged about the possession in himself, with no
 eye to any material object.

 [What follows is unintelligible, and something has probably been lost.]

 For it is not lawful that the simple should meddle with that with which
 they have no concern, but which properly belongs to others. For you
 should each mind your own business, that so that which is most
 expedient may come about [and that your Church may again prosper], when
 those who have been dispersed have returned again to the unit of the
 one body, and spiritual peace is established by those who devoutly
 glorify God. To this end it is well, I think, to look out for high
 qualifications in your election, that he who is appointed to the
 Presidency may be suitable for the post. Now the Apostolic injunctions
 do not direct us to look to high birth, wealth, and distinction in the
 eyes of the world among the virtues of a Bishop; but if all this
 should, unsought, accompany your spiritual chiefs, we do not reject it,
 but consider it merely as a shadow accidentally [2209] following the
 body; and none the less shall we welcome the more precious endowments,
 even though they happen to be apart from those boons of fortune. The
 prophet Amos was a goat-herd; Peter was a fisherman, and his brother
 Andrew followed the same employment; so too was the sublime John; Paul
 was a tent-maker, Matthew a publican, and the rest of the Apostles in
 the same way--not consuls, generals, prefects, or distinguished in
 rhetoric and philosophy, but poor, and of none of the learned
 professions, but starting from the more humble occupations of life: and
 yet for all that their voice went out into all the earth, and their
 words unto the ends of the world. "Consider your calling, brethren,
 that not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
 called, but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world [2210] ."
 Perhaps even now it is thought something foolish, as things appear to
 men, when one is not able to do much from poverty, or is slighted
 because of meanness of extraction [2211] , not of character. But who
 knows whether the horn of anointing is not poured out by grace upon
 such an one, even though he be less than the lofty and more
 illustrious? Which was more to the interest of the Church at Rome, that
 it should at its commencement be presided over by some high-born and
 pompous senator, or by the fisherman Peter, who had none of this
 world's advantages to attract men to him [2212] ? What house had he,
 what slaves, what property ministering luxury, by wealth constantly
 flowing in? But that stranger, without a table, without a roof over his
 head, was richer than those who have all things, because through having
 nothing he had God wholly. So too the people of Mesopotamia, though
 they had among them wealthy satraps, preferred Thomas above them all to
 the presidency of their Church; the Cretans preferred Titus, the
 dwellers at Jerusalem James, and we Cappadocians the centurion, who at
 the Cross acknowledged the Godhead of the Lord, though there were many
 at that time of splendid lineage, whose fortunes enabled them to
 maintain a stud, and who prided themselves upon having the first place
 in the Senate. And in all the Church one may see those who are great
 according to God's standard preferred above worldly magnificence. You
 too, I think, ought to have an eye to these spiritual qualifications at
 this time present, if you really mean to revive the ancient glory of
 your Church. For nothing is better known to you than your own history,
 that anciently, before the city near you [2213] flourished, the seat of
 government was with you, and among Bithynian cities there was nothing
 preeminent above yours. And now, it is true, the public buildings that
 once graced it have disappeared, but the city that consists in
 men--whether we look to numbers or to quality--is rapidly rising to a
 level with its former splendour. Accordingly it would well become you
 to entertain thoughts that shall not fall below the height of the
 blessings that now are yours, but to raise your enthusiasm in the work
 before you to the height of the magnificence of your city, that you may
 find such a one to preside over the laity as will prove himself not
 unworthy of you [2214] . For it is disgraceful, brethren, and utterly
 monstrous, that while no one ever becomes a pilot unless he is skilled
 in navigation, he who sits at the helm of the Church should not know
 how to bring the souls of those who sail with him safe into the haven
 of God. How many wrecks of Churches, men and all, have ere now taken
 place by the inexperience of their heads! Who can reckon what disasters
 might not have been avoided, had there been aught of the pilot's skill
 in those who had command? Nay, we entrust iron, to make vessels with,
 not to those who know nothing about the matter, but to those who are
 acquainted with the art of the smith; ought we not therefore to trust
 souls to him who is well-skilled to soften them by the fervent heat of
 the Holy Spirit, and who by the impress of rational implements may
 fashion each one of you to be a chosen and useful vessel? It is thus
 that the inspired Apostle bids us to take thought, in his Epistle to
 Timothy [2215] , laying injunction upon all who hear, when he says that
 a Bishop must be without reproach. Is this all that the Apostle cares
 for, that he who is advanced to the priesthood should be
 irreproachable? and what is so great an advantage as that all possible
 qualifications should be included in one? But he knows full well that
 the subject is moulded by the character of his superior, and that the
 upright walk of the guide becomes that of his followers too. For what
 the Master is, such does he make the disciple to be. For it is
 impossible that he who has been apprenticed to the art of the smith
 should practise that of the weaver, or that one who has only been
 taught to work at the loom should turn out an orator or a
 mathematician: but on the contrary that which the disciple sees in his
 master he adopts and transfers to himself. For this reason it is that
 the Scripture says, "Every disciple that is perfect shall be as his
 master [2216] ." What then, brethren? Is it possible to be lowly and
 subdued in character, moderate, superior to the love of lucre, wise in
 things divine, and trained to virtue and considerateness in works and
 ways, without seeing those qualities in one's master? Nay, I do not
 know how a man can become spiritual, if he has been a disciple in a
 worldly school. For how can they who are striving to resemble their
 master fail to be like him? What advantage is the magnificence of the
 aqueduct to the thirsty, if there is no water in it, even though the
 symmetrical disposition of columns [2217] variously shaped rear aloft
 the pediment [2218] ? Which would the thirsty man rather choose for the
 supply of his own need, to see marbles beautifully disposed or to find
 good spring water, even if it flowed through a wooden pipe, as long as
 the stream which it poured forth was clear and drinkable? Even so,
 brethren, those who look to godliness should neglect the trappings of
 outward show, and whether a man exults in powerful friends, or plumes
 himself on the long list of his dignities, or boasts that he receives
 large annual revenues, or is puffed up with the thought of his noble
 ancestry, or has his mind on all sides clouded [2219] with the fumes of
 self-esteem, should have nothing to do with such an one, any more than
 with a dry aqueduct, if he display not in his life the primary and
 essential qualities for high office. But, employing the lamp of the
 Spirit for the search [2220] , you should, as far as is possible, seek
 for "a garden enclosed, a fountain sealed [2221] ," that, by your
 election the garden of delight having been opened and the water of the
 fountain having been unstopped, there may be a common acquisition to
 the Catholic Church. May God grant that there may soon be found among
 you such an one, who shall be a chosen vessel, a pillar of the Church.
 But we trust in the Lord that so it will be, if you are minded by the
 grace of concord with one mind to see that which is good, preferring to
 your own wills the will of the Lord, and that which is approved of Him,
 and perfect, and well-pleasing in His eyes; that there may be such a
 happy issue among you, that therein we may rejoice, and you triumph,
 and the God of all be glorified, Whom glory becometh for ever and ever.

 [2207] Euphrasius, mentioned in this Letter, had subscribed to the
 first Council of Constantinople, as Bishop of Nicomedia. On his death,
 clergy and laity proceeded to a joint election of a successor. The date
 of this is uncertain; Zacagni and Page think that the dispute here
 mentioned is to be identified with that which Sozomen records, and
 which is placed by Baronius and Basnage in 400, 401. But we have no
 evidence that Gregory's life was prolonged so far.

 [2208] oudemia gegone ton ephestoton epistrophe, literally, "no return
 from existing (or besetting) evils." The words might possibly mean
 something very different; "no concern shown on the part of those set
 over you" (H. C. O.).

 [2209] The shadow may be considered as an accidental appendage to the
 body, inasmuch as it does not always appear, but only when there is
 some light, e.g. of the sun, to cast it (H. C. O.).

 [2210] 1 Cor. i. 26, 27.

 [2211] somatos dusgeneian, might possibly mean "bodily deformity;" but
 less probably (H. C. O.).

 [2212] Reading epholkon: if epholkion, "a boat taken in tow," perhaps
 still regarding S. Peter as the master of a ship: or "an appendage;"
 Gregory so uses it in his De Animâ. Some suggest ephodion, meaning
 "resource," but epholkon is simpler.

 [2213] i.e.Nicæa. "The whirligig of time has brought about its
 revenge," and Nicomedia (Ismid) is now more important than Nicæa
 (Isnik). Nicomedia had, in fact, been the residence of the Kings of
 Bithynia; and Diocletian had intended to make it the rival of Rome (cf.
 Lactantius, De Mort. Persec. c. 7). But it had been destroyed by an
 earthquake in the year 368: Socrates, ii. 39.

 [2214] Reading humon for humin.

 [2215] 1 Tim. iii. 2.

 [2216] S. Luke vi. 40. Cf. Gregory's Treatises On Perfection, What is
 the Christian name and profession, Sketch of the aim of True
 Asceticism.

 [2217] he ton kionon epallelos thesis.

 [2218] petason.

 [2219] periautizetai

 [2220] For humility and spirituality required in prelates, cf. Origen,
 c. Cels. viii. 75. "We summon to the magistracies of these churches men
 of ability and good life: but instead of selecting the ambitious
 amongst these we put compulsion upon those whose deep humility makes
 them backward in accepting this general charge of the Church. Our best
 rulers then, are like consuls compelled to rule by a mighty Emperor: no
 other, we are persuaded, than the Son of God, Who is the Word of God.
 If, then, these magistrates in the assembly of God's nation rule well,
 or at all events strictly in accordance with the Divine enactment, they
 are not because of that to meddle with the secular law-making. It is
 not that the Christians wish to escape all public responsibility, that
 they keep themselves away from such things; but they wish to reserve
 themselves for the higher and more urgent responsibilities
 (anankaiotera leitourgi& 139;) of God's Church."

 [2221] Song of Songs, iv. 12.

 Letter XIV [2222] .--To the Bishop of Melitene.

 How beautiful are the likenesses of beautiful objects, when they
 preserve in all its clearness the impress of the original beauty! For
 of your soul, so truly beautiful, I saw a most clear image in the
 sweetness of your letter, which, as the Gospel says, "out of the
 abundance of the heart" you filled with honey. And for this reason I
 fancied I saw you in person, and enjoyed your cheering company, from
 the affection expressed in your letter; and often taking your letter
 into my hands and going over it again from beginning to end, I only
 came more vehemently to crave for the enjoyment, and there was no sense
 of satiety. Such a feeling can no more put an end to my pleasure, than
 it can to that derived from anything that is by nature beautiful and
 precious. For neither has our constant participation of the benefit
 blunted the edge of our longing to behold the sun, nor does the
 unbroken enjoyment of health prevent our desiring its continuance; and
 we are persuaded that it is equally impossible for our enjoyment of
 your goodness, which we have often experienced face to face and now by
 letter, ever to reach the point of satiety. But our case is like that
 of those who from some circumstance are afflicted with unquenchable
 thirst; for just in the same way, the more we taste your kindness, the
 more thirsty we become. But unless you suppose our language to be mere
 blandishment and unreal flattery--and assuredly you will not so
 suppose, being what you are in all else, and to us especially good and
 staunch, if any one ever was,--you will certainly believe what I say;
 that the favour of your letter, applied to my eyes like some medical
 prescription, stayed my ever-flowing "fountain of tears," and that
 fixing our hopes on the medicine of your holy prayers, we expect that
 soon and completely the disease of our soul will be healed: though, for
 the present at any rate, we are in such a case, that we spare the ears
 of one who is fond of us, and bury the truth in silence, that we may
 not drag those who loyally love us into partnership with our troubles.
 For when we consider that, bereft of what is dearest to us, we are
 involved in wars, and that it is our children that we were compelled to
 leave behind, our children whom we were counted worthy to bear to God
 in spiritual pangs, closely joined to us by the law of love, who at the
 time of their own trials amid their afflictions extended their
 affection to us; and over and above these, a fondly-loved [2223] home,
 brethren, kinsmen, companions, intimate associates, friends, hearth,
 table, cellar, bed, seat, sack, converse, tears--and how sweet these
 are, and how dearly prized from long habit, I need not write to you who
 know full well--but not to weary you further, consider for yourself
 what I have in exchange for those blessings. Now that I am at the end
 of my life, I begin to live again, and am compelled to learn the
 graceful versatility of character which is now in vogue: but we are
 late learners in the shifty school of knavery; [2224] so that we are
 constantly constrained to blush at our awkwardness and inaptitude for
 this new study. But our adversaries, equipped with all the training of
 this wisdom, are well able to keep what they have learned, and to
 invent what they have not learned. Their method of warfare accordingly
 is to skirmish at a distance, and then at a preconcerted signal to form
 their phalanx in solid order; they utter by way of prelude [2225]
 whatever suits their interests, they execute surprises by means of
 exaggerations, they surround themselves with allies from every quarter.
 But a vast amount of cunning invincible in power [2226] accompanies
 them, advanced before them to lead their host, like some
 right-and-left-handed combatant, fighting with both hands in front of
 his army, on one side levying tribute upon his subjects, on the other
 smiting those who come in his way. But if you care to inquire into the
 state of our internal affairs, you will find other troubles to match; a
 stifling hut, abundant in cold, gloom, confinement, and all such
 advantages; a life the mark of every one's censorious observation, the
 voice, the look, the way of wearing one's cloak, the movement of the
 hands, the position of one's feet, and everything else, all a subject
 for busy-bodies. And unless one from time to time emits a deep
 breathing, and unless a continuous groaning is uttered with the
 breathing, and unless the tunic passes gracefully through the girdle
 (not to mention the very disuse of the girdle itself), and unless our
 cloak flows aslant down our backs--the omission of anyone of these
 niceties is a pretext for war against us. And on such grounds as these,
 they gather together to battle against us, man by man [2227] , township
 by township, even down to all sorts of out-of-the-way places. Well, one
 cannot be always faring well or always ill, for every one's life is
 made up of contraries. But if by God's grace your help should stand by
 us steadily, we will bear the abundance of annoyances, in the hope of
 being always a sharer in your goodness. May you, then, never cease
 bestowing on us such favours, that by them you may refresh us, and
 prepare for yourself in ampler measure the reward promised to them that
 keep the commandments.

 [2222] To Otreius, Bishop of Melitene (in eastern Cappadocia, on or
 near the upper Euphrates), to whose successor Letoius Gregory addressed
 his Canonical Epistle about Penitents (Cod. Medic.). Written when
 Gregory was in exile under Valens. Zacagni thinks that the "war," and
 the carping criticisms here complained of, refer to the followers of
 Eustathius of Sebasteia or of Macedonius, who had plenty to find fault
 with, even in the gestures and dress of the Catholics (cf. Basil, De
 Spirit. S., end).

 [2223] kecharitomenos

 [2224] This passage is very corrupt, and I have put the best sense I
 could on the fragmentary words preserved to us (H. C. O.).

 [2225] prologizontas. But prolochizontas would suit the context better;
 i.e. "they lay an ambush wherever their interests are concerned" (H. C.
 O.).

 [2226] Or "accompanies their power:" te dunamei may go with homartei,
 or with akatagonistos (H. C. O.).

 [2227] kat' andras, kai demous, kai eschatias. But the Latin, having
 "solitudines," shows that eremous was read for demous. We seem to get
 here a glimpse of Gregory's activity during his exile (376-78). Rupp
 thinks that Macrina's words to her brother also refer to this period:
 "Thee the Churches call to help them and correct them." He moved from
 place to place to strengthen the Catholic cause; "we," he says in the
 longer Antirrhetic, "who have sojourned in many spots, and have had
 serious conversation upon the points in dispute both with those who
 hold and those who reject the Faith." Gregory of Nazianzum consoles him
 during these journeys, so exhausting and discouraging to one of his
 spirit, by comparing him to the comet which is ruled while it seems to
 wander, and of seeing in the seeming advance of heresy only the last
 hiss of the dying snake. His travels probably ended in a visit to
 Palestine: for his Letter On Pilgrimages certainly presupposes former
 visits in which he had learnt the manners of Jerusalem. His love of
 Origen, too, makes it likely that he made a private pilgrimage
 (distinct from the visit of 379) to the land where Origen had chiefly
 studied.

 Letter XV.--To Adelphius the Lawyer [2228] .

 I write you this letter from the sacred Vanota, if I do not do the
 place injustice by giving it its local title:--do it injustice, I say,
 because in its name it shows no polish. At the same time the beauty of
 the place, great as it is, is not conveyed by this Galatian epithet:
 eyes are needed to interpret its beauty. For I, though I have before
 this seen much, and that in many places, and have also observed many
 things by means of verbal description in the accounts of old writers,
 think both all I have seen, and all of which I have heard, of no
 account in comparison with the loveliness that is to be found here.
 Your Helicon is nothing: the Islands of the Blest are a fable: the
 Sicyonian plain is a trifle: the accounts of the Peneus are another
 case of poetic exaggeration--that river which they say by overflowing
 with its rich current the banks which flank its course makes for the
 Thessalians their far-famed Tempe. Why, what beauty is there in any one
 of these places I have mentioned, such as Vanota can show us of its
 own? For if one seeks for natural beauty in the place, it needs none of
 the adornments of art: and if one considers what has been done for it
 by artificial aid, there has been so much done, and that so well, as
 might overcome even natural disadvantages. The gifts bestowed upon the
 spot by Nature who beautifies the earth with unstudied grace are such
 as these: below, the river Halys makes the place fair to look upon with
 his banks, and gleams like a golden ribbon through their deep purple,
 reddening his current with the soil he washes down. Above, a mountain
 densely overgrown with wood stretches with its long ridge, covered at
 all points with the foliage of oaks, worthy of finding some Homer to
 sing its praises more than that Ithacan Neritus, which the poet calls
 "far-seen with quivering leaves [2229] ." But the natural growth of
 wood, as it comes down the hill-side, meets at the foot the planting of
 men's husbandry. For forthwith vines, spread out over the slopes, and
 swellings, and hollows at the mountain's base, cover with their colour,
 like a green mantle, all the lower ground: and the season at this time
 even added to their beauty, displaying its grape-clusters wonderful to
 behold. Indeed this caused me yet more surprise, that while the
 neighbouring country shows fruit still unripe, one might here enjoy the
 full clusters, and be sated with their perfection. Then, far off, like
 a watch-fire from some great beacon, there shone before our eyes the
 fair beauty of the buildings. On the left as we entered was the chapel
 built for the martyrs, not yet complete in its structure, but still
 lacking the roof, yet making a good show notwithstanding. Straight
 before us in the way were the beauties of the house, where one part is
 marked out from another by some delicate invention. There were
 projecting towers, and preparations for banqueting among the wide and
 high-arched rows of trees crowning the entrance before the gates [2230]
 . Then about the buildings are the Phaeacian gardens; rather, let not
 the beauties of Vanota be insulted by comparison with those. Homer
 never saw "the apple with bright fruit [2231] " as we have it here,
 approaching to the hue of its own blossom in the exceeding brilliancy
 of its colouring: he never saw the pear whiter than new-polished ivory.
 And what can one say of the varieties of the peach, diverse and
 multiform, yet blended and compounded out of different species? For
 just as with those who paint "goat-stags," and "centaurs," and the
 like, commingling things of different kind, and making themselves wiser
 than Nature, so it is in the case of this fruit: Nature, under the
 despotism of art, turns one to an almond, another to a walnut, yet
 another to a "Doracinus [2232] ," mingled alike in name and in flavour.
 And in all these the number of single trees is more noted than their
 beauty; yet they display tasteful arrangement in their planting, and
 that harmonious form of drawing--drawing, I call it, for the marvel
 belongs rather to the painter's art than to the gardener's. So readily
 does Nature fall in with the design of those who arrange these devices,
 that it seems impossible to express this by words. Who could find words
 worthily to describe the road under the climbing vines, and the sweet
 shade of their cluster, and that novel wall-structure where roses with
 their shoots, and vines with their trailers, twist themselves together
 and make a fortification that serves as a wall against a flank attack,
 and the pond at the summit of this path, and the fish that are bred
 there? As regards all these, the people who have charge of your
 Nobility's house were ready to act as our guides with a certain
 ingenuous kindliness, and pointed them out to us, showing us each of
 the things you had taken pains about, as if it were yourself to whom,
 by our means, they were showing courtesy. There too, one of the lads,
 like a conjuror, showed us such a wonder as one does not very often
 find in nature: for he went down to the deep water and brought up at
 will such of the fish as he selected; and they seemed no strangers to
 the fisherman's touch, being tame and submissive under the artist's
 hands, like well-trained dogs. Then they led me to a house as if to
 rest--a house, I call it, for such the entrance betokened, but, when we
 came inside, it was not a house but a portico which received us. The
 portico was raised up aloft to a great height over a deep pool: the
 basement supporting the portico of triangular shape, like a gateway
 leading to the delights within, was washed by the water. Straight
 before us in the interior a sort of house occupied the vertex of the
 triangle, with lofty roof, lit on all sides by the sun's rays, and
 decked with varied paintings; so that this spot almost made us forget
 what had preceded it. The house attracted us to itself; and again, the
 portico on the pool was a unique sight. For the excellent fish would
 swim up from the depths to the surface, leaping up into the very air
 like winged things, as though purposely mocking us creatures of the dry
 land. For showing half their form and tumbling through the air, they
 plunged once more into the depth. Others, again, in shoals, following
 one another in order, were a sight for unaccustomed eyes: while in
 another place one might see another shoal packed in a cluster round a
 morsel of bread, pushed aside one by another, and here one leaping up,
 there another diving downwards. But even this we were made to forget by
 the grapes that were brought us in baskets of twisted shoots, by the
 varied bounty of the season's fruit, the preparation for breakfast, the
 varied dainties, and savoury dishes, and sweetmeats, and drinking of
 healths, and wine-cups. So now since I was sated and inclined to sleep,
 I got a scribe posted beside me, and sent to your Eloquence, as if it
 were a dream, this chattering letter. But I hope to recount in full to
 yourself and your friends, not with paper and ink, but with my own
 voice and tongue, the beauties of your home.

 [2228] scholastikos, or possibly "student," but the title of logistes,
 afterwards employed of the person to whom the letter is addressed,
 rather suggests the profession of an "advocate," than the occupation of
 a scholar.

 [2229] Cf. Hom. Odyss. ix. 22.

 [2230] The text is clearly erroneous, and perhaps stephanousi is the
 true reading: it seems clearer in construction than stephanousai
 suggested by Caraccioli.

 [2231] Cf. Hom. Od. vii. 115.

 [2232] The word seems otherwise unknown. It may be a Græcizing of the
 Latin "duracinus," for which cf. Plin. XV. xii. 11.

 Letter XVI.--To Amphilochius.

 I am well persuaded that by God's grace the business of the Church of
 the Martyrs is in a fair way. Would that you were willing in the
 matter. The task we have in hand will find its end by the power of God,
 Who is able, wherever He speaks, to turn word into deed. Seeing that,
 as the Apostle says, "He Who has begun a good work will also perform it
 [2233] ", I would exhort you in this also to be an imitator of the
 great Paul, and to advance our hope to actual fulfilment, and send us
 so many workmen as may suffice for the work we have in hand.

 Your Perfection might perhaps be informed by calculation of the
 dimensions to which the total work will attain: and to this end I will
 endeavour to explain the whole structure by a verbal description. The
 form of the chapel is a cross, which has its figure completed
 throughout, as you would expect, by four structures. The junctions of
 the buildings intercept one another, as we see everywhere in the
 cruciform pattern. But within the cross there lies a circle, divided by
 eight angles (I call the octagonal figure a circle in view of its
 circumference), in such wise that the two pairs of sides of the octagon
 which are diametrically opposed to one another, unite by means of
 arches the central circle to the adjoining blocks of building; while
 the other four sides of the octagon, which lie between the
 quadrilateral buildings, will not themselves be carried to meet the
 buildings, but upon each of them will be described a semicircle like a
 shell [2234] , terminating in an arch above: so that the arches will be
 eight in all, and by their means the quadrilateral and semicircular
 buildings will be connected, side by side, with the central structure.
 In the blocks of masonry formed by the angles there will be an equal
 number of pillars, at once for ornament and for strength, and these
 again will carry arches built of equal size to correspond with those
 within [2235] . And above these eight arches, with the symmetry of an
 upper range of windows, the octagonal building will be raised to the
 height of four cubits: the part rising from it will be a cone shaped
 like a top, as the vaulting [2236] narrows the figure of the roof from
 its full width to a pointed wedge. The dimensions below will be,--the
 width of each of the quadrilateral buildings, eight cubits, the length
 of them half as much again, the height as much as the proportion of the
 width allows. It will be as much in the semicircles also. The whole
 length between the piers extends in the same way to eight cubits, and
 the depth will be as much as will be given by the sweep of the
 compasses with the fixed point placed in the middle of the side [2237]
 and extending to the end. The height will be determined in this case
 too by the proportion to the width. And the thickness of the wall, an
 interval of three feet from inside these spaces, which are measured
 internally, will run round the whole building.

 I have troubled your Excellency with this serious trifling, with this
 intention, that by the thickness of the walls, and by the intermediate
 spaces, you may accurately ascertain what sum the number of feet gives
 as the measurement; because your intellect is exceedingly quick in all
 matters, and makes its way, by God's grace, in whatever subject you
 will, and it is possible for you, by subtle calculation, to ascertain
 the sum made up by all the parts, so as to send us masons neither more
 nor fewer than our need requires. And I beg you to direct your
 attention specially to this point, that some of them may be skilled in
 making vaulting [2238] without supports: for I am informed that when
 built in this way it is more durable than what is made to rest on
 props. It is the scarcity of wood that brings us to this device of
 roofing the whole fabric with stone; because the place supplies no
 timber for roofing. Let your unerring mind be persuaded, because some
 of the people here contract with me to furnish thirty workmen for a
 stater, for the dressed stonework, of course with a specified ration
 along with the stater. But the material of our masonry is not of this
 sort [2239] , but brick made of clay and chance stones, so that they do
 not need to spend time in fitting the faces of the stones accurately
 together. I know that so far as skill and fairness in the matter of
 wages are concerned, the workmen in your neighbourhood are better for
 our purpose than those who follow the trade here. The sculptor's work
 lies not only in the eight pillars, which must themselves be improved
 and beautified, but the work requires altar-like base-mouldings [2240]
 , and capitals carved in the Corinthian style. The porch, too, will be
 of marbles wrought with appropriate ornaments. The doors set upon these
 will be adorned with some such designs as are usually employed by way
 of embellishment at the projection of the cornice. Of all these, of
 course, we shall furnish the materials; the form to be impressed on the
 materials art will bestow. Besides these there will be in the colonnade
 not less than forty pillars: these also will be of wrought stone. Now
 if my account has explained the work in detail, I hope it may be
 possible for your Sanctity, on perceiving what is needed, to relieve us
 completely from anxiety so far as the workmen are concerned. If,
 however, the workman were inclined to make a bargain favourable to us,
 let a distinct measure of work, if possible, be fixed for the day, so
 that he may not pass his time doing nothing, and then, though he has no
 work to show for it, as having worked for us so many days, demand
 payment for them. I know that we shall appear to most people to be
 higglers, in being so particular about the contracts. But I beg you to
 pardon me; for that Mammon about whom I have so often said such hard
 things, has at last departed from me as far as he can possibly go,
 being disgusted, I suppose, at the nonsense that is constantly talked
 against him, and has fortified himself against me by an impassable
 gulf--to wit, poverty--so that neither can he come to me, nor can I
 pass to him [2241] . This is why I make a point of the fairness of the
 workmen, to the end that we may be able to fulfil the task before us,
 and not be hindered by poverty--that laudable and desirable evil. Well,
 in all this there is a certain admixture of jest. But do you, man of
 God, in such ways as are possible and legitimate, boldly promise in
 bargaining with the men that they will all meet with fair treatment at
 our hands, and full payment of their wages: for we shall give all and
 keep back nothing, as God also opens to us, by your prayers, His hand
 of blessing.

 [2233] Cf. Phil. i. 6

 [2234] Reading konchoeidos

 [2235] That is, on an inner line; the upper row having their supports
 at the angles of the inscribed octagon, and therefore at a point
 further removed from the centre of the circle than those of the lower
 tier, which correspond to the sides of the octagon. Or, simply, "those
 inside the building," the upper tier showing in the outside view of the
 structure, while the lower row would only be visible from the interior.
 There is apparently a corresponding row of windows above the upper row
 of arches, carrying the central tower four cubits higher. This at least
 seems the sense of the clause immediately following.

 [2236] Reading eileseos, of which this seems to be the meaning.

 [2237] i.e.of the side of the octagon.

 [2238] Reading eilesin.

 [2239] i.e.not dressed stone.

 [2240] The speira is a moulding at the base of the column, equivalent
 to the Latin torus.

 [2241] Cf. S. Luke xvi. 26

 Letter XVII.--To Eustathia, Ambrosia, and Basilissa [2242] . To the
 most discreet and devout Sisters, Eustathia and Ambrosia, and to the
 most discreet and noble Daughter, Basilissa, Gregory sends greeting in
 the Lord.

 The meeting with the good and the beloved, and the memorials of the
 immense love of the Lord for us men, which are shown in your
 localities, have been the source to me of the most intense joy and
 gladness. Doubly indeed have these shone upon divinely festal days;
 both in beholding the saving tokens [2243] of the God who gave us life,
 and in meeting with souls in whom the tokens of the Lord's grace are to
 be discerned spiritually in such clearness, that one can believe that
 Bethlehem and Golgotha, and Olivet, and the scene of the Resurrection
 are really in the God-containing heart. For when through a good
 conscience Christ has been formed in any, when any has by dint of godly
 fear nailed down the promptings of the flesh and become crucified to
 Christ, when any has rolled away from himself the heavy stone of this
 world's illusions, and coming forth from the grave of the body has
 begun to walk as it were in a newness of life, abandoning this
 low-lying valley of human life, and mounting with a soaring desire to
 that heavenly country [2244] with all its elevated thoughts, where
 Christ is, no longer feeling the body's burden, but lifting it by
 chastity, so that the flesh with cloud-like lightness accompanies the
 ascending soul--such an one, in my opinion, is to be counted in the
 number of those famous ones in whom the memorials of the Lord's love
 for us men are to be seen. When, then, I not only saw with the sense of
 sight those Sacred Places, but I saw the tokens of places like them,
 plain in yourselves as well, I was filled with joy so great that the
 description of its blessing is beyond the power of utterance. But
 because it is a difficult, not to say an impossible thing for a human
 being to enjoy unmixed with evil any blessing, therefore something of
 bitterness was mingled with the sweets I tasted: and by this, after the
 enjoyment of those blessings, I was saddened in my journey back to my
 native land, estimating now the truth of the Lord's words, that "the
 whole world lieth in wickedness [2245] ," so that no single part of the
 inhabited earth is without its share of degeneracy. For if the spot
 itself that has received the footprints of the very Life is not clear
 of the wicked thorns, what are we to think of other places where
 communion with the Blessing has been inculcated by hearing and
 preaching alone [2246] . With what view I say this, need not be
 explained more fully in words; facts themselves proclaim more loudly
 than any speech, however intelligible, the melancholy truth.

 The Lawgiver of our life has enjoined upon us one single hatred. I
 mean, that of the Serpent: for no other purpose has He bidden us
 exercise this faculty of hatred, but as a resource against wickedness.
 "I will put enmity," He says, "between thee and him." Since wickedness
 is a complicated and multifarious thing, the Word allegorizes it by the
 Serpent, the dense array of whose scales is symbolic of this
 multiformity of evil. And we by working the will of our Adversary make
 an alliance with this serpent, and so turn this hatred against one
 another [2247] , and perhaps not against ourselves alone, but against
 Him Who gave the commandment; for He says, "Thou shalt love thy
 neighbour and hate thine enemy," commanding us to hold the foe to our
 humanity as our only enemy, and declaring that all who share that
 humanity are the neighbours of each one of us. But this gross-hearted
 age has disunited us from our neighbour, and has made us welcome the
 serpent, and revel in his spotted scales [2248] . I affirm, then, that
 it is a lawful thing to hate God's enemies, and that this kind of
 hatred is pleasing to our Lord: and by God's enemies I mean those who
 deny the glory of our Lord, be they Jews, or downright idolaters, or
 those who through Arius' teaching idolize the creature, and so adopt
 the error of the Jews. Now when the Father, the Son, and the Holy
 Ghost, are with orthodox devotion being glorified and adored by those
 who believe that in a distinct and unconfused Trinity there is One
 Substance, Glory, Kingship, Power, and Universal Rule, in such a case
 as this what good excuse for fighting can there be? At the time,
 certainly, when the heretical views prevailed, to try issues with the
 authorities, by whom the adversaries' cause was seen to be
 strengthened, was well; there was fear then lest our saving Doctrine
 should be over-ruled by human rulers. But now, when over the whole
 world from one end of heaven to the other the orthodox Faith is being
 preached, the man who fights with them who preach it, fights not with
 them, but with Him Who is thus preached. What other aim, indeed, ought
 that man's to be, who has the zeal for God, than in every possible way
 to announce the glory of God? As long, then, as the Only-begotten is
 adored with all the heart and soul and mind, believed to be in
 everything that which the Father is, and in like manner the Holy Ghost
 is glorified with an equal amount of adoration, what plausible excuse
 for fighting is left these over-refined disputants, who are rending the
 seamless robe, and parting the Lord's name between Paul and Cephas, and
 undisguisedly abhorring contact with those who worship Christ, all but
 exclaiming in so many words, "Away from me, I am holy"?

 Granting that the knowledge which they believe themselves to have
 acquired is somewhat greater than that of others: yet can they possess
 more than the belief that the Son of the Very God is Very God, seeing
 that in that article of the Very God every idea that is orthodox, every
 idea that is our salvation, is included? It includes the idea of His
 Goodness, His Justice, His Omnipotence: that He admits of no
 variableness nor alteration, but is always the same; incapable of
 changing to worse or changing to better, because the first is not His
 nature, the second He does not admit of; for what can be higher than
 the Highest, what can be better than the Best? In fact, He is thus
 associated with all perfection, and, as to every form of alteration, is
 unalterable; He did not on occasions display this attribute, but was
 always so, both before the Dispensation that made Him man, and during
 it, and after it; and in all His activities in our behalf He never
 lowered any part of that changeless and unvarying character to that
 which was out of keeping with it. What is essentially imperishable and
 changeless is always such; it does not follow the variation of a lower
 order of things, when it comes by dispensation to be there; just as the
 sun, for example, when he plunges his beam into the gloom, does not dim
 the brightness of that beam; but instead, the dark is changed by the
 beam into light; thus also the True Light, shining in our gloom, was
 not itself overshadowed with that shade, but enlightened it by means of
 itself. Well, seeing that our humanity was in darkness, as it is
 written, "They know not, neither will they understand, they walk on in
 darkness [2249] ," the Illuminator of this darkened world darted the
 beam of His Divinity through the whole compound of our nature, through
 soul, I say, and body too, and so appropriated humanity entire by means
 of His own light, and took it up and made it just that thing which He
 is Himself. And as this Divinity was not made perishable, though it
 inhabited a perishable body, so neither did it alter in the direction
 of any change, though it healed the changeful in our soul: in medicine,
 too, the physician of the body, when he takes hold of his patient, so
 far from himself contracting the disease, thereby perfects the cure of
 the suffering part. Let no one, either, putting a wrong interpretation
 on the words of the Gospel, suppose that our human nature in Christ was
 transformed to something more divine by any gradations and advance: for
 the increasing in stature and in wisdom and in favour, is recorded in
 Holy Writ only to prove that Christ really was present in the human
 compound, and so to leave no room for their surmise, who propound that
 a phantom, or form in human outline, and not a real Divine
 Manifestation, was there. It is for this reason that Holy Writ records
 unabashed with regard to Him all the accidents of our nature, even
 eating, drinking, sleeping, weariness, nurture, increase in bodily
 stature, growing up--everything that marks humanity, except the
 tendency to sin. Sin, indeed, is a miscarriage, not a quality of human
 nature: just as disease and deformity are not congenital to it in the
 first instance, but are its unnatural accretions, so activity in the
 direction of sin is to be thought of as a mere mutilation of the
 goodness innate in us; it is not found to be itself a real thing, but
 we see it only in the absence of that goodness. Therefore He Who
 transformed the elements of our nature into His divine abilities,
 rendered it secure from mutilation and disease, because He admitted not
 in Himself the deformity which sin works in the will. "He did no sin,"
 it says, "neither was guile found in his mouth [2250] ." And this in
 Him is not to be regarded in connection with any interval of time: for
 at once the man in Mary (where Wisdom built her house), though
 naturally part of our sensuous compound, along with the coming upon her
 of the Holy Ghost, and her overshadowing with the power of the Highest,
 became that which that overshadowing power in essence was: for, without
 controversy, it is the Less that is blest by the Greater. Seeing, then,
 that the power of the Godhead is an immense and immeasurable thing,
 while man is a weak atom, at the moment when the Holy Ghost came upon
 the Virgin, and the power of the Highest overshadowed her, the
 tabernacle formed by such an impulse was not clothed with anything of
 human corruption; but, just as it was first constituted, so it
 remained, even though it was man, Spirit nevertheless, and Grace, and
 Power; and the special attributes of our humanity derived lustre from
 this abundance of Divine Power [2251] .

 There are indeed two limits of human life: the one we start from, and
 the one we end in: and so it was necessary that the Physician of our
 being should enfold us at both these extremities, and grasp not only
 the end, but the beginning too, in order to secure in both the raising
 of the sufferer. That, then, which we find to have happened on the side
 of the finish we conclude also as to the beginning. As at the end He
 caused by virtue of the Incarnation that, though the body was disunited
 from the soul, yet the indivisible Godhead which had been blended once
 for all with the subject (who possessed them) was not stripped from
 that body any more than it was from that soul, but while it was in
 Paradise along with the soul, and paved an entrance there in the person
 of the Thief for all humanity, it remained by means of the body in the
 heart of the earth, and therein destroyed him that had the power of
 Death (wherefore His body too is called "the Lord [2252] " on account
 of that inherent Godhead)--so also, at the beginning, we conclude that
 the power of the Highest, coalescing with our entire nature by that
 coming upon (the Virgin) of the Holy Ghost, both resides in our soul,
 so far as reason sees it possible that it should reside there, and is
 blended with our body, so that our salvation throughout every element
 may be perfect, that heavenly passionlessness which is peculiar to the
 Deity being nevertheless preserved both in the beginning and in the end
 of this life as Man [2253] . Thus the beginning was not as our
 beginning, nor the end as our end. Both in the one and in the other He
 evinced His Divine independence; the beginning had no stain of pleasure
 upon it, the end was not the end in dissolution.

 Now if we loudly preach all this, and testify to all this, namely that
 Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God, always changeless,
 always imperishable, though He comes in the changeable and the
 perishable; never stained Himself, but making clean that which is
 stained; what is the crime that we commit, and wherefore are we hated?
 And what means this opposing array [2254] of new Altars? Do we announce
 another Jesus? Do we hint at another? Do we produce other scriptures?
 Have any of ourselves dared to say "Mother of Man" of the Holy Virgin,
 the Mother of God [2255] : which is what we hear that some of them say
 without restraint? Do we romance about three Resurrections [2256] ? Do
 we promise the gluttony of the Millennium? Do we declare that the
 Jewish animal-sacrifices shall be restored? Do we lower men's hopes
 again to the Jerusalem below, imagining its rebuilding with stones of a
 more brilliant material? What charge like these can be brought against
 us, that our company should be reckoned a thing to be avoided, and that
 in some places another altar should be erected in opposition to us, as
 if we should defile their sanctuaries? My heart was in a state of
 burning indignation about this: and now that I have set foot in the
 City [2257] again, I am eager to unburden my soul of its bitterness, by
 appealing, in a letter, to your love. Do ye, whithersoever the Holy
 Spirit shall lead you, there remain; walk with God before you; confer
 not with flesh and blood; lend no occasion to any of them for glorying,
 that they may not glory in you, enlarging their ambition by anything in
 your lives. Remember the Holy Fathers, into whose hands ye were
 commended by your Father now in bliss [2258] , and to whom we by God's
 grace were deemed worthy to succeed and remove not the boundaries which
 our Fathers have laid down, nor put aside in any way the plainness of
 our simpler proclamation in favour of their subtler school. Walk by the
 primitive rule of the Faith: and the God of peace shall be with you,
 and ye shall be strong in mind and body. May God keep you uncorrupted,
 is our prayer.

 [2242] This Letter was published, Paris 1606, by R. Stephens (not the
 great lexicographer), who also translated On Pilgrimages into French
 for Du Moulin (see p. 382): and this edition was reprinted a year after
 at Hanover, with notes by Isaac Casaubon, "viro docto, sed quod
 dolendum, in castris Calvinianis militanti" (Gretser). Heyns places it
 in 382, and Rupp also.

 [2243] soteria sumbola. Casaubon remarks "hoc est tou soteros,
 Salvatoris, non autem soterias poietika." This is itself doubtful; and
 he also makes the astounding statement that both Jerome, Augustine, and
 the whole primitive Church felt that visits to the Sacred Places
 contributed nothing to the alteration of character. But see especially
 Jerome, De Peregrinat., and Epistle to Marcella. Fronto Ducæus adds,
 "At, velis nolis, soteria sunt illa loca: tum quia aspectu sui corda ad
 poenitentiam et salutares lacrymas non raro commovent, ut patet de
 Mariâ Ægyptiacâ; tum quia..."

 [2244] epouranion politeian. Even Casaubon (against Du Moulin here)
 allows this to mean the ascetic or monastic Life; "sublimius
 propositum." Cf. Macarius. Hom. v. p. 85. enaretos politeia: Isidore of
 Pelusium, lib. 1, c. xiv, pneumatike politeia.

 [2245] 1 S. John v. 19.

 [2246] psiles: this word expresses the absence of something, without
 implying any contempt: cf. psilos anthropos, psilos logos (prose).

 [2247] kat' allelon.

 [2248] tois ton pholidon stigmasin. For stigma with this meaning and
 connexion, see Hesiod, Scutum. 166.

 [2249] Ps. lxxxii. 5.

 [2250] 1 Pet. ii. 22.

 [2251] Compare Gregory against Apollinaris (Ad Theophil. iii. 265):
 "The first-fruits of humanity assumed by omnipotent Deity were, like a
 drop of vinegar merged in a boundless ocean, found still in that Deity,
 but not in their own distinctive properties: otherwise we should be
 obliged to think of a duality of Sons." In Orat. Cat. c. 10, he says
 that the Divine nature is to be conceived as having been so united with
 the human, as flame is with its fuel, the former extending beyond the
 latter, as our souls also overstep the limits of our bodies. The first
 of these passages appeared to Hooker (V. liii. 2) to be "so plain and
 direct for Eutyches," that he doubted whether the words were Gregory's.
 But at the Council of Ephesus, S. Cyril (of Alexandria), in his contest
 with the Nestorians, had showed that these expressions were capable of
 a Catholic interpretation, and pardonable in discussing the difficult
 and mysterious question of the union of the Two Natures.

 [2252] S. Matt. xxviii. 6. "Come see the place where the Lord lay." Cf.
 S. John xx. 2, 13.

 [2253] "Here is the true vicariousness of the Atonement, which
 consisted not in the substitution of His punishment for ours, but in
 His offering the sacrifice which man had neither the purity nor the
 power to offer. From out of the very heart or centre of human
 nature...there is raised the sinless sacrifice of perfect humanity by
 the God Man....It is a representative sacrifice, for it consists of no
 unheard-of experience, of no merely symbolic ceremony, but of just
 those universal incidents of suffering, which, though he must have felt
 them with a bitterness unknown to us, are intensely human." Lux Mundi,
 p. 218.

 [2254] antexagoge

 [2255] As early as 250, Dionysius of Alexandria, in his letter to Paul
 of Samosata, frequently speaks of he theotokos Maria. Later, in the
 Council of Ephesus (430), it was decreed that "the immaculate and
 ever-Virgin mother of our Lord should be called properly (kurios) and
 really theotokos," against the Nestorian title christotokos. Cf.
 Theodoret. Anath. I. tom. iv. p. 709, "We call Mary not Mother of Man,
 but Mother of God;" and Greg. Naz. Or. li. p. 738. "If any one call not
 Mary Mother of God he is outside divinity.'"

 [2256] me treis anastaseis muthopoioumen; For the first Resurrection
 (of the Soul in Baptism) and the second (of the Body), see Rev. xx. 5,
 with Bishop Wordsworth's note.

 [2257] i.e.Cæsarea in Cappadocia.

 [2258] Basil, probably: who after Cyril's exile had been called in to
 heal the heresy of Apollinaris, which was spreading in the convents at
 Jerusalem. The factious purism, however, which Gregory deplores here,
 and which led to rival altars, seems to have evinced itself amongst the
 orthodox themselves, "quo majorem apud omnes opinionem de suâ
 præstantiâ belli isti cathari excitarent" (Casaubon). Cyril, it is
 true, had returned this year, 382; and spent the last years of his life
 in his see; but with more than twenty years interval of Arian rule
 (Herennius, Heraclius, and Hilarius, according to Sozomen) the
 communities of the Catholics must have suffered from want of a constant
 control: and unity was always difficult to maintain in a city
 frequented by all the ecclesiastics of the world. Gregory must have
 "succeeded" to this charge in his visit to Jerusalem after the Council
 of Antioch in 379, to which he refers in his letter On Pilgrimages: but
 it is possible that he had paid even an earlier visit: see Letter XIV.
 p. 539, note 5.

 Letter XVIII.--To Flavian [2259] .

 Things with us, O man of God, are not in a good way. The development of
 the bad feeling existing amongst certain persons who have conceived a
 most groundless and unaccountable hatred of us is no longer a matter of
 mere conjecture; it is now evinced with an earnestness and openness
 worthy only of some holy work. You meanwhile, who have hitherto been
 beyond the reach of such annoyance, are too remiss in stifling the
 devouring conflagration on your neighbour's land; yet those who are
 well-advised for their own interests really do take pains to check a
 fire close to them, securing themselves, by this help given to a
 neighbour, against ever needing help in like circumstances. Well, you
 will ask, what do I complain of? Piety has vanished from the world;
 Truth has fled from our midst; as for Peace, we used to have the name
 at all events going the round upon men's lips; but now not only does
 she herself cease to exist, but we do not even retain the word that
 expresses her. But that you may know more exactly the things that move
 our indignation, I will briefly detail to you the whole tragic story.

 Certain persons had informed me that the Right Reverend Helladius had
 unfriendly feelings towards me, and that he enlarged in conversation to
 every one upon the troubles that I had brought upon him. I did not at
 first believe what they said, judging only from myself, and the actual
 truth of the matter. But when every one kept bringing to us a tale of
 the same strain, and facts besides corroborated their report, I thought
 it my duty not to continue to overlook this ill-feeling, while it was
 still without root and development. I therefore wrote by letter to your
 piety, and to many others who could help me in my intention, and
 stimulated your zeal in this matter. At last, after I had concluded the
 services at Sebasteia in [2260] commemoration of Peter [2261] of most
 blessed memory, and of the holy martyrs, who had lived in his times,
 and whom the people were accustomed to commemorate with him, I was
 returning to my own See, when some one told me that Helladius himself
 was in the neighbouring mountain district, holding martyrs' memorial
 services. At first I held on my journey, judging it more proper that
 our meeting should take place in the metropolis itself. But when one of
 his relations took the trouble to meet me, and to assure me that he was
 sick, I left my carriage at the spot where this news arrested me; I
 performed on horseback the intervening journey over a road that was
 like a precipice, and well-nigh impassable with its rocky ascents.
 Fifteen milestones measured the distance we had to traverse. Painfully
 travelling, now on foot, now mounted, in the early morning, and even
 employing some part of the night, I arrived between twelve and one
 o'clock at Andumocina; for that was the name of the place where, with
 two other bishops, he was holding his conference. From a shoulder of
 the hill overhanging this village, we looked down, while still at a
 distance, upon this outdoor assemblage of the Church. Slowly, and on
 foot, and leading the horses, I and my company passed over the
 intervening ground, and we arrived at the chapel [2262] just as he had
 retired to his residence.

 Without any delay a messenger was despatched to inform him of our being
 there; and a very short while after, the deacon in attendance on him
 met us, and we requested him to tell Helladius at once, so that we
 might spend as much time as possible with him, and so have an
 opportunity of leaving nothing in the misunderstanding between us
 unhealed. As for myself, I then remained sitting, still in the open
 air, and waited for the invitation indoors; and at a most inopportune
 time I became, as I sat there, a gazing stock to all the visitors at
 the conference. The time was long; drowsiness came on, and languor,
 intensified by the fatigue of the journey and the excessive heat of the
 day; and all these things, with people staring at me, and pointing me
 out to others, were so very distressing that in me the words of the
 prophet were realized: "My spirit within me was desolate [2263] ." I
 was kept in this state till noon, and heartily did I repent of this
 visit, and that I had brought upon myself this piece of discourtesy;
 and my own reflection vexed me worse than this injury done me by my
 enemies [2264] , warring as it did against itself, and changing into a
 regret that I had made the venture. At last the approach to the Altars
 was thrown open, and we were admitted to the sanctuary; the crowd,
 however, were excluded, though my deacon entered along with me,
 supporting with his arm my exhausted frame. I addressed his Lordship,
 and stood for a moment, expecting from him an invitation to be seated;
 but when nothing of the kind was heard from him, I turned towards one
 of the distant seats, and rested myself upon it, still expecting that
 he would utter something that was friendly, or at all events kind; or
 at least give one nod of recognition.

 Any hopes I had were doomed to complete disappointment. There ensued a
 silence dead as night, and looks as downcast as in tragedy, and daze,
 and dumbfoundedness, and perfect dumbness. A long interval of time it
 was, dragged out as if it were in the blackness of night. So struck
 down was I by this reception, in which he did not deign to accord me
 the merest utterance even of those common salutations by which you
 discharge the courtesies of a chance meeting [2265] ,--"welcome," for
 instance, or "where do you come from?" or "to what am I indebted for
 this pleasure?" or "on what important business are you here?"--that I
 was inclined to make this spell of silence into a picture of the life
 led in the underworld. Nay, I condemn the similitude as inadequate. For
 in that underworld the equality of conditions is complete, and none of
 the things that cause the tragedies of life on earth disturb existence.
 Their glory, as the Prophet says, does not follow men down there; each
 individual soul, abandoning the things so eagerly clung to by the
 majority here, his petulance, and pride, and conceit, enters that lower
 world in simple unencumbered nakedness; so that none of the miseries of
 this life are to be found among them. Still [2266] , notwithstanding
 this reservation, my condition then did appear to me like an
 underworld, a murky dungeon, a gloomy torture-chamber; the more so,
 when I reflected what treasures of social courtesies we have inherited
 from our fathers, and what recorded deeds of it we shall leave to our
 descendants. Why, indeed, should I speak at all of that affectionate
 disposition of our fathers towards each other? No wonder that, being
 all naturally equal [2267] , they wished for no advantage over one
 another, but thought to exceed each other only in humility. But my mind
 was penetrated most of all with this thought; that the Lord of all
 creation, the Only-begotten Son, Who was in the bosom of the Father,
 Who was in the beginning, Who was in the form of God, Who upholds all
 things by the word of His power, humbled Himself not only in this
 respect, that in the flesh He sojourned amongst men, but also that He
 welcomed even Judas His own betrayer, when he drew near to kiss Him, on
 His blessed lips; and that when He had entered into the house of Simon
 the leper He, as loving all men, upbraided his host, that He had not
 been kissed by him: whereas I was not reckoned by him as equal even to
 that leper; and yet what was I, and what was he? I cannot discover any
 difference between us. If one looks at it from the mundane point of
 view, where was the height from which he had descended, where was the
 dust in which I lay? If, indeed, one must regard things of this fleshly
 life, thus much perhaps it will hurt no one's feelings to assert that,
 looking at our lineage, whether as noble or as free, our position was
 about on a par; though, if one looked in either for the true freedom
 and nobility, i.e. that of the soul, each of us will be found equally a
 bondsman of Sin; each equally needs One Who will take away his sins; it
 was Another Who ransomed us both from Death and Sin with His own blood,
 Who redeemed us, and yet showed no contempt of those whom He has
 redeemed, calling them though He does from deadness to life, and
 healing every infirmity of their souls and bodies.

 Seeing, then, that the amount of this conceit and overweening pride was
 so great, that even the height of heaven was almost too narrow limits
 for it (and yet I could see no cause or occasion whatever for this
 diseased state of mind, such as might make it excusable in the case of
 some who in certain circumstances contract it; when, for instance, rank
 or education, or pre-eminence in dignities of office may have happened
 to inflate the vainer minds), I had no means whereby to advise myself
 to keep quiet: for my heart within me was swelling with indignation at
 the absurdity of the whole proceeding, and was rejecting all the
 reasons for enduring it. Then, if ever, did I feel admiration for that
 divine Apostle who so vividly depicts the civil war that rages within
 us, declaring that there is a certain "law of sin in the members,
 warring against the law of the mind," and often making the mind a
 captive, and a slave as well, to itself. This was the very array, in
 opposition, of two contending feelings that I saw within myself: the
 one, of anger at the insult caused by pride, the other prompting to
 appease the rising storm. When by God's grace, the worse inclination
 had failed to get the mastery, I at last said to him, "But is it, then,
 that some one of the things required for your personal comfort is being
 hindered by our presence, and is it time that we withdrew?" On his
 declaring that he had no bodily needs, I spoke to him some words
 calculated to heal, so far as in me lay, his ill-feeling. When he had,
 in a very few words, declared that the anger he felt towards me was
 owing to many injuries done him, I for my part answered him thus: "Lies
 possess an immense power amongst mankind to deceive: but in the Divine
 Judgment there will be no place for the misunderstandings thus arising.
 In my relations towards yourself, my conscience is bold enough to
 prompt me to hope that I may obtain forgiveness for all my other sins,
 but that, if I have acted in any way to harm you, this may remain for
 ever unforgiven." He was indignant at this speech, and did not suffer
 the proofs of what I had said to be added.

 It was now past six o'clock, and the bath had been well prepared, and
 the banquet was being spread, and the day was the sabbath [2268] , and
 a martyr's commemoration. Again observe how this disciple of the Gospel
 imitates the Lord of the Gospel: He, when eating and drinking with
 publicans and sinners, answered to those who found fault with Him that
 He did it for love of mankind: this disciple considers it a sin and a
 pollution to have us at his board, even after all that fatigue which we
 underwent on the journey, after all that excessive heat out of doors,
 in which we were baked while sitting at his gates; after all that
 gloomy sullenness with which he treated us to the bitter end, when we
 had come into his presence. He sends us off to toil painfully, with a
 frame now thoroughly exhausted with the over-fatigue, over the same
 distance, the same route: so that we scarcely reached our travelling
 company at sunset, after we had suffered many mishaps on the way. For a
 storm-cloud, gathered into a mass in the clear air by an eddy of wind,
 drenched us to the skin with its floods of rain; for owing to the
 excessive sultriness, we had made no preparation against any shower.
 However, by God's grace we escaped, though in the plight of shipwrecked
 sailors from the waves: and right glad were we to reach our company.

 Having joined our forces we rested there that night, and at last
 arrived alive in our own district; having reaped in addition this
 result of our meeting him, that the memory of all that had happened
 before was revived by this last insult offered to us; and, you see, we
 are positively compelled to take measures, for the future, on our own
 behalf, or rather on his behalf; for it was because his designs were
 not checked on former occasions that he has proceeded to this
 unmeasured display of vanity. Something, therefore, I think, must be
 done on our part, in order that he may improve upon himself, and may be
 taught that he is human, and has no authority to insult and to disgrace
 those who possess the same beliefs and the same rank as himself. For
 just consider; suppose we granted for a moment, for the sake of
 argument, that it is true that I have done something that has annoyed
 him, what trial [2269] was instituted against us, to judge either of
 the fact or the hearsay? What proofs were given of this supposed
 injury? What Canons were cited against us? What legitimate episcopal
 decision confirmed any verdict passed upon us? And supposing any of
 these processes had taken place, and that in the proper way, my
 standing [2270] in the Church might certainly have been at stake, but
 what Canons could have sanctioned insults offered to a free-born
 person, and disgrace inflicted on one of equal rank with himself?
 "Judge righteous judgment," you who look to God's law in this matter;
 say wherein you deem this disgrace put upon us to be excusable. If our
 dignity is to be estimated on the ground of priestly jurisdiction, the
 privilege of each recorded by the Council [2271] is one and the same;
 or rather the oversight of Catholic correction [2272] , from the fact
 that we possess an equal share of it, is so. But if some are inclined
 to regard each of us by himself, divested of any priestly dignity, in
 what respect has one any advantage over the other; in education for
 instance, or in birth connecting with the noblest and most illustrious
 lineage, or in theology? These things will be found either equal, or at
 all events not inferior, in me. "But what about revenue?" he will say.
 I would rather not be obliged to speak of this in his case; thus much
 only it will suffice to say, that our own was so much at the beginning,
 and is so much now; and to leave it to others to enquire into the
 causes of this increase of our revenue [2273] , nursed as it is up till
 now, and growing almost daily by means of noble undertakings. What
 licence, then, has he to put an insult upon us, seeing that he has
 neither superiority of birth to show, nor a rank exalted above all
 others, nor a commanding power of speech, nor any previous kindness
 done to me? While, even if he had all this to show, the fault of having
 slighted those of gentle birth would still be inexcusable. But he has
 not got it; and therefore I deem it right to see that this malady of
 puffed-up pride is not left without a cure; and it will be its cure to
 put it down to its proper level, and reduce its inflated dimensions, by
 letting off a little of the conceit with which he is bursting. The
 manner of effecting this we leave to God.

 [2259] The date of this letter is probably as late as 393. Flavian's
 authority at Antioch was now undisputed, by his reconciliation, after
 the deaths of Paulinus and Evagrius, with the Bishops of Alexandria and
 Rome, and, through them, with all his people. Gregory writes to him not
 only as his dear friend, but one who had known how to appease wrath,
 and to check opposition from the Emperor downward. He died in 404. The
 litigiousness of Helladius is described by Greg. Naz., Letter ccxv. He
 it was who a few years later, against Ambrose's authority, and for mere
 private interest, consecrated the physician Gerontius (Sozomen, viii.
 6).

 [2260] Sebasteia (Sivâs) was in Pontus on the upper Halys: and the
 "mountain district" between this and Helladius' "metropolis" (Cæsarea,
 ad Argæum) must have been some offshoots of the Anti-Taurus.

 [2261] His brother, who had urged him to write the books against
 Eunomius, and to whom he sent On the Making of Man.

 [2262] marturi& 251;, i.e. dedicated in this case to Peter; but the
 word is used even of a chapel dedicated to Christ.

 [2263] ekediasen Ps. cxliii. 4 (LXX.).

 [2264] chalepoteron tes para ton echthron moi genomenes hubreos. The
 Latin does not express this, "quam si ab hostibus profecta fuisset."

 [2265] ton katemaxeumenon (so Paris Editt. and Migne, but it must be
 kathemaxeumenon, from hamaxa) touton ten suntuchian aphosioumenon

 [2266] plen all' emoi, k.t.l. See note, p. 313.

 [2267] en homotimo te phusei. Cf. hoi homotimoi, the peers of the
 Persian kingdom.

 [2268] Cf. Dies Dominica (by Thomas Young, tutor of Milton the poet):
 "It's without controversie that the Oriental Christians, and others,
 did at that time hold assemblies on the Sabbath day....Yet did they not
 hold the Sabbath day holy," p. 35. Again, "Socrates doth not record
 that they of Alexandria and Rome did celebrate those mysteries on the
 Sabbath. While Chrysostom requireth it of the rich Lords of Villages,
 that they build Churches in them (Hom. 18 in Act.), he distinguisheth
 those congregations that were on other days from those that were held
 upon the Lord's day. Upon those congregations (sunaxeis) Prayers and
 hymns were had, in these an oblation was made on every Lord's day,' and
 for that cause the Lord's day is in Chrysostom called, dies panis'.
 Athanasius purgeth himself of a calumny imputed to him, for breaking
 the cup, because it was not the time of administering the holy
 mysteries; for it is not,' saith he, the Lord's day.'" A law of
 Constantine had enacted that the first day of the week, "the Lord's
 day," should be observed with greater solemnity than formerly; which
 shows that the seventh day, the Sabbath, still held its place; and it
 does not follow that in remoter places, as here, both were kept. The
 hour of service was generally "in the evening after sunset; or in the
 morning before the dawn," Mosheim.

 [2269] kriterion

 [2270] ton bathmon i.e."a grade of honour": cf. 1 Tim. iii. 13. bathmon
 heautois kalon peripoiountai. So in the Canons often.

 [2271] The Council of Constantinople.

 [2272] the oversight of Catholic correction. "On July 30, 381, the
 Bishop of Nyssa received the supreme honour of being named by
 Theodosius as one of the acknowledged authorities in all matters of
 theological orthodoxy: and he was appointed to regulate the affairs of
 the Church in Asia Minor, conjointly with Helladius of Cæsarea, and
 Otreius of Melitene:" Farrar's Lives of the Fathers, 1889.

 [2273] He is speaking of the funds of his Diocese, which at one period
 certainly he had been accused of mismanaging.

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [6]1:1 [7]1:1 [8]1:3 [9]1:26 [10]1:26 [11]1:26 [12]1:26
 [13]1:26 [14]1:26 [15]1:26-27 [16]1:27 [17]1:27 [18]1:27
 [19]1:27 [20]1:27 [21]1:27 [22]1:27 [23]1:27 [24]1:28
 [25]1:28 [26]1:31 [27]2:1 [28]2:4 [29]2:7 [30]2:7 [31]2:9
 [32]2:16 [33]2:17 [34]2:17 [35]2:19-20 [36]3:5-6 [37]3:8
 [38]3:16 [39]3:16 [40]3:19 [41]3:21 [42]4:1 [43]5:2
 [44]5:3 [45]5:24 [46]8:21 [47]9:3 [48]11:7 [49]11:9
 [50]14:18 [51]15:6 [52]18:12 [53]18:27 [54]23:7 [55]24
 [56]25:26 [57]26:15 [58]29 [59]29:32-35 [60]30:37 [61]33:3
 [62]38:29 [63]42:15 [64]43:23 [65]46:27 [66]48:5 [67]49:9
 [68]50:3

 Exodus

 [69]1:17 [70]2 [71]2:10 [72]3:2 [73]3:4 [74]3:4 [75]3:4
 [76]3:14 [77]3:14 [78]7:1 [79]7:1 [80]7:1 [81]7:17
 [82]14:15 [83]15:10 [84]15:20 [85]15:20 [86]16:18 [87]16:33
 [88]19:15 [89]20:3 [90]32:34 [91]33:2 [92]33:12 [93]33:15
 [94]33:17 [95]33:20 [96]34:9 [97]34:14 [98]34:14 [99]35:30

 Leviticus

 [100]2:5 [101]19:31

 Numbers

 [102]22 [103]25:7-8

 Deuteronomy

 [104]4:23 [105]6:4 [106]6:13 [107]10:22 [108]30:14
 [109]32:6 [110]32:17 [111]32:30

 Joshua

 [112]3 [113]4 [114]23:10

 Judges

 [115]8:19 [116]13:18 [117]20:16

 1 Samuel

 [118]2:12 [119]2:30 [120]15:35 [121]19:24 [122]28:13

 2 Samuel

 [123]6:14

 1 Kings

 [124]18

 2 Kings

 [125]2 [126]5 [127]23:5

 2 Chronicles

 [128]28:2

 Job

 [129]5:13 [130]9:9 [131]10:9 [132]14:1 [133]26:7 [134]30:29
 [135]38:32 [136]38:36

 Psalms

 [137]1:4 [138]2:6 [139]2:6 [140]4:1 [141]4:2 [142]4:2-3
 [143]6:3 [144]7:1 [145]7:8 [146]7:10 [147]7:11 [148]8:6
 [149]8:6-8 [150]8:7-8 [151]10:16 [152]13:2 [153]13:2
 [154]13:4 [155]16:2 [156]16:4 [157]16:8 [158]18:1
 [159]18:25-26 [160]19:1 [161]19:1 [162]19:1-3 [163]19:6-8
 [164]23:1 [165]23:2 [166]23:2 [167]23:4 [168]24:1 [169]24:1
 [170]24:4 [171]27:1 [172]28:8 [173]29:1 [174]29:3-4
 [175]29:10 [176]30:10 [177]31:3 [178]31:3 [179]31:19
 [180]31:21 [181]32:9 [182]33:4 [183]33:6 [184]33:9
 [185]34:5 [186]35:15 [187]36:6 [188]36:6 [189]36:6
 [190]36:9 [191]36:9 [192]37:4 [193]37:24 [194]39 [195]39:5
 [196]39:5 [197]39:6 [198]40:20 [199]42:2 [200]44:4
 [201]44:21 [202]45:6 [203]45:7-8 [204]45:13 [205]45:15
 [206]47:3 [207]47:3 [208]49:13 [209]51:12 [210]51:12
 [211]51:14 [212]53:6 [213]55:2 [214]55:6 [215]55:19
 [216]56:3 [217]58:10 [218]60:8 [219]61:3 [220]62:1
 [221]65:2 [222]66:6 [223]66:6 [224]66:6 [225]66:10-11
 [226]68:26 [227]68:35 [228]69:1 [229]69:2 [230]69:2
 [231]69:16 [232]72:3 [233]74:12 [234]74:12 [235]74:12
 [236]76:17 [237]77:10 [238]77:20 [239]78:25 [240]78:40
 [241]78:65 [242]80:1 [243]81:5 [244]81:9 [245]81:9
 [246]81:10 [247]81:10 [248]81:17 [249]82:5 [250]82:5
 [251]84:3 [252]84:5 [253]84:9 [254]84:10 [255]84:11
 [256]84:12 [257]86:15 [258]89:6 [259]92:15 [260]92:15
 [261]94:9 [262]94:19 [263]95 [264]95:4 [265]96:5 [266]96:6
 [267]97:7 [268]98:10 [269]98:10 [270]99:5 [271]99:9
 [272]102:25 [273]102:25-26 [274]102:27 [275]102:27
 [276]102:27 [277]103:8 [278]103:8 [279]103:12 [280]103:21
 [281]104 [282]104:15 [283]104:24 [284]104:24 [285]104:29-30
 [286]104:31-35 [287]106 [288]106:1 [289]106:40 [290]108:4-7
 [291]108:9 [292]110:1 [293]110:1 [294]110:2 [295]113:9
 [296]114:4 [297]114:6 [298]115:11 [299]116:11 [300]116:15-16
 [301]118:13 [302]118:27 [303]118:27 [304]119:73 [305]119:91
 [306]119:91 [307]119:127 [308]119:132 [309]120:3 [310]120:5-6
 [311]124:5-7 [312]124:7 [313]126:1 [314]126:3 [315]135:6
 [316]137 [317]137:9 [318]138:6 [319]141:3 [320]142:10
 [321]143:4 [322]143:6 [323]143:10 [324]143:10 [325]144:1
 [326]144:4 [327]145:3 [328]145:3 [329]145:16 [330]146:8
 [331]147:4 [332]147:5 [333]148:2-10 [334]148:5 [335]148:5
 [336]148:5 [337]148:5 [338]148:5 [339]148:5

 Proverbs

 [340]1:2 [341]1:3 [342]1:6 [343]3:18 [344]3:18 [345]3:18
 [346]4:6 [347]4:6 [348]4:6 [349]8:5 [350]8:5 [351]8:12
 [352]8:12 [353]8:21-22 [354]8:22 [355]8:22 [356]8:22
 [357]8:22 [358]8:22 [359]8:22 [360]8:22 [361]8:23-25
 [362]8:26 [363]8:27 [364]8:27-8 [365]8:28 [366]8:28
 [367]8:32 [368]9:1 [369]9:1 [370]9:5 [371]11:22 [372]15:19
 [373]17:6 [374]20:6 [375]27:2 [376]30:3 [377]30:15
 [378]31:1 [379]31:6 [380]31:6

 Ecclesiastes

 [381]1:4 [382]1:8 [383]3:1-11 [384]4:9 [385]4:10 [386]5:2
 [387]7:16 [388]8:5 [389]11:5 [390]11:7

 Song of Solomon

 [391]1:3 [392]1:3 [393]1:3 [394]4:12 [395]100

 Isaiah

 [396]1:16 [397]1:16 [398]4:4 [399]5:20 [400]5:21 [401]6:1
 [402]6:6-7 [403]6:9-10 [404]8:18 [405]9:6 [406]9:6
 [407]12:3 [408]13:10 [409]13:21 [410]22:4 [411]25:8
 [412]26:18 [413]26:18 [414]26:19 [415]28:11 [416]28:16
 [417]29:4 [418]29:13 [419]29:13 [420]34:13 [421]35:1-2
 [422]35:2 [423]35:2 [424]40:8 [425]40:12 [426]40:12
 [427]40:12-22 [428]40:15 [429]41:4 [430]41:10 [431]42:8
 [432]43:1 [433]43:25 [434]44:25 [435]45:14-15 [436]49:5
 [437]49:20 [438]51:7 [439]59:5 [440]60:8 [441]60:8
 [442]61:10 [443]64:4 [444]66:1 [445]66:2

 Jeremiah

 [446]1:39 [447]3:3 [448]9:17 [449]10:11 [450]17:11
 [451]31:15 [452]31:33

 Lamentations

 [453]1:4 [454]4:20

 Ezekiel

 [455]18:20 [456]36:25-27 [457]37:1-10

 Daniel

 [458]2:45 [459]7:10

 Hosea

 [460]3:2 [461]13:3 [462]13:7

 Joel

 [463]2:13 [464]2:28

 Amos

 [465]4:13 [466]5:8 [467]8:11

 Jonah

 [468]3:5

 Micah

 [469]1:8

 Habakkuk

 [470]2:15

 Zephaniah

 [471]3:7-13

 Zechariah

 [472]3:1 [473]3:3 [474]5:7 [475]7:9 [476]9:17

 Malachi

 [477]3:1 [478]3:2-3

 Matthew

 [479]1:20 [480]2:20 [481]3:7 [482]3:7 [483]3:9 [484]3:10
 [485]4:4 [486]5 [487]5:3 [488]5:7 [489]5:14 [490]5:26
 [491]5:28 [492]5:44 [493]6:24 [494]6:25 [495]7:6 [496]7:8
 [497]7:18 [498]7:23 [499]8:11 [500]8:17 [501]8:26 [502]9
 [503]9:4 [504]9:12 [505]9:12 [506]10:16 [507]11:10
 [508]11:12 [509]11:27 [510]11:27 [511]11:27 [512]12:11
 [513]12:28 [514]12:28 [515]12:50 [516]13:27 [517]13:39
 [518]13:43 [519]13:47-48 [520]15:8 [521]17:5 [522]18:6
 [523]18:10 [524]18:23 [525]19:17 [526]20:13 [527]20:15
 [528]21:42 [529]22:20-21 [530]22:37 [531]22:45 [532]23:8-10
 [533]24:35 [534]25:1 [535]25:25 [536]25:34 [537]26:13
 [538]26:24 [539]26:29 [540]28:6 [541]28:19 [542]28:19

 Mark

 [543]2 [544]2:17 [545]3:29 [546]6:50 [547]8:25 [548]8:38
 [549]8:38 [550]9:25 [551]9:42 [552]9:48 [553]12:30
 [554]13:1 [555]14:9 [556]14:38

 Luke

 [557]1:1 [558]1:2 [559]2:6-7 [560]2:30 [561]2:52 [562]3:23
 [563]4:23 [564]4:39 [565]5:20 [566]5:23 [567]6:36 [568]6:40
 [569]7:13-15 [570]7:32 [571]7:41 [572]10:16 [573]10:18
 [574]10:40 [575]11:27 [576]12:10 [577]12:36 [578]13:29
 [579]15:8 [580]16:24-31 [581]16:26 [582]17:21 [583]17:33
 [584]19:8 [585]19:10 [586]20:35-36 [587]22:35 [588]23:27-29
 [589]23:43 [590]23:46 [591]24:39

 John

 [592]1 [593]1:1 [594]1:1 [595]1:1 [596]1:1 [597]1:1
 [598]1:1 [599]1:1 [600]1:1 [601]1:1 [602]1:1 [603]1:1
 [604]1:1 [605]1:1 [606]1:1 [607]1:1 [608]1:1 [609]1:1
 [610]1:1-2 [611]1:3 [612]1:3 [613]1:3 [614]1:3 [615]1:3
 [616]1:3 [617]1:3 [618]1:3 [619]1:4 [620]1:4 [621]1:4
 [622]1:4 [623]1:5 [624]1:5 [625]1:9 [626]1:9 [627]1:9
 [628]1:9 [629]1:12 [630]1:12 [631]1:13 [632]1:13 [633]1:14
 [634]1:14 [635]1:14 [636]1:14 [637]1:14 [638]1:14 [639]1:18
 [640]1:18 [641]1:18 [642]1:18 [643]1:18 [644]1:18 [645]1:18
 [646]1:18 [647]2 [648]2:1 [649]2:19 [650]2:19 [651]3:3
 [652]3:3 [653]3:3 [654]3:3 [655]3:4 [656]3:4 [657]3:5
 [658]3:6 [659]3:6 [660]3:6 [661]3:6 [662]3:8 [663]3:8
 [664]3:8 [665]3:8 [666]3:10 [667]3:31 [668]3:36 [669]4:7-8
 [670]4:13-14 [671]4:14 [672]4:22 [673]4:24 [674]4:24
 [675]4:24 [676]4:49 [677]4:57 [678]5:14 [679]5:17 [680]5:19
 [681]5:21 [682]5:21 [683]5:22 [684]5:22 [685]5:22 [686]5:22
 [687]5:22 [688]5:22 [689]5:23 [690]5:23 [691]5:23 [692]5:23
 [693]5:23 [694]5:26 [695]5:29 [696]5:37 [697]5:44 [698]6:27
 [699]6:32 [700]6:51 [701]6:63 [702]7:20 [703]7:24 [704]7:37
 [705]7:37 [706]8:15 [707]8:34 [708]8:40 [709]8:44 [710]9:5
 [711]10:5 [712]10:5 [713]10:9 [714]10:17-18 [715]10:18
 [716]10:18 [717]10:30 [718]10:30 [719]10:30 [720]10:30
 [721]10:30 [722]10:30 [723]10:37 [724]10:38 [725]11:25
 [726]11:25 [727]11:51 [728]12:20 [729]12:23 [730]12:26
 [731]12:28 [732]12:30 [733]12:35 [734]12:41 [735]13:13
 [736]13:35 [737]14:3 [738]14:6 [739]14:6 [740]14:6
 [741]14:6 [742]14:8 [743]14:9 [744]14:9 [745]14:9 [746]14:9
 [747]14:9 [748]14:9 [749]14:9-10 [750]14:10 [751]14:10
 [752]14:10 [753]14:10 [754]14:10 [755]14:10 [756]14:10
 [757]14:11 [758]14:11 [759]14:16 [760]14:23 [761]14:27
 [762]15:15 [763]15:15 [764]15:22 [765]15:26 [766]15:26
 [767]16:15 [768]16:15 [769]16:15 [770]16:15 [771]16:21
 [772]16:21 [773]16:33 [774]17:3 [775]17:3 [776]17:4
 [777]17:5 [778]17:10 [779]17:10 [780]17:10 [781]17:10
 [782]17:10 [783]17:11 [784]17:12 [785]17:23 [786]17:25
 [787]18:5-6 [788]19:23-24 [789]20:2 [790]20:13 [791]20:17
 [792]20:17 [793]20:21 [794]20:27 [795]21:16-17 [796]21:25

 Acts

 [797]1:7 [798]1:7 [799]2:17 [800]2:24 [801]2:24 [802]2:27
 [803]2:31 [804]2:36 [805]2:36 [806]2:36 [807]2:36 [808]2:36
 [809]2:36 [810]2:36 [811]2:36 [812]2:36 [813]2:36 [814]2:47
 [815]3:15 [816]5:3 [817]7:14 [818]7:19 [819]9:5 [820]10:38
 [821]10:38 [822]17 [823]17:18 [824]17:21 [825]17:28
 [826]28:2-4 [827]28:25 [828]28:25-26

 Romans

 [829]1:1 [830]1:17 [831]1:20 [832]1:20 [833]1:20 [834]1:25
 [835]1:26 [836]2:20 [837]2:24 [838]3:3-9 [839]3:6 [840]4:21
 [841]4:22 [842]5:15 [843]6:3 [844]6:10 [845]6:10 [846]6:13
 [847]6:17 [848]7:7 [849]7:14 [850]7:14 [851]8:3 [852]8:3
 [853]8:9 [854]8:13 [855]8:14 [856]8:14 [857]8:15 [858]8:16
 [859]8:19-23 [860]8:20-1 [861]8:21 [862]8:21 [863]8:21
 [864]8:24 [865]8:26 [866]8:29 [867]8:29 [868]8:29 [869]8:32
 [870]8:32 [871]8:32 [872]9:5 [873]9:5 [874]9:5 [875]9:5
 [876]9:5 [877]9:10 [878]9:16 [879]9:21 [880]10:8 [881]10:10
 [882]11:2 [883]11:16 [884]11:16 [885]11:16 [886]11:33
 [887]11:33-34 [888]11:34 [889]11:36 [890]12:1-2 [891]12:3
 [892]12:15 [893]13:14 [894]13:14 [895]14:9 [896]14:17
 [897]15:6 [898]16:25 [899]16:26

 1 Corinthians

 [900]1:5 [901]1:13 [902]1:18 [903]1:20 [904]1:24 [905]1:24
 [906]1:24 [907]1:24 [908]1:24 [909]1:24 [910]1:24 [911]1:24
 [912]1:24 [913]1:26-27 [914]2:1-8 [915]2:8 [916]2:8
 [917]2:8 [918]2:9 [919]2:9 [920]2:10 [921]2:10 [922]2:11
 [923]2:14-15 [924]2:15 [925]2:15 [926]2:15 [927]2:16
 [928]3:3 [929]3:11 [930]3:12 [931]3:12 [932]3:14 [933]3:19
 [934]4:15 [935]4:15 [936]5:6 [937]5:12 [938]7:32 [939]7:32
 [940]7:35 [941]8:6 [942]8:6 [943]8:6 [944]8:13 [945]10:1-2
 [946]10:11 [947]10:11 [948]11:2 [949]12:3 [950]12:3
 [951]12:6 [952]12:6 [953]12:6 [954]12:11 [955]12:11
 [956]12:11 [957]12:11 [958]12:11 [959]12:14-24 [960]12:26
 [961]13:6 [962]13:8 [963]13:8-13 [964]13:10 [965]13:11
 [966]13:12 [967]14:2 [968]14:16 [969]14:20 [970]14:21
 [971]15:12 [972]15:19 [973]15:20 [974]15:21 [975]15:28
 [976]15:28 [977]15:29 [978]15:35 [979]15:37 [980]15:41
 [981]15:47 [982]15:47 [983]15:51 [984]15:51-52 [985]15:52

 2 Corinthians

 [986]1:3-4 [987]1:3-4 [988]3:2 [989]3:6 [990]3:6
 [991]3:14-15 [992]3:15 [993]3:16-17 [994]3:17 [995]3:17
 [996]3:17 [997]4:2 [998]4:16 [999]4:18 [1000]4:18 [1001]5:1
 [1002]5:4 [1003]5:4 [1004]5:4 [1005]5:16 [1006]5:16
 [1007]5:17 [1008]5:17 [1009]5:20 [1010]5:21 [1011]5:21
 [1012]5:21 [1013]5:21 [1014]5:21 [1015]5:21 [1016]6:6
 [1017]6:7 [1018]6:14 [1019]6:15-16 [1020]6:16 [1021]7:6
 [1022]8:15 [1023]12:4 [1024]12:4 [1025]13:3 [1026]13:3
 [1027]13:3 [1028]13:4 [1029]13:4 [1030]13:4 [1031]13:11
 [1032]13:13

 Galatians

 [1033]1:8-9 [1034]3:13 [1035]3:13 [1036]3:13 [1037]3:13
 [1038]3:20 [1039]3:28 [1040]3:28 [1041]4:8 [1042]4:8
 [1043]4:8 [1044]4:8 [1045]4:19 [1046]4:20 [1047]4:22
 [1048]4:31 [1049]5:1 [1050]5:13 [1051]5:17 [1052]5:17
 [1053]5:25 [1054]6:3 [1055]6:14 [1056]6:14

 Ephesians

 [1057]1:21 [1058]2:3 [1059]2:12 [1060]2:15 [1061]2:16
 [1062]3:16 [1063]3:18 [1064]3:18 [1065]4:6 [1066]4:22-23
 [1067]4:24 [1068]4:24 [1069]4:24 [1070]4:24 [1071]4:24
 [1072]5:27 [1073]5:27 [1074]6:12 [1075]6:24

 Philippians

 [1076]1:6 [1077]1:23 [1078]1:23 [1079]1:23 [1080]1:23
 [1081]2:5 [1082]2:6 [1083]2:6 [1084]2:6 [1085]2:6 [1086]2:7
 [1087]2:7 [1088]2:7 [1089]2:7 [1090]2:7-8 [1091]2:8
 [1092]2:9 [1093]2:9 [1094]2:9 [1095]2:9 [1096]2:9
 [1097]2:10 [1098]2:10 [1099]2:10 [1100]2:10 [1101]2:10
 [1102]2:10-11 [1103]2:10-11 [1104]2:10-11 [1105]2:10-11
 [1106]2:11 [1107]2:11 [1108]3:13 [1109]3:21

 Colossians

 [1110]1:15 [1111]1:15 [1112]1:15 [1113]1:15 [1114]1:16
 [1115]1:16 [1116]1:16 [1117]1:16 [1118]1:16 [1119]1:16
 [1120]1:16-17 [1121]1:16-17 [1122]1:17 [1123]1:17 [1124]1:18
 [1125]1:18 [1126]1:18 [1127]1:18 [1128]1:18 [1129]2:8
 [1130]2:9 [1131]2:9 [1132]2:9 [1133]2:16 [1134]3:1
 [1135]3:2 [1136]3:3 [1137]3:9 [1138]3:9-10 [1139]3:10
 [1140]3:11 [1141]3:24

 1 Thessalonians

 [1142]1:10 [1143]4:13 [1144]4:16 [1145]4:16 [1146]4:17
 [1147]5:5 [1148]5:21 [1149]5:23 [1150]5:23

 2 Thessalonians

 [1151]3:8

 1 Timothy

 [1152]1:7 [1153]1:7 [1154]1:7 [1155]1:7 [1156]1:7
 [1157]1:15 [1158]1:17 [1159]2:4 [1160]2:4 [1161]2:4
 [1162]2:5 [1163]2:5 [1164]2:5 [1165]2:5 [1166]2:5 [1167]2:5
 [1168]2:14 [1169]2:15 [1170]3:2 [1171]3:4 [1172]3:13
 [1173]3:16 [1174]3:16 [1175]3:16 [1176]3:16 [1177]3:16
 [1178]3:16 [1179]3:16 [1180]4 [1181]4:2 [1182]4:4 [1183]4:4
 [1184]4:4 [1185]4:5 [1186]4:7 [1187]4:10 [1188]6:10
 [1189]6:16 [1190]6:16 [1191]6:16 [1192]6:16 [1193]6:16
 [1194]6:16 [1195]6:16 [1196]6:16 [1197]6:16

 2 Timothy

 [1198]1:13 [1199]2:5 [1200]2:13 [1201]2:16 [1202]2:19
 [1203]2:20 [1204]3:8 [1205]3:16 [1206]4:5 [1207]4:17

 Titus

 [1208]2:9 [1209]2:11 [1210]2:13 [1211]2:13 [1212]2:13
 [1213]3:5

 Philemon

 [1214]1:10

 Hebrews

 [1215]1 [1216]1:1 [1217]1:2 [1218]1:2 [1219]1:2 [1220]1:3
 [1221]1:3 [1222]1:3 [1223]1:3 [1224]1:3 [1225]1:3 [1226]1:3
 [1227]1:3 [1228]1:3 [1229]1:3 [1230]1:3 [1231]1:3 [1232]1:3
 [1233]1:3 [1234]1:3 [1235]1:3 [1236]1:3 [1237]1:3 [1238]1:4
 [1239]1:6 [1240]1:6 [1241]1:6 [1242]1:6 [1243]1:6-12
 [1244]1:7 [1245]1:14 [1246]1:14 [1247]2:10 [1248]2:13
 [1249]2:14 [1250]2:14 [1251]2:14 [1252]3:1-2 [1253]3:7
 [1254]3:7 [1255]4:15 [1256]4:15 [1257]5:5 [1258]5:12
 [1259]5:14 [1260]5:14 [1261]6:8 [1262]6:11 [1263]6:16
 [1264]6:20 [1265]6:20 [1266]7:3 [1267]7:3 [1268]7:3
 [1269]7:9-10 [1270]7:21 [1271]8:13 [1272]9:4 [1273]9:13
 [1274]9:15 [1275]10:16 [1276]10:20 [1277]10:22 [1278]11:1
 [1279]11:1 [1280]11:1 [1281]11:1 [1282]11:3 [1283]11:3
 [1284]11:4 [1285]11:6 [1286]11:6 [1287]11:8 [1288]11:11
 [1289]11:13 [1290]11:27 [1291]11:40 [1292]12:1 [1293]12:2
 [1294]12:15 [1295]12:29 [1296]13:16

 James

 [1297]1:15 [1298]1:17

 1 Peter

 [1299]1:24 [1300]1:24 [1301]2:8 [1302]2:22 [1303]2:22
 [1304]3:14

 2 Peter

 [1305]1:4

 1 John

 [1306]1:2

 Revelation

 [1307]1:5 [1308]1:16 [1309]20:5

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [1310]1:4 [1311]7:18 [1312]7:25 [1313]7:25 [1314]13
 [1315]13:5 [1316]13:5 [1317]13:5 [1318]16:14 [1319]16:20

 Baruch

 [1320]3:37 [1321]3:37 [1322]3:37 [1323]3:37

 Susanna

 [1324]1:42 [1325]1:42 [1326]1:42

 3 Maccabees

 [1327]2:14

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * Amiges: [1328]1
 * Apokatastasis: [1329]1
 * Basileusei Kurios eis ton ai& 242;na, kai eis ton ai& 242;na tou
 ai& 242;nos;: [1330]1
 * Gennetos: [1331]1
 * Doxa: [1332]1
 * Eisphresanton: [1333]1
 * Zorotero: [1334]1
 * Theou: [1335]1
 * Theos: [1336]1 [1337]2 [1338]3
 * Theos kurios, kai epephanen hemin; sustesasthe ten eorten en tois
 pukazousin heos ton keraton tou thusiasteriou: [1339]1
 * Theos: [1340]1 [1341]2
 * Karnaphouk: [1342]1
 * Kurios ektise me, k.t.l: [1343]1
 * Logos: [1344]1 [1345]2 [1346]3 [1347]4 [1348]5 [1349]6 [1350]7
 [1351]8 [1352]9 [1353]10 [1354]11 [1355]12 [1356]13 [1357]14
 [1358]15 [1359]16
 * Nebel oinou, hoper esti metron xeston r'n': [1360]1
 * Housios: [1361]1
 * Plen alla: [1362]1
 * Plen all' ouk anelpisteon soi kai ton onuchon ekeinou: [1363]1
 * Prounikos Sophia: [1364]1
 * Prototokos: [1365]1
 * Pros tous suneisaktous echontas: [1366]1
 * Ti gar baptizontai eis Christon: [1367]1
 * Tis de edoke gunaixin huphasmatos sophian, e poikiltiken epistemen:
 [1368]1
 * Tis emetrjse...ton ouranon spithame: [1369]1
 * To Dauid (dia) Ieremiou: [1370]1
 * To gar, k. t. l: [1371]1
 * Christou: [1372]1
 * aition: [1373]1
 * ai& 240;n: [1374]1 [1375]2
 * aioni& 251;: [1376]1
 * aionios: [1377]1
 * hairounta: [1378]1
 * augazein: [1379]1
 * autoi hautois ouch homologoumenoi logoi: [1380]1
 * autou: [1381]1
 * auten: [1382]1
 * auto to kalon: [1383]1
 * auto to peplasmenon tes huponoias: [1384]1
 * autos: [1385]1 [1386]2
 * autos theos: [1387]1
 * autes: [1388]1 [1389]2 [1390]3
 * autes methistamenes: [1391]1
 * auto: [1392]1 [1393]2
 * auto; auton: [1394]1
 * hautos: [1395]1
 * bathmon heautois kalon peripoiountai: [1396]1
 * bareia: [1397]1
 * biazomenes: [1398]1
 * biotikes apates: [1399]1
 * bracheia: [1400]1
 * brotos gar gennetos gunaikos, oligobios kai pleres orges: [1401]1
 * brotos: [1402]1
 * brosteres: [1403]1
 * ballontes: [1404]1
 * baptisma, pistis: [1405]1
 * barbaroi: [1406]1
 * barbaroi hoi apaideutoi: [1407]1
 * bion: [1408]1
 * bios: [1409]1 [1410]2
 * gasteros: [1411]1
 * gaian: [1412]1
 * gaian epistrephetai: [1413]1
 * gegennekota: [1414]1
 * genealogein: [1415]1
 * geneseos: [1416]1
 * genikotero: [1417]1
 * genikotero tini logo ten noeran ousian te aisthete sunkatemixen:
 [1418]1
 * genikes: [1419]1
 * genneseos: [1420]1 [1421]2
 * gennemata echidnon: [1422]1
 * genesetai: [1423]1
 * genomenos: [1424]1
 * geode: [1425]1
 * ginomenon: [1426]1
 * gnorizomenais: [1427]1
 * gnorizomenen: [1428]1
 * gnoristikon: [1429]1
 * gnostikon: [1430]1
 * gnoston: [1431]1
 * gnosin: [1432]1
 * gnosis: [1433]1
 * graphikes technes: [1434]1
 * gar: [1435]1 [1436]2 [1437]3 [1438]4 [1439]5
 * gangraina: [1440]1
 * gennema: [1441]1 [1442]2 [1443]3 [1444]4 [1445]5
 * gennema, poiema: [1446]1
 * gennesin: [1447]1
 * gennesis: [1448]1 [1449]2
 * gennetos: [1450]1
 * ginetai: [1451]1
 * daimones: [1452]1
 * dedokosi: [1453]1
 * dedokasi: [1454]1
 * dexias: [1455]1
 * deuteros logos: [1456]1
 * deiknusin: [1457]1
 * deiknutai: [1458]1
 * deixasthai: [1459]1
 * dein: [1460]1
 * delonoti: [1461]1
 * diabeblemeno pros areten kai kalokagathian: [1462]1
 * diabebleothai dokei: [1463]1
 * diaballesthai: [1464]1
 * diabebletai: [1465]1
 * diagluphous: [1466]1
 * diagonizesthai: [1467]1
 * diadochen Uphegesis: [1468]1
 * diatheontes asteres: [1469]1
 * diakomesasa: [1470]1
 * diakomisasa: [1471]1
 * diakonesai: [1472]1
 * diakonesasa: [1473]1 [1474]2
 * diaperainontes: [1475]1
 * diaspatai: [1476]1
 * diastematiken: [1477]1
 * diastematikes: [1478]1
 * diastoichizomena: [1479]1
 * diaschizetai: [1480]1
 * diasozein: [1481]1
 * diasostes: [1482]1
 * diateichizomena: [1483]1
 * diatattontas: [1484]1
 * diaphorountas: [1485]1
 * diaphorous dechesthai epinoias: [1486]1
 * diaphugoi: [1487]1
 * digluphous: [1488]1
 * didaskalian exomologeseos huphegoumenos: [1489]1
 * didaxosi: [1490]1
 * didaskosi: [1491]1
 * diegemasin: [1492]1
 * dieremene: [1493]1
 * dia: [1494]1
 * dia broseos: [1495]1
 * dia mesou ou gegonen: [1496]1
 * dia tou henos kai pros ta sunemmena touto: [1497]1
 * dia tes aischras apotiseos ton emeton anekinesan: [1498]1
 * dia tes basanou: [1499]1
 * dia ton kata ten basin poron: [1500]1
 * dia ton historoumenon thaumaton ouk amphiballomen: [1501]1
 * dia ton homoion: [1502]1
 * dia te tas ennoias: [1503]1
 * diakonos genomene: [1504]1
 * diakrisis: [1505]1
 * dianoia, to zoopoion aition: [1506]1
 * diaphoros: [1507]1
 * diexodos: [1508]1
 * diekei: [1509]1
 * diattontas: [1510]1
 * di' analuseos: [1511]1
 * di' aneseos: [1512]1
 * di' epitaseos: [1513]1
 * di' heautou: [1514]1
 * di' heterou tinos organou: [1515]1
 * di' hes oimai kai ten Theotokon prodiatupousthai Marian: [1516]1
 * dogmaton akribeia: [1517]1
 * dokeie to empalin: [1518]1
 * dokei, e to empalin: [1519]1
 * doleran: [1520]1
 * doruphorousin: [1521]1
 * dous: [1522]1
 * doulos gastros, kai ton hupo gastera: [1523]1
 * dunamei: [1524]1
 * dunameis: [1525]1 [1526]2 [1527]3
 * dorophorousin: [1528]1
 * de: [1529]1
 * dexasthai: [1530]1
 * de: [1531]1
 * demous: [1532]1
 * doxa: [1533]1
 * ei: [1534]1
 * ei: [1535]1 [1536]2
 * ei gar alethes ho logos ho kata se, kai to suneche te pros, k. t.
 l: [1537]1
 * ei de mikroteron: [1538]1
 * ei de mikroteron: [1539]1
 * ei de ti: [1540]1
 * ei kai...kata se: [1541]1
 * ei kan he!: [1542]1
 * ei me eie: [1543]1
 * ei anti: [1544]1
 * eikotos: [1545]1
 * eileseos: [1546]1
 * eirmon: [1547]1
 * eirmo: [1548]1
 * eis: [1549]1 [1550]2
 * eis plethoriken aedian ekpipton: [1551]1
 * eis to analusai, kai sun Christo einai: [1552]1
 * eis to homogenes heauton eisagage: [1553]1
 * eis asebeian graphein: [1554]1
 * eis apeiron parateinetai: [1555]1
 * eis orthoteta logou: [1556]1
 * eis orthotetos apodeixin: [1557]1
 * eisagage: [1558]1
 * eispedan: [1559]1
 * eisphtheiromenos: [1560]1
 * eisphorein: [1561]1
 * heirgmo: [1562]1
 * ei ti makarion, k.t.l: [1563]1
 * ei tina touton kata ton authon logon sunousiomenen tis einai legoi
 dunamin, k.t.l: [1564]1
 * eilesin: [1565]1
 * eipate: [1566]1
 * eiper to haploun: [1567]1
 * eiper he energeia ton parepomenon tis einai te prote ousia
 memarturetai: [1568]1
 * eiper hebosin hoi kata tous nun tois logois akmazontes: [1569]1
 * eipomen: [1570]1
 * eipomen: [1571]1
 * einai: [1572]1
 * eipen: [1573]1 [1574]2
 * eipon: [1575]1 [1576]2 [1577]3
 * euangelisamenos: [1578]1
 * eugenes ton aph' heliou anatolon: [1579]1
 * eudokia: [1580]1
 * eulabeian tina prospoieton kai epilepton: [1581]1
 * eupeitheias: [1582]1
 * euruthmon: [1583]1
 * eusebeias: [1584]1
 * eusebos: [1585]1
 * euteremonton: [1586]1
 * euphrosune: [1587]1
 * zetoumenou: [1588]1
 * zotike dunamis: [1589]1 [1590]2
 * zoon: [1591]1
 * thaumastoutai: [1592]1
 * thaumatopoiountas: [1593]1
 * thaumatopoiias: [1594]1
 * theasthai: [1595]1 [1596]2
 * theata: [1597]1
 * theates: [1598]1
 * theomachia: [1599]1
 * theopoioumenon: [1600]1
 * theopoiesis: [1601]1
 * theotokos: [1602]1
 * theoi: [1603]1
 * therapeuesthai: [1604]1
 * therapeuein: [1605]1
 * theoria: [1606]1
 * theaomai: [1607]1
 * theon: [1608]1 [1609]2
 * theos: [1610]1
 * theon: [1611]1
 * theos: [1612]1 [1613]2 [1614]3 [1615]4 [1616]5 [1617]6 [1618]7
 * theotes: [1619]1 [1620]2
 * theorema: [1621]1
 * thinganomen: [1622]1
 * tholeran: [1623]1
 * thusiasteria: [1624]1
 * thusian: [1625]1
 * thalamos: [1626]1
 * thanatos: [1627]1
 * thea: [1628]1
 * thesei: [1629]1
 * thesis: [1630]1
 * theosis: [1631]1
 * katharsi& 251;: [1632]1
 * kathegeseos: [1633]1
 * kathemaxeumenon: [1634]1
 * kathieitai Kurios basileus eis ton ai& 242;na;: [1635]1
 * kathubrisousin: [1636]1
 * kathuphesousin: [1637]1
 * kathaper: [1638]1
 * kathistantai: [1639]1
 * katholou gar ouk anankaion to tes hedones pathos, epakolouthimon de
 chreiais tais phusikais, k. t. l: [1640]1
 * kathos ekeinos phesin: [1641]1
 * kath' hemas: [1642]1
 * kath' hemon: [1643]1
 * kath' ho dokei monon pos autes, k. t. l: [1644]1
 * kath' humas: [1645]1
 * kath' humon: [1646]1
 * kath' hupostasin: [1647]1
 * kath') hoson te: [1648]1
 * kairou sustolen: [1649]1
 * kakon: [1650]1 [1651]2
 * kakon: [1652]1
 * kakos eklabontes: [1653]1
 * kallopizein: [1654]1
 * kalon: [1655]1 [1656]2 [1657]3 [1658]4
 * kalos: [1659]1
 * katagnoien: [1660]1
 * katakermatizetai: [1661]1
 * katakosmeisthai: [1662]1
 * kataleptikes ephodou: [1663]1
 * katalepseis: [1664]1
 * katargethesontai, katargethesetai: [1665]1
 * kataseiein te cheiri: [1666]1
 * kataseisasa te cheiri: [1667]1
 * katasigesasa: [1668]1
 * kataskeue: [1669]1
 * kataskeuasma: [1670]1
 * kataskeue: [1671]1
 * katastolen: [1672]1
 * katar& 191;iknothenta: [1673]1
 * katemelanthe: [1674]1
 * katechseos: [1675]1
 * katischusetai: [1676]1
 * kata diametron allelois antikeimenon: [1677]1
 * kata logon: [1678]1
 * kata tauton: [1679]1
 * kata tauton: [1680]1
 * kata to emprosthen autes: [1681]1
 * kata tou nomothetou: [1682]1
 * kata ten ton antikeimenon phusin: [1683]1
 * kata to dexion e euonumon: [1684]1
 * kata to nooumenon: [1685]1
 * kata to proegoumenon: [1686]1
 * kata to agathon: [1687]1
 * kata ton nomotheten: [1688]1
 * kata ton nooumenon: [1689]1
 * kata ton erounta logon: [1690]1
 * kata ton hupselon 'Ioannen en te aphthori& 139; tou somatos:
 [1691]1
 * kata phusin auten, kai tes theoeidous charitos, k. t. l: [1692]1
 * kata analuoin: [1693]1
 * katakrisin: [1694]1
 * katalepsis: [1695]1
 * kataptosis: [1696]1
 * katelabe: [1697]1
 * kat' auton: [1698]1
 * kat' allelon: [1699]1
 * kat' apoklerosin: [1700]1
 * kat' andras, kai demous, kai eschatias: [1701]1
 * kat' idian perigraphen: [1702]1 [1703]2
 * kai: [1704]1 [1705]2
 * kai gar kai autos ton phuomenon estin: [1706]1
 * kai ei di'henos tinos moluntheie, k. t. l: [1707]1
 * kai einai pepisteutai: [1708]1
 * kai men: [1709]1
 * kai ou mechri touton, k.t.l: [1710]1
 * kai peri tous somatikous ponous escholemenon: [1711]1
 * kai pros ton dromon oi podes: [1712]1
 * kai poseos: [1713]1
 * kai toutou palin: [1714]1
 * kai ton tou kuriotatou logon epechei;: [1715]1
 * kai tes eusebous ennoias: [1716]1
 * kai agalliasis: [1717]1
 * kai anapausontai ekei seirenes, kai daimonia ekei orchesontai:
 [1718]1
 * kai anastas te trite hemera, kai hodopoiesas pase sarki ten ek
 nekron anastasin, k.t.l: [1719]1
 * kai akran: [1720]1
 * kai hama legein epecheiroun hosa pros anatropen tes anastaseos para
 ton eristikon epheurisketai: [1721]1
 * kai en to patri ontos: [1722]1
 * kai hen pros ton patera ontos: [1723]1
 * kai ho gennetheis gennetos: [1724]1
 * kai homoios kata platos kai bathos hoi dokountes asteres diattein
 ginontai: [1725]1
 * kai tis: [1726]1
 * kaiein: [1727]1
 * kekadmenos: [1728]1
 * keraian: [1729]1
 * kephalaion: [1730]1
 * kecharitomenos: [1731]1
 * kechoristhai: [1732]1
 * keisthai: [1733]1
 * kibotos: [1734]1
 * konchoeidos: [1735]1
 * koinonous: [1736]1
 * koinonias: [1737]1
 * koinon ennoion: [1738]1
 * kouphon: [1739]1
 * krataioma: [1740]1
 * krateres: [1741]1
 * kreitton logos: [1742]1
 * kreitton, k. t. l: [1743]1
 * kriterion: [1744]1
 * ktethen: [1745]1
 * ktisthen: [1746]1
 * ktiston = theon ouk einai: [1747]1
 * ktistos: [1748]1
 * ktiseos: [1749]1
 * ktisma: [1750]1 [1751]2 [1752]3
 * kukloteros: [1753]1
 * kurios: [1754]1
 * kakeinon en hauto: [1755]1
 * katharsis: [1756]1
 * kallos: [1757]1
 * kekaire: [1758]1
 * kenosis: [1759]1
 * keraire: [1760]1
 * kinema: [1761]1
 * kinesis: [1762]1
 * kolles: [1763]1
 * kakeinai hai energeiai autai: [1764]1
 * lambanomenon: [1765]1
 * lambanein: [1766]1
 * lamprotes: [1767]1
 * legomenon: [1768]1
 * lexeos: [1769]1
 * logikos: [1770]1 [1771]2
 * logistes: [1772]1
 * lupron: [1773]1
 * legoi: [1774]1
 * legon: [1775]1
 * lexeos: [1776]1
 * logoi: [1777]1
 * logoi spermatikoi: [1778]1
 * logon: [1779]1 [1780]2
 * logos: [1781]1 [1782]2 [1783]3 [1784]4 [1785]5 [1786]6 [1787]7
 [1788]8 [1789]9 [1790]10 [1791]11 [1792]12 [1793]13
 * logos tis enkeitai to somati, aph' hou me phtheiromenou egeiretai
 to soma en aphtharsi& 139;: [1794]1
 * logou: [1795]1 [1796]2
 * logo: [1797]1 [1798]2
 * logo tini kreittoni tes anthropines katanoeseos: [1799]1
 * marturi& 251;: [1800]1
 * mataioteta: [1801]1
 * machaira: [1802]1
 * mega chrema hu& 232;s: [1803]1
 * methori& 251;: [1804]1
 * meizotero: [1805]1
 * meta: [1806]1
 * metabatikos: [1807]1
 * metabibazein: [1808]1
 * metaballesthai: [1809]1
 * metalambanein: [1810]1
 * metaxu: [1811]1
 * metapoieisthai: [1812]1
 * metarruthmizesthai: [1813]1
 * metaseisasa: [1814]1
 * metastoicheioun: [1815]1
 * metastoicheiosas: [1816]1 [1817]2
 * metousioun: [1818]1
 * meta tauta: [1819]1
 * meta touton ton bion: [1820]1
 * meta: [1821]1
 * metechein axion: [1822]1
 * meiosis: [1823]1
 * meinai: [1824]1
 * mede archaizein: [1825]1
 * mechanikes: [1826]1
 * mechanes: [1827]1
 * mnesteres: [1828]1
 * mnemen: [1829]1
 * molubdaines: [1830]1
 * molubdines: [1831]1
 * monarchia: [1832]1
 * monarchias: [1833]1
 * monogenes: [1834]1
 * morphe: [1835]1 [1836]2 [1837]3
 * morphen: [1838]1
 * morphes: [1839]1
 * morian: [1840]1
 * moriois: [1841]1
 * murmekias: [1842]1
 * malista men: [1843]1
 * men: [1844]1
 * men, etoi, de: [1845]1
 * mega anthropos: [1846]1
 * melos: [1847]1
 * meros: [1848]1
 * merops: [1849]1
 * mesou: [1850]1
 * mechri mias odinos: [1851]1
 * me: [1852]1
 * me dechoito: [1853]1
 * me katallelo trophe: [1854]1
 * me katischusete parakalein me epi to suntrimma, k.t.l: [1855]1
 * me metabibazein: [1856]1
 * me nomothetein: [1857]1
 * me treis anastaseis muthopoioumen: [1858]1
 * me anenergeton einai: [1859]1
 * me apemphainein: [1860]1
 * mete to kata ten haploteta dokoun epaineton: [1861]1
 * mia hupostasis: [1862]1 [1863]2
 * monos: [1864]1
 * morphosin: [1865]1
 * mia ousia: [1866]1
 * n: [1867]1
 * naluontas: [1868]1
 * neoteron: [1869]1
 * neura: [1870]1
 * noematon: [1871]1
 * noeten: [1872]1
 * noetos: [1873]1
 * nooumenon: [1874]1
 * nous: [1875]1 [1876]2 [1877]3
 * numphostolou: [1878]1
 * nebel oinou: [1879]1
 * noema: [1880]1
 * nosema: [1881]1
 * nun: [1882]1
 * xenizei: [1883]1
 * xerostomias kakosunthetos diaperainonta: [1884]1
 * xoogoneitai: [1885]1
 * ousia: [1886]1
 * oikodomei: [1887]1 [1888]2
 * oikonomei: [1889]1 [1890]2
 * oikonomikos genomenen: [1891]1
 * oikistes autoschedios: [1892]1
 * hoi therapeutai tou chrusiou: [1893]1
 * hoi misthou komizontes ta onia apo tes agoras, hous tines
 paidarionas kalousin, dromeis, tracheis, oxeis, eukinetoi, gorgoi,
 misthotoi: [1894]1
 * hoi peri ton Periklea: [1895]1
 * hoi te prounikou sophi& 139; engumnasthentes; ex ekeines gar dokei
 moi tes paraskeues ta eiremena proenenochenai;: [1896]1
 * hoi homotimoi: [1897]1
 * oiden: [1898]1
 * oiden hoti: [1899]1
 * hois de proseporothe ta pathe: [1900]1
 * ou: [1901]1
 * ou gar enarges esti to epitedeuma touto, hoste kat' ananken,
 k.t.l.: [1902]1
 * ou di' heterou tinos organou: [1903]1
 * ou men: [1904]1
 * ou men alla: [1905]1
 * ou monon de touto, k.t.l: [1906]1
 * ou peri to aidion theoreisthai: [1907]1
 * oudemia gegone ton ephestoton epistrophe: [1908]1
 * oudeni aresthesetai: [1909]1
 * oude...ton botrun: [1910]1
 * ouden houto te phusei pheukton estin, hos, k. t. l: [1911]1
 * oude to archetupon, k. t. l: [1912]1
 * ouk: [1913]1 [1914]2 [1915]3
 * ouk eis to einai sunairountes: [1916]1
 * ouk oida peri tinos legomenon ti koinon echei k.t.l: [1917]1
 * ouk esti ginoskon tis he hodos tou pneumatos, hos osta en gastri
 kuophorouses: [1918]1
 * ouk estin: [1919]1
 * ouk echontes pou ten ananken tes a& 207;rhostias tautes
 epanenenkosi: [1920]1
 * ouk en ousia to ek tinos: [1921]1
 * ourano: [1922]1
 * ousian ouk an apodeiknuoito e to med' holos einai: [1923]1
 * ousia: [1924]1 [1925]2 [1926]3 [1927]4 [1928]5 [1929]6 [1930]7
 [1931]8 [1932]9 [1933]10 [1934]11 [1935]12 [1936]13 [1937]14
 [1938]15 [1939]16 [1940]17 [1941]18 [1942]19 [1943]20 [1944]21
 [1945]22 [1946]23 [1947]24 [1948]25
 * ousia ousion, idea ideon: [1949]1
 * ousian: [1950]1
 * ousias: [1951]1 [1952]2 [1953]3
 * ousias semantikon: [1954]1
 * ouchi to misei tes aletheias alla te asthenei& 139; tes diegeseos:
 [1955]1
 * oupote: [1956]1
 * oute: [1957]1 [1958]2
 * oute diacheitai: [1959]1
 * oute ton horonton...hois te an...: [1960]1
 * houto legesthai: [1961]1
 * houtos: [1962]1
 * ousan: [1963]1
 * houtos: [1964]1
 * panteles: [1965]1
 * parakalein: [1966]1 [1967]2
 * parakratoumene: [1968]1
 * parallage: [1969]1
 * paraskeuazetai, epeide, k.t.l: [1970]1
 * paregraphonto: [1971]1
 * parethenta: [1972]1
 * parektikes kai metabatikes energeias: [1973]1
 * parenespare: [1974]1
 * parellachthai: [1975]1
 * parthenia: [1976]1
 * parthenia: [1977]1 [1978]2 [1979]3 [1980]4
 * parthenia tou somatos: [1981]1
 * parodiken: [1982]1
 * parousia: [1983]1
 * parousian: [1984]1
 * para: [1985]1 [1986]2
 * para ten auten: [1987]1
 * para ten proten: [1988]1 [1989]2
 * para tinos: [1990]1
 * para ton ktisanta: [1991]1
 * paragrapton: [1992]1
 * parastasin: [1993]1
 * paratasin: [1994]1
 * parengrapton: [1995]1
 * par' heautou: [1996]1
 * pases perigraphes ektos: [1997]1
 * pater, agennetos: [1998]1
 * peplanemeno: [1999]1
 * peplerophoremenon: [2000]1
 * peplerophoremetha: [2001]1
 * perateian: [2002]1 [2003]2
 * periautizetai: [2004]1
 * periespato: [2005]1
 * perilambanei ti: [2006]1
 * perilambanetai: [2007]1 [2008]2
 * perileptike: [2009]1
 * perilepte: [2010]1
 * periodiken: [2011]1
 * perispasmon: [2012]1
 * peristeran sun neossois: [2013]1
 * peritathentos: [2014]1
 * peritethentos: [2015]1
 * peritte: [2016]1
 * periechonti: [2017]1
 * peri auton kai en auto: [2018]1
 * peri koinon ennoion: [2019]1
 * peri ten psuchen: [2020]1
 * peri tinon diabebaiountai: [2021]1
 * peri hon diateinontai: [2022]1
 * peri hon tosouton k.t.l: [2023]1
 * peri ti: [2024]1
 * peloo kompsos pephuramenon.: [2025]1
 * pistos: [2026]1
 * plerophoreisthai: [2027]1
 * plerophoretheis hoti ho epengeltai k.t.l: [2028]1
 * plerophoria pisteos: [2029]1
 * plerophoria tes elpidos: [2030]1
 * plesmones: [2031]1
 * plinthotes: [2032]1
 * ploutos: [2033]1
 * plen alla kai estin en theriois krisis: [2034]1
 * plen all' emoi, k.t.l: [2035]1
 * plen all' epeide esti kai en theriois kriois: [2036]1
 * pleroma: [2037]1
 * plinthon: [2038]1
 * pneumatikou: [2039]1
 * pneumatike politeia: [2040]1
 * pneuma: [2041]1
 * pneuma anairein: [2042]1
 * pneuma hegemonikon: [2043]1
 * poiountai: [2044]1
 * politeian: [2045]1
 * polutheia: [2046]1
 * pompholux: [2047]1
 * pote: [2048]1
 * poiema: [2049]1 [2050]2
 * presbeuein: [2051]1
 * proairesis: [2052]1
 * proballoito: [2053]1
 * protheoroie: [2054]1
 * prolabon: [2055]1
 * prologizontas: [2056]1
 * prolochizontas: [2057]1
 * pronoeteon: [2058]1
 * prosekunese to lao tes ges: [2059]1
 * prosekunesen epi ten gen heptakis: [2060]1
 * proselotheisa: [2061]1
 * prostheoroie: [2062]1
 * proskinoumenois: [2063]1
 * proskunein: [2064]1
 * proslabon: [2065]1
 * prostithenai: [2066]1
 * prostithesi: [2067]1
 * prosekei: [2068]1
 * prosopon: [2069]1 [2070]2
 * prosopon delotikon: [2071]1
 * prosepsin: [2072]1
 * protithenai: [2073]1
 * protithesi: [2074]1
 * prounikou: [2075]1
 * propheres: [2076]1
 * proi& 241;n (hoste) genesthai eis to soma tou logou: [2077]1
 * prounikos: [2078]1
 * prototokos: [2079]1 [2080]2
 * prototokos tes ktiseos: [2081]1
 * pragmata Romaiois neotera mechanesasthai: [2082]1
 * pro pases kataleptes epinoias: [2083]1
 * pros ouden horizomenos: [2084]1
 * pros tous 'Ephesious: [2085]1
 * pros ten enantian poioteta: [2086]1
 * pros ten homoioteta tou prokeimenou: [2087]1
 * pros to: [2088]1
 * pros to sumban apoptuontos: [2089]1
 * pros to soma dia tou logou metapoioumenos: [2090]1
 * pros to soma metapoioumenos: [2091]1
 * pros to soma tou logou: [2092]1
 * pros to akatergaston tes ton stoicheion hules: [2093]1
 * pros to: [2094]1
 * pros heauton analuon: [2095]1
 * pros hemas: [2096]1
 * pros holon ai& 242;na: [2097]1
 * pros te to peras: [2098]1
 * prosopsin: [2099]1
 * prosphatos: [2100]1
 * prosopa: [2101]1 [2102]2 [2103]3
 * prosopon: [2104]1
 * prosopon alethos memorphomenon: [2105]1
 * pragma pheukton: [2106]1
 * proton men tes Prounikou sophias ginetai mathetes: [2107]1
 * pukasmos: [2108]1
 * pukazousin: [2109]1
 * puri: [2110]1
 * pathe: [2111]1 [2112]2 [2113]3
 * pathos: [2114]1 [2115]2 [2116]3
 * palin: [2117]1 [2118]2
 * panta homou: [2119]1
 * panton: [2120]1
 * panton ton kuklophoroumenon: [2121]1
 * pantos: [2122]1
 * pantos de alethes, k. t. l: [2123]1
 * petason: [2124]1
 * perosin: [2125]1
 * purosin: [2126]1
 * pan: [2127]1
 * pan en panti: [2128]1
 * pasa he kakia ouden estin, epei kai ouk on tunchanei: [2129]1
 * pasan: [2130]1
 * pasin: [2131]1
 * sapron: [2132]1
 * seirenes: [2133]1
 * semnotetos: [2134]1
 * sepedonodes: [2135]1
 * skaioteti: [2136]1
 * skopon: [2137]1
 * skopos: [2138]1
 * skopo: [2139]1
 * skuthropon epanorthosis: [2140]1
 * skotous energeian: [2141]1
 * skenos: [2142]1 [2143]2
 * sophia: [2144]1
 * sophistes: [2145]1
 * spermatikos logos: [2146]1
 * speira: [2147]1
 * stagon: [2148]1
 * stathmos: [2149]1
 * stereoma: [2150]1
 * stephanousai: [2151]1
 * stephanousi: [2152]1
 * stoicheion: [2153]1
 * stroutho-kamelos: [2154]1
 * strouthia: [2155]1
 * stachus: [2156]1
 * steresis: [2157]1 [2158]2
 * stigma: [2159]1
 * sunkalupsas: [2160]1
 * sunkatabasis: [2161]1
 * sunkechremene: [2162]1
 * sumparagraphousi: [2163]1
 * sumperastiko: [2164]1
 * sumpomaton: [2165]1
 * sumptomaton: [2166]1
 * sumphorais: [2167]1
 * sunageiromen: [2168]1
 * sundromes: [2169]1
 * sunenkataleie, sunektale, sunektaleie, sunektalai& 219;, sunkatalu&
 219;: [2170]1
 * sunekrotei: [2171]1
 * sunekrotoun allos allon, me apokamnein: [2172]1
 * sunektile: [2173]1
 * sunektinei: [2174]1
 * suneplakemen: [2175]1
 * sunetheias: [2176]1 [2177]2
 * sunonomazomenes: [2178]1
 * suntropho: [2179]1
 * sunteleian: [2180]1
 * sunaxeis: [2181]1
 * sunethe: [2182]1 [2183]2
 * sustesasthai: [2184]1
 * sustesasthe: [2185]1
 * spheteras: [2186]1
 * scholastikos: [2187]1
 * schole: [2188]1
 * schesin: [2189]1
 * somatikos: [2190]1
 * soterias poietika: [2191]1
 * soteria: [2192]1
 * soteria sumbola: [2193]1
 * sun: [2194]1
 * suzugon: [2195]1
 * sunaxis: [2196]1
 * sundesmoi: [2197]1
 * sundesmos: [2198]1
 * somatos: [2199]1
 * somatos dusgeneian: [2200]1
 * soma: [2201]1
 * soma ginetai: [2202]1
 * taxiarchas kai lochagous, hekatontarchous te kai chiliarchous:
 [2203]1
 * tauta: [2204]1
 * tais hupo gastera plesmonais: [2205]1
 * tauta: [2206]1
 * tauta eipon: [2207]1
 * te: [2208]1
 * terateian: [2209]1
 * tetagmenoi epi ton skuthropon...pragmaton: [2210]1
 * tetragonos aneu psogou: [2211]1
 * ti: [2212]1
 * ti ton katagnomon: [2213]1
 * ti ton kata gnomen: [2214]1
 * timiotaton: [2215]1
 * time: [2216]1
 * tis: [2217]1
 * toi: [2218]1
 * tosouton: [2219]1
 * tois pollois parakathemenois: [2220]1
 * tous dieremenous: [2221]1
 * tous me dieremenous: [2222]1
 * toutois: [2223]1
 * touton: [2224]1 [2225]2 [2226]3 [2227]4
 * touton ten suntuchian aphosioumenon: [2228]1
 * tois dedokosin epanasozetai: [2229]1
 * tois duskolotatois: [2230]1
 * tois kata gnomen prosklinomene: [2231]1
 * tois mazouroth: [2232]1
 * tois meta gastera: [2233]1
 * tois men gar k.t.l: [2234]1
 * tois tes aretes dromois: [2235]1
 * tois ton pholidon stigmasin: [2236]1
 * tois huiois tou Chet: [2237]1
 * tois alogoterois: [2238]1
 * tois anagennomenois: [2239]1
 * tois exothen periboles: [2240]1
 * tois hemeterois: [2241]1
 * tois hup' autou diabeblemenois anthropois: [2242]1
 * tou: [2243]1
 * tou Theou einai k.t.l: [2244]1
 * tou Theon einai ton monogene Theon: [2245]1
 * tou biou: [2246]1
 * tou geodous: [2247]1
 * tou didaskalou: [2248]1
 * tou diexodeuomenou: [2249]1
 * tou eikotos: [2250]1
 * tou kata to stoma porou: [2251]1
 * tou pantos: [2252]1
 * tou propherontos: [2253]1
 * tou prototupou kallistou: [2254]1
 * tou stoicheiou: [2255]1 [2256]2
 * tou stuphou: [2257]1
 * tou soteros: [2258]1
 * tou somatos: to periechonti: [2259]1
 * tou idein en te chrestoteti ton eklekton sou: [2260]1
 * tou ontos: [2261]1
 * touto: [2262]1 [2263]2
 * trepton: [2264]1
 * treptos: [2265]1
 * treis hupostaseis: [2266]1 [2267]2 [2268]3 [2269]4 [2270]5 [2271]6
 * trophes: [2272]1
 * truphen: [2273]1
 * truphes: [2274]1
 * tria prosopa: [2275]1
 * to me genesthai ti touton epises homologeitai: [2276]1
 * ta kath' hemas: [2277]1
 * ta katallela ton historoumenon: [2278]1
 * ta paratethenta par' ekeinon anthupoiso: [2279]1
 * ta phuomena: [2280]1
 * ta en to ourano telaugos kathoratai: [2281]1
 * ta hedna tou gamou: [2282]1
 * ta onomata sumbola ton noematon kata to proegoumenon: [2283]1
 * tas men: [2284]1
 * tas stomphodeis: [2285]1
 * tas trichas rheousas parakratein: [2286]1
 * tas ennoias: [2287]1
 * tas hedonas: [2288]1
 * tas...dunameis: [2289]1
 * taxin: [2290]1
 * te: [2291]1
 * techne: [2292]1
 * ten: [2293]1
 * ten gen: [2294]1
 * ten zoen: [2295]1
 * ten theorian: [2296]1
 * ten muesin: [2297]1
 * ten sesophismenen tes philargurias ananken: [2298]1
 * ten ton katadikon ana& 207;rhusin: [2299]1
 * ten alethe morphosin tes eusebeias: [2300]1
 * ten aplane periphoran: [2301]1
 * ten ek sumphonou katharoteta te schole ton proseuchon aphorizon:
 [2302]1
 * ti polu to agathon sou: [2303]1
 * tis: [2304]1
 * tis he apoklerosis: [2305]1
 * tis he apoklerosis, k.t.l: [2306]1
 * tis ho logos kath' hon eulogon krinousin patera anairein: [2307]1
 * to: [2308]1 [2309]2 [2310]3 [2311]4
 * to Theion: [2312]1
 * to dianoetikon: [2313]1
 * to euergetoumenon: [2314]1
 * to theon auton onomasthenai: [2315]1
 * to theon einai: [2316]1
 * to kalon: [2317]1 [2318]2
 * to katenkulomenon tes ton suphismaton plokes: [2319]1
 * to kata ton thumon aischos: [2320]1
 * to logion: [2321]1
 * to met' eme on: [2322]1
 * to meden to pante me onti tauton: [2323]1
 * to men me dunasthai: [2324]1
 * to men ti: [2325]1
 * to me sunermosthai tini dia ton katallelon ton bion: [2326]1
 * to monimon: [2327]1
 * to monon to onti agapeton kai erasmion: [2328]1
 * to noema: [2329]1
 * to xulon tou eidenai gnoston kalou kai ponerou: [2330]1
 * to ponerotaton: [2331]1
 * to pros meizona doxan anupsothen: [2332]1
 * to proton kinoun akineton: [2333]1
 * to pan: [2334]1 [2335]2
 * to sunamphoteron: [2336]1
 * to aparallakton: [2337]1
 * to hagnon anathema tes aletheias: [2338]1
 * to aphthoron: [2339]1
 * to en tode thermon: [2340]1
 * to ephexes: [2341]1
 * to ephexes exeuriskousa: [2342]1
 * to henomenon: [2343]1
 * to holon, ta hola: [2344]1
 * to hudor tris epicheamenoi: [2345]1
 * to hudor to anupostaton: [2346]1
 * ton: [2347]1 [2348]2
 * ton auton: [2349]1
 * ton bathmon: [2350]1
 * ton basilea: [2351]1
 * ton gar tou zen arxamenon, zesai chre pantos: [2352]1
 * ton dikaion: [2353]1
 * ton theon: [2354]1
 * ton monon: [2355]1
 * ton paideuten: [2356]1
 * ton perikeimenon auta: [2357]1
 * ton plousion: [2358]1
 * ton tes aitias logon: [2359]1
 * ton ophthalmon blaptomenen: [2360]1
 * ton hupochthonion: [2361]1
 * tupon: [2362]1
 * tupos: [2363]1
 * tuphon: [2364]1
 * tuphou: [2365]1
 * te exothen philosophi& 139;: [2366]1
 * tes de somatikes ktiseos, k.t.l: [2367]1
 * tes zoopoiou dunameos: [2368]1
 * tes kata phusin schetikes semasias: [2369]1
 * tes oikonomias: [2370]1
 * tes politeias: [2371]1
 * tes ton stoicheion henoseos: [2372]1
 * tes phusikes tautes: [2373]1
 * tes psuches: [2374]1
 * te gnosei heautou: [2375]1
 * te dunamei: [2376]1
 * te de agathoteti: [2377]1
 * te theori& 139;: [2378]1
 * te katharsei: [2379]1
 * te krisei ton hagion: [2380]1
 * te loipon: [2381]1
 * te men dikaiosune: [2382]1
 * te tes psuches klesei sunkekrimene: [2383]1
 * te phusei: [2384]1
 * te chresei ton hagion: [2385]1
 * te aplanei periphora: [2386]1
 * te aphtharsi& 139;: [2387]1
 * te homoiosei: [2388]1
 * ton: [2389]1
 * ton Nussaeon phoster: [2390]1
 * ton ginomenon: [2391]1 [2392]2 [2393]3
 * ton didaskalon: [2394]1
 * ton di autou kai met' auton: [2395]1
 * ton therion: [2396]1
 * ton katemaxeumenon: [2397]1
 * ton katorthounton: [2398]1
 * ton kata ten opsin poron: [2399]1
 * ton me huphestoton: [2400]1
 * ton peri ten theian phusin nooumenon: [2401]1
 * ton pros ti pos echein ten psuchen: [2402]1
 * ton sophismaton antistrophas: [2403]1
 * ton ti peri ten th. ph. nooumenon: [2404]1
 * ton agathon mou ou chreian echeis: [2405]1
 * ton apostolon ten suskenian (eipate: [2406]1
 * ton allon: [2407]1
 * ton enantion diadoche: [2408]1
 * ton exothen: [2409]1
 * ton exothen logon: [2410]1
 * ton onomaton ouk onton: [2411]1
 * ton holon: [2412]1 [2413]2
 * ton huphestoton: [2414]1
 * tonde ton splanchnon: [2415]1
 * to: [2416]1
 * to = kai: [2417]1
 * to kath' heauton aktisto: [2418]1
 * to koino tes ousias logo: [2419]1
 * to logo: [2420]1
 * to meriko salo sunkumatoumenon: [2421]1
 * to merei: [2422]1
 * to parellachthai, k.t.l: [2423]1
 * to periechonti: [2424]1
 * to pedali& 251; tes euphrosunes: [2425]1
 * to agatho kolpo: [2426]1
 * to atomo: [2427]1
 * tode: [2428]1
 * u: [2429]1
 * uiopatorian: [2430]1
 * hui& 231;n: [2431]1
 * hui& 231;s: [2432]1
 * huiothetetheisi: [2433]1
 * huioi loimoi: [2434]1
 * huioi loimou: [2435]1
 * phaininda: [2436]1
 * phesi de touto ho apostolos: [2437]1
 * phesin: [2438]1
 * phesin he didaskalos: [2439]1
 * philanthropia: [2440]1
 * philosomatoi: [2441]1
 * philotimia: [2442]1
 * philanthropos: [2443]1
 * phrontizontas: [2444]1
 * phrenes: [2445]1
 * phusike: [2446]1
 * phusikos: [2447]1
 * phusikon: [2448]1
 * phusikos: [2449]1
 * phusikes: [2450]1
 * phutike: [2451]1
 * phutikes: [2452]1
 * phutikon: [2453]1
 * phutikos: [2454]1
 * phutikes: [2455]1
 * phuta: [2456]1
 * phuton e zoon: [2457]1
 * phesin: [2458]1
 * phurama: [2459]1
 * phusei: [2460]1 [2461]2 [2462]3
 * phusin: [2463]1
 * phusis: [2464]1 [2465]2 [2466]3 [2467]4 [2468]5 [2469]6 [2470]7
 [2471]8 [2472]9 [2473]10 [2474]11
 * phusis ginetai: [2475]1
 * phos: [2476]1
 * phu cheiri, Doupese, Iache: [2477]1
 * chalepoteron tes para ton echthron moi genomenes hubreos: [2478]1
 * cheiri: [2479]1
 * choikos: [2480]1
 * chrestos: [2481]1
 * chrestotes: [2482]1 [2483]2 [2484]3
 * christotokos: [2485]1
 * chrusion kai topazion: [2486]1
 * chresis ton hagion: [2487]1
 * chorion: [2488]1
 * choresai: [2489]1
 * charis: [2490]1
 * chusis tes kakias: [2491]1
 * psila noemata: [2492]1
 * psilos anthropos, psilos logos: [2493]1
 * psiles: [2494]1
 * psuchiken: [2495]1
 * psuche: [2496]1 [2497]2 [2498]3
 * psuche logike, nous: [2499]1
 * psuche, logos, nous: [2500]1
 * psuchen: [2501]1 [2502]2
 * agathon: [2503]1
 * agaponton: [2504]1
 * agennesia: [2505]1 [2506]2 [2507]3 [2508]4 [2509]5
 * agatho: [2510]1
 * agape: [2511]1
 * agennetos: [2512]1
 * adelphoi: [2513]1
 * adelphon: [2514]1
 * adelphos: [2515]1
 * adiexodon...phrouran: [2516]1
 * adoleschian tou logou tis kataginoskoi: [2517]1
 * athetesasi: [2518]1
 * athroos: [2519]1
 * athanatos: [2520]1
 * akatagonistos: [2521]1
 * akerato: [2522]1
 * akinesia pros to agathon: [2523]1 [2524]2
 * akoimeto: [2525]1
 * akoinoneton: [2526]1
 * akolouthia: [2527]1
 * akoen: [2528]1
 * akoimetos, aionios: [2529]1
 * akroates ginetai: [2530]1
 * alethes: [2531]1
 * allagesometha: [2532]1
 * allokotos autou tas toiautas stomphodeis kai adianoetous phonas:
 [2533]1
 * alla men: [2534]1
 * allotrios: [2535]1
 * all' en hois: [2536]1
 * amegethes: [2537]1 [2538]2 [2539]3
 * amiges tou sungenous palin apokrithenai: [2540]1
 * anabaseis en te kardi& 139; autou dietheto: [2541]1
 * anabebeke: [2542]1
 * anagennontai: [2543]1
 * anankaiotera leitourgi& 139;: [2544]1
 * ananken hempoiousi ton abouleton kakon, plesmones hos ta polla
 ektiktouses, k. t. l: [2545]1
 * anagogikos: [2546]1 [2547]2
 * anagoge: [2548]1
 * anadrome: [2549]1
 * anaisthetos echonton: [2550]1
 * anakratheises to anthropo: [2551]1
 * anakratheisa pros to theion: [2552]1
 * anakraseos: [2553]1
 * analabonton: [2554]1
 * analabon: [2555]1
 * analogikos: [2556]1
 * analuthenton: [2557]1
 * analusanton: [2558]1
 * analuseos: [2559]1
 * analogos: [2560]1
 * analuein: [2561]1 [2562]2
 * analuse: [2563]1
 * analusai: [2564]1
 * anamassontai: [2565]1
 * anaplassomenon: [2566]1
 * anaimakton hierosunen: [2567]1
 * anodi& 139;, anodiais: [2568]1
 * anodias tinas kainotomesosin: [2569]1
 * antexagoge: [2570]1
 * antidiastole: [2571]1
 * antididonta: [2572]1
 * antikeimenon: [2573]1
 * antimethistasis ton onomaton: [2574]1
 * antiotrophe: [2575]1
 * antipiptonton pros ton skopon touton hupoklethenton: [2576]1
 * antipiptoton: [2577]1
 * anotato: [2578]1
 * ananke pasa: [2579]1
 * anathema: [2580]1
 * anakrasis: [2581]1
 * anarchos: [2582]1
 * anastasis: [2583]1 [2584]2 [2585]3
 * anedramen: [2586]1
 * anepse: [2587]1
 * apages: [2588]1 [2589]2
 * apatheia: [2590]1
 * apallassomenon: [2591]1
 * apaxioi: [2592]1
 * aparche tou hemeterou phuramatos: [2593]1
 * apaugasmapa: [2594]1
 * apaugasma tes doxes: [2595]1
 * apemphainonta: [2596]1
 * apeschoinistai: [2597]1
 * aplane: [2598]1
 * apodrantes: [2599]1
 * apodrasantes: [2600]1
 * apodesmo: [2601]1
 * apodidonai palin to zen: [2602]1
 * apokathemenos: [2603]1
 * apokatastasis ton panton: [2604]1 [2605]2
 * apoklerotheisan: [2606]1
 * apokleroseos: [2607]1
 * apoklerosis: [2608]1
 * apokritikous: [2609]1
 * apokritikous: [2610]1
 * apoktenousthai: [2611]1
 * apologia: [2612]1
 * aposos: [2613]1
 * apotelouses: [2614]1
 * apotelesma: [2615]1
 * apotelesma einai: [2616]1
 * apophainousa: [2617]1
 * apophainon: [2618]1 [2619]2
 * apor& 191;ipsameno: [2620]1
 * apor& 191;upsameno: [2621]1
 * apo theou: [2622]1
 * apo upsous hemeras ou phobethesomai: [2623]1
 * apokroton: [2624]1
 * aponeroi: [2625]1
 * apoleian: [2626]1
 * argein: [2627]1
 * archen: [2628]1
 * asebeias graphe: [2629]1
 * askos: [2630]1
 * asunethe: [2631]1
 * asunthetos: [2632]1
 * atremein: [2633]1
 * atremounton: [2634]1
 * aphtharsia: [2635]1 [2636]2 [2637]3
 * aphthoria: [2638]1
 * achronos: [2639]1
 * aeri: [2640]1
 * arrheto tini logo: [2641]1
 * halieos: [2642]1
 * hamartian: [2643]1
 * hapanth' ho limos glukea, plen hautou, poiei: [2644]1
 * an: [2645]1 [2646]2
 * an eipoimi: [2647]1
 * angelos: [2648]1
 * allos: [2649]1
 * allos antidiairei: [2650]1
 * alogon archen: [2651]1
 * amikton esti kai idiazon epi tautes tes phuseos, eph' heautou, k.
 t. l: [2652]1
 * anarchon: [2653]1
 * anthropos: [2654]1
 * anthropos anos: [2655]1
 * anoson: [2656]1
 * anothen: [2657]1
 * anothen = ex ouranou: [2658]1
 * apoios: [2659]1
 * aposos: [2660]1 [2661]2 [2662]3
 * ara: [2663]1
 * ascholos tois parousin: [2664]1
 * aphrastos logos: [2665]1
 * aupnon, anoson: [2666]1
 * aupnos: [2667]1
 * aupnos anthropos: [2668]1
 * halma kouphon: [2669]1
 * hamaxa: [2670]1
 * haptesthai: [2671]1
 * harpagis: [2672]1
 * ara: [2673]1
 * ara tis: [2674]1
 * hara tis: [2675]1
 * ean: [2676]1
 * engastrimuthos: [2677]1
 * egennethe: [2678]1
 * egennethesan: [2679]1
 * enkeimenes: [2680]1
 * enkratheisan: [2681]1
 * enkomazomenes: [2682]1
 * enkomiazomenes: [2683]1
 * ethaumastose: [2684]1
 * ethelothreskeias: [2685]1
 * ek geitonon: [2686]1
 * ek katachreseos tinos: [2687]1
 * ek sunetheias rhematon te kai onomaton: [2688]1
 * ek tou Theou esti, kai tou Christou esti, kathos gegraptai: [2689]1
 * ek tou periechontos: [2690]1
 * ek trephomenou trephomenon: [2691]1
 * ek tes kata didachen huphegeseos: [2692]1
 * ekbalontes: [2693]1
 * ekbalon tou logou scheseis tinas kai paratheseis: [2694]1
 * ekeino: [2695]1
 * ekpnoen: [2696]1
 * ekteinesthai, diateinomenon, parekteinomene: [2697]1
 * ektesato: [2698]1 [2699]2 [2700]3
 * elattonese: [2701]1
 * elattonesen: [2702]1
 * elattoseos tinos e kata phusin parallages, k. t. l: [2703]1
 * elattose: [2704]1
 * eleitourgese to dakruon: [2705]1
 * eleutheriotes: [2706]1
 * eleutheria: [2707]1
 * ellus sou to rh& 210;ma estin, en to stomati sou kai en te kardi&
 139; sou: [2708]1
 * elpizomenon hupostasis pragmaton: [2709]1
 * emparoinei: [2710]1
 * emphuomene: [2711]1
 * en d'ara hoi phu cheiri, k. t. l: [2712]1
 * en euphui& 139;: [2713]1
 * en men to thanato kathoran to anthropinon, en de to tropo
 polupragmonein to theioteron: [2714]1
 * en merei: [2715]1
 * en merei heortes: [2716]1
 * en panti to ex autou: [2717]1
 * en tois prolabousin: [2718]1
 * en tois ton didaskalon diegemasin: [2719]1
 * en te kata ton thanaton oikonomi& 139;: [2720]1
 * en te periodo kai anastrophe ton homoion rhematon: [2721]1
 * en to athanato...en de to anthropo: [2722]1
 * en to kath' holou: [2723]1
 * en to meta tauta: [2724]1
 * en to merei: [2725]1
 * en to nun kairo: [2726]1
 * en to atelei tes helikias: [2727]1
 * en to hagio: [2728]1
 * en tode: [2729]1
 * en anonumo tini Korniaspines eschati& 139;: [2730]1
 * en archais: [2731]1
 * en atonouse te lexei: [2732]1
 * en allois ar' he zoe: [2733]1
 * en epimetro: [2734]1
 * en epitasei: [2735]1
 * en heaute blepousa: [2736]1
 * en heauto te kakeinon: [2737]1
 * en iteais: [2738]1
 * en homotimo te phusei: [2739]1
 * en hupostasei theoroumenon: [2740]1
 * enapomorxamenon: [2741]1
 * enarmonious apostaseis: [2742]1
 * enatonouse te lexei: [2743]1
 * endedeichthai: [2744]1
 * endeiknusthai: [2745]1
 * enedeixato, hou to epekeina: [2746]1
 * energeia: [2747]1
 * enesemenato he ?n te drachme: [2748]1
 * enechountos te kardia: [2749]1
 * ennooumeno: [2750]1
 * ennoias logon: [2751]1
 * enoesamen: [2752]1
 * enparespare: [2753]1
 * entithetai: suntithetai: [2754]1
 * enaretos politeia: [2755]1
 * energeia: [2756]1
 * energeiai: [2757]1
 * energeian: [2758]1
 * ex hon drapodistheie: [2759]1
 * exandrapodistheie: [2760]1
 * exouuchizei: [2761]1
 * epeide: [2762]1
 * epiballouses: [2763]1
 * epibionai tinas ton kakon: [2764]1
 * epibolas: [2765]1
 * epidistazousa: [2766]1
 * epimetrias: [2767]1
 * epiplatunesthai: [2768]1
 * epiprosthouses: [2769]1
 * epistrephomeno ten halona: [2770]1
 * episphales: [2771]1
 * epitolmon: [2772]1
 * epitolmonta: [2773]1
 * epitolmonti: [2774]1
 * epitechnesis: [2775]1
 * epiphaneian: [2776]1
 * epicheomenos: [2777]1
 * epouranion politeian: [2778]1
 * epoiesen hemas basileis kai hiereis to theo kai patri autou:
 [2779]1
 * epi kephalai& 251; sunapteon: [2780]1
 * epi matai& 251; laboi: [2781]1
 * epi meson tou metrou: [2782]1
 * epi tosonde: [2783]1
 * epi tosonde...he epitasis: [2784]1
 * epi ta parakeimena: [2785]1
 * epi ta ano: [2786]1
 * epi to hen: [2787]1
 * epi tes ges: [2788]1
 * epikeron: [2789]1
 * epikeros: [2790]1
 * epinoia: [2791]1 [2792]2
 * ep' auton: [2793]1
 * erathesetai: [2794]1
 * eremous: [2795]1
 * estin heteron: [2796]1
 * estin, e hoste: [2797]1
 * estin, hoste: [2798]1
 * eschatia: [2799]1
 * etekomen pneuma soterias sou, ho epoiesamen epi tes ges: [2800]1
 * eti touton anakleseis: [2801]1
 * euarithmeton rhematon: [2802]1
 * eph hon: [2803]1
 * ephaploutai: [2804]1
 * epharmosthenai to logo: [2805]1
 * ephexes: [2806]1
 * ephetinda: [2807]1
 * epholki& 251;: [2808]1
 * epholkon: [2809]1 [2810]2
 * ephapax: [2811]1
 * ephaptesthai: [2812]1
 * ephepesthai: [2813]1
 * ephodion: [2814]1
 * epholkion: [2815]1
 * eph' heautes: [2816]1
 * eph' ho: [2817]1
 * epseusthai dokein: [2818]1
 * heautou: [2819]1 [2820]2
 * heauten: [2821]1
 * heauton: [2822]1 [2823]2
 * hekateron: [2824]1
 * henoseos: [2825]1
 * heni pantos ho logos sunenechthesetai: [2826]1
 * henos tinos touton: [2827]1
 * heteroglossois: kai en cheilesin heterois: [2828]1
 * hetero ptomati: [2829]1
 * heteron: [2830]1
 * hen: [2831]1
 * ektheois tes tisteos: [2832]1
 * ekthesis tes pisteos: [2833]1
 * ektise: [2834]1
 * ennoia: [2835]1 [2836]2
 * ennoiai: [2837]1
 * ereisma: [2838]1
 * estai: [2839]1
 * eti en to klero ton presbuteron ierateuon: [2840]1
 * ephodos heuretike ton agnooumenon, dia ton prosechon te kai
 akolouthon: [2841]1
 * egapemenos pais: [2842]1
 * ekediasen: [2843]1
 * ekousate: [2844]1
 * he de tes theotetos marturia dia ton thaumaton estin: [2845]1
 * he euschemosune: [2846]1
 * he theotokos Maria: [2847]1
 * he katalepsis: [2848]1
 * he kat' auton: [2849]1
 * he tou Christou epiphaneia; he despotike epidemia; he dia sarkos
 homilia; he tou logou ensarkosis; he enanthropesis; he eleusis; he
 kenosis; he sunkatabasis; he oikonomia: [2850]1
 * he tou puros dapane: [2851]1
 * he ton kionon epallelos thesis: [2852]1
 * he phusis: [2853]1 [2854]2
 * he adiaphoros chresis: [2855]1
 * he epithumia tiktei: [2856]1
 * he historia phesin: [2857]1
 * hegemonikon: [2858]1
 * heli& 251;: [2859]1
 * hemeis de: [2860]1
 * hemas: [2861]1 [2862]2
 * hemin: [2863]1
 * e: [2864]1
 * e dia t. hag. Pn: [2865]1
 * e tou autou nun men, k.t.l: [2866]1
 * e tou hagiou Pneumatos: [2867]1
 * he: [2868]1
 * he te pros to theion homoiomene, he te pros ten diaphoran tauten:
 [2869]1
 * he, be: [2870]1
 * e: [2871]1
 * elthon, eidon, enikesa: [2872]1
 * idein: [2873]1 [2874]2
 * idiotiken: [2875]1
 * idiotetes, hupostaseis, prosopa: [2876]1
 * idioten kalei ton en to laiko tagmati tetagmenon: [2877]1
 * idean: [2878]1
 * ideas: [2879]1
 * idios: [2880]1
 * ilun buthou: [2881]1
 * ilun: [2882]1
 * itea: [2883]1
 * hierourgese: [2884]1
 * hiera noso: [2885]1
 * hikane: [2886]1
 * historikoteron kai di' ainigmaton: [2887]1
 * idion gar touto: [2888]1
 * ide: [2889]1
 * isas...adelia: [2890]1
 * ise de: [2891]1
 * isthi me meden echonta liparon: [2892]1
 * isos...he deilia: [2893]1
 * hina me amphiballe: [2894]1
 * hin', hosper en hupokeimeno tini pragmati pasa kataskeue
 theoreitai, (ou gar an tis eipoi kataskeuasthai ho me huphesteken),
 houtos hoion kataskeuasmati te tou monogenous phusei proteine to
 logo ten poiesin: [2895]1
 * ogdoadas: [2896]1
 * oktadas: [2897]1
 * oneiron: [2898]1
 * ousia: [2899]1
 * opheilen: [2900]1 [2901]2
 * ho: [2902]1
 * ho Eunomios: [2903]1
 * ho Theos pro ton allon hosa genneta: [2904]1
 * ho Theos: [2905]1
 * ho gar exochotatos autou theou: [2906]1
 * ho de chrusos, aithomenon pur hate diaprepei nuktos, megalanoros
 exocha ploutou: [2907]1
 * ho theologos: [2908]1
 * ho katathumios: [2909]1
 * ho kata se: [2910]1
 * ho legon hoti pote ouk en ho hui& 232;s: [2911]1
 * ho legon hoti pote ouk en, houtos: [2912]1
 * ho logos: [2913]1 [2914]2 [2915]3 [2916]4
 * ho pater eipon: [2917]1
 * ho proteros logos: [2918]1
 * ho proteros (logos: [2919]1
 * ho tes ousias logos: [2920]1
 * ho ekeino dous te dunamei, sunomologese, k. t. l: [2921]1
 * ho exochotatos theou: [2922]1
 * ho heteros: [2923]1
 * ho heteros ton logon: [2924]1
 * holoschere: [2925]1
 * homartei: [2926]1
 * homogene: [2927]1
 * homologeis: [2928]1
 * homologounton: [2929]1
 * homologountas: [2930]1 [2931]2
 * homoousion: [2932]1
 * homoousios, autotheos: [2933]1
 * onkon apothemenoi panta: [2934]1
 * onkou: [2935]1
 * onoma de tauton tes emes echousa tis damartos alle: [2936]1
 * onoma to huper pan onoma: [2937]1
 * osa epitheoreitai te phusei: [2938]1
 * ophlema: [2939]1
 * ochema: [2940]1
 * ho: [2941]1
 * hode de: [2942]1
 * holon: [2943]1 [2944]2
 * hoper: [2945]1 [2946]2
 * hoper de panteles tou stoicheiou meiosis legetai: [2947]1
 * hos: [2948]1
 * hosa: [2949]1
 * hosa de tes psuches en methori& 251; keitai: [2950]1
 * hote gar...tote: [2951]1
 * hoti to men to ek tou pithou, poion de to ek tou poteriou, k. t. l:
 [2952]1
 * hoti to heterogenes echei pros ekeinen ta onta: [2953]1
 * hoti cheirotonete phusis ou ginetai: [2954]1
 * hoti cheirotonete: [2955]1
 * hoti cheirotonia he phusis ou ginetai: [2956]1
 * ugras: [2957]1
 * hubristes koros: [2958]1
 * hugies de ousa mechris ouranou te kai asteron exikneitai: [2959]1
 * hudraules: [2960]1
 * humas: [2961]1 [2962]2
 * humin: [2963]1
 * humon: [2964]1
 * hupameiphtheie: [2965]1
 * hupameiphthesesthai: [2966]1
 * hupekluthenton: [2967]1
 * hupenantion: [2968]1
 * hupenantios: [2969]1 [2970]2
 * hupenantios diakeimenon: [2971]1
 * huperbole: [2972]1
 * huperkeimene: [2973]1
 * hupoboles: [2974]1
 * hupobruchion: [2975]1
 * hupographe: [2976]1
 * hupokeimenon: [2977]1
 * hupokineseien, e k.t.l: [2978]1
 * hupokupsas, epekeina, pothos, to proton, glichomenos: [2979]1
 * hupolephtheisa: [2980]1
 * hupoleleiptai: [2981]1
 * hupolepseos: [2982]1
 * hupostaseon: [2983]1 [2984]2 [2985]3
 * hupostaseos: [2986]1
 * hupostase: [2987]1
 * hupostasei: [2988]1
 * hupostaseis: [2989]1 [2990]2 [2991]3
 * hupotuposin: [2992]1
 * hupophonein: [2993]1
 * huper tou allou: [2994]1
 * hupo: [2995]1
 * hupo theou: [2996]1
 * hupo ten hamartian: [2997]1 [2998]2
 * hupo tes tou geros aponoias: [2999]1
 * hupo tes hamartias: [3000]1 [3001]2
 * hupothesis: [3002]1
 * huponoia: [3003]1
 * hupostasin: [3004]1 [3005]2
 * hupostasis: [3006]1 [3007]2 [3008]3 [3009]4 [3010]5 [3011]6 [3012]7
 [3013]8 [3014]9 [3015]10 [3016]11 [3017]12 [3018]13 [3019]14
 [3020]15 [3021]16 [3022]17
 * hupostasis mou: [3023]1
 * hulen: [3024]1
 * hupno de sphas autous ekdidontes tas ton oneiron phantasias
 propheteias apokalousi: [3025]1
 * hupsiste: [3026]1
 * hupsiston: [3027]1
 * okumoron phusema: [3028]1
 * otia: [3029]1
 * homologeito: [3030]1
 * hos einai men ton Theon kata tauton hos einai pote: [3031]1
 * hos polu to plethos tes chrestotetos sou, k.t.l: [3032]1
 * hos tuchaia, k.t.l: [3033]1
 * hos an: [3034]1
 * hos an sunepartheie to thei& 251; to ge& 187;non: [3035]1
 * hos an ananken einai, ei me eie peri to soma ta pros ouden, k.t.l:
 [3036]1
 * hos elleipos endeixameno ten phusin: [3037]1
 * hos en gumnasi& 251;: [3038]1
 * hos en gumnasi& 251;, k. t. l: [3039]1
 * hos heteron: [3040]1 [3041]2
 * on: [3042]1
 * horan: [3043]1 [3044]2
 * hos ti: [3045]1
 * hosper ti anathema: [3046]1
 * hoste: [3047]1 [3048]2 [3049]3
 * hoste pathein an: [3050]1
 * hon kai kata gnomen kai hos heteros dioikoumenon oligos tois
 sophronousin ho logos: [3051]1
 * hadou onoma: [3052]1
 * he: [3053]1
 * he anti: [3054]1
 * ho: [3055]1 [3056]2
 * 'Agennesia: [3057]1 [3058]2
 * 'Agennetos: [3059]1 [3060]2 [3061]3 [3062]4 [3063]5 [3064]6 [3065]7
 [3066]8 [3067]9 [3068]10 [3069]11 [3070]12 [3071]13 [3072]14
 [3073]15 [3074]16 [3075]17 [3076]18 [3077]19 [3078]20 [3079]21
 [3080]22 [3081]23 [3082]24 [3083]25
 * 'All' ouch homologeitai: [3084]1
 * 'Amaltheias keras: [3085]1
 * 'Anagoge: [3086]1
 * 'Anatreptikos tou apologetikou tou duosebous Eunomiou: [3087]1
 * 'Apokatastasis: [3088]1 [3089]2
 * 'Earsou: [3090]1
 * 'Ekdechetai ton logon touton ho Paulos: [3091]1
 * 'Epinoia: [3092]1 [3093]2 [3094]3 [3095]4 [3096]5 [3097]6 [3098]7
 [3099]8 [3100]9
 * Ennoia: [3101]1
 * Echei ho pater: [3102]1
 * E gar: [3103]1
 * E gar: [3104]1
 * E mikropsuchon k.t.l: [3105]1
 * O thusias pempontes anaimaktous hierees: [3106]1
 * E sphragis: [3107]1
 * Ieri& 251; Egemoni: [3108]1
 * O de theos basileus hemon pro ai& 242;nos: [3109]1
 * O men tis apothneskei plegeis, ho de k.t.l: [3110]1
 * O ton Pateron Pater: [3111]1
 * O anapleron ton topon tou idiotou: [3112]1
 * Rebekka ex henos koiten echousa: [3113]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [3114]i  [3115]iii  [3116]v  [3117]vii  [3118]viii  [3119]ix
 [3120]xiii  [3121]1  [3122]2  [3123]3  [3124]4  [3125]5  [3126]6
 [3127]7  [3128]8  [3129]9  [3130]10  [3131]11  [3132]12  [3133]13
 [3134]14  [3135]15  [3136]16  [3137]17  [3138]18  [3139]19  [3140]20
 [3141]21  [3142]22  [3143]23  [3144]24  [3145]25  [3146]26  [3147]27
 [3148]28  [3149]29  [3150]30  [3151]31  [3152]32  [3153]33  [3154]34
 [3155]35  [3156]36  [3157]37  [3158]38  [3159]39  [3160]40  [3161]41
 [3162]42  [3163]43  [3164]44  [3165]45  [3166]46  [3167]47  [3168]48
 [3169]49  [3170]50  [3171]51  [3172]52  [3173]53  [3174]54  [3175]55
 [3176]56  [3177]57  [3178]58  [3179]59  [3180]60  [3181]61  [3182]62
 [3183]63  [3184]64  [3185]65  [3186]66  [3187]67  [3188]68  [3189]69
 [3190]70  [3191]71  [3192]72  [3193]73  [3194]74  [3195]75  [3196]76
 [3197]77  [3198]78  [3199]79  [3200]80  [3201]81  [3202]82  [3203]83
 [3204]84  [3205]85  [3206]86  [3207]87  [3208]88  [3209]89  [3210]90
 [3211]91  [3212]92  [3213]93  [3214]94  [3215]95  [3216]96  [3217]97
 [3218]98  [3219]99  [3220]100  [3221]101  [3222]102  [3223]103
 [3224]104  [3225]105  [3226]106  [3227]107  [3228]108  [3229]109
 [3230]110  [3231]111  [3232]112  [3233]113  [3234]114  [3235]115
 [3236]116  [3237]117  [3238]118  [3239]119  [3240]120  [3241]121
 [3242]122  [3243]123  [3244]124  [3245]125  [3246]126  [3247]127
 [3248]128  [3249]129  [3250]130  [3251]131  [3252]132  [3253]133
 [3254]134  [3255]135  [3256]136  [3257]137  [3258]138  [3259]139
 [3260]140  [3261]141  [3262]142  [3263]143  [3264]144  [3265]145
 [3266]146  [3267]147  [3268]148  [3269]149  [3270]150  [3271]151
 [3272]152  [3273]153  [3274]154  [3275]155  [3276]156  [3277]157
 [3278]158  [3279]159  [3280]160  [3281]161  [3282]162  [3283]163
 [3284]164  [3285]165  [3286]166  [3287]167  [3288]168  [3289]169
 [3290]170  [3291]171  [3292]172  [3293]173  [3294]174  [3295]175
 [3296]176  [3297]177  [3298]178  [3299]179  [3300]180  [3301]181
 [3302]182  [3303]183  [3304]184  [3305]185  [3306]186  [3307]187
 [3308]188  [3309]189  [3310]190  [3311]191  [3312]192  [3313]193
 [3314]194  [3315]195  [3316]196  [3317]197  [3318]198  [3319]199
 [3320]200  [3321]201  [3322]202  [3323]203  [3324]204  [3325]205
 [3326]206  [3327]207  [3328]208  [3329]209  [3330]210  [3331]211
 [3332]212  [3333]213  [3334]214  [3335]215  [3336]216  [3337]217
 [3338]218  [3339]219  [3340]220  [3341]221  [3342]222  [3343]223
 [3344]224  [3345]225  [3346]226  [3347]227  [3348]228  [3349]229
 [3350]230  [3351]231  [3352]232  [3353]233  [3354]234  [3355]235
 [3356]236  [3357]237  [3358]238  [3359]239  [3360]240  [3361]241
 [3362]242  [3363]243  [3364]244  [3365]245  [3366]246  [3367]247
 [3368]248  [3369]249  [3370]250  [3371]251  [3372]252  [3373]253
 [3374]254  [3375]255  [3376]256  [3377]257  [3378]258  [3379]259
 [3380]260  [3381]261  [3382]262  [3383]263  [3384]264  [3385]265
 [3386]266  [3387]267  [3388]268  [3389]269  [3390]270  [3391]271
 [3392]272  [3393]273  [3394]274  [3395]275  [3396]276  [3397]277
 [3398]278  [3399]279  [3400]280  [3401]281  [3402]282  [3403]283
 [3404]284  [3405]285  [3406]286  [3407]287  [3408]288  [3409]289
 [3410]290  [3411]291  [3412]292  [3413]293  [3414]294  [3415]295
 [3416]296  [3417]297  [3418]298  [3419]299  [3420]300  [3421]301
 [3422]302  [3423]303  [3424]304  [3425]305  [3426]306  [3427]307
 [3428]308  [3429]309  [3430]310  [3431]311  [3432]312  [3433]313
 [3434]314  [3435]315  [3436]316  [3437]317  [3438]318  [3439]319
 [3440]320  [3441]321  [3442]322  [3443]323  [3444]324  [3445]325
 [3446]326  [3447]327  [3448]328  [3449]329  [3450]330  [3451]331
 [3452]332  [3453]333  [3454]334  [3455]335  [3456]336  [3457]337
 [3458]338  [3459]339  [3460]341  [3461]342  [3462]343  [3463]344
 [3464]345  [3465]346  [3466]347  [3467]348  [3468]349  [3469]350
 [3470]351  [3471]352  [3472]353  [3473]354  [3474]355  [3475]356
 [3476]357  [3477]358  [3478]359  [3479]360  [3480]361  [3481]362
 [3482]363  [3483]364  [3484]365  [3485]366  [3486]367  [3487]368
 [3488]369  [3489]370  [3490]371  [3491]372  [3492]373  [3493]374
 [3494]375  [3495]376  [3496]377  [3497]378  [3498]379  [3499]380
 [3500]381  [3501]382  [3502]383  [3503]384  [3504]385  [3505]386
 [3506]387  [3507]388  [3508]389  [3509]390  [3510]391  [3511]392
 [3512]393  [3513]394  [3514]395  [3515]396  [3516]397  [3517]398
 [3518]399  [3519]400  [3520]401  [3521]402  [3522]403  [3523]404
 [3524]405  [3525]406  [3526]407  [3527]408  [3528]409  [3529]410
 [3530]411  [3531]412  [3532]413  [3533]414  [3534]415  [3535]416
 [3536]417  [3537]418  [3538]419  [3539]420  [3540]421  [3541]422
 [3542]423  [3543]424  [3544]425  [3545]426  [3546]427  [3547]428
 [3548]429  [3549]430  [3550]431  [3551]432  [3552]433  [3553]434
 [3554]435  [3555]436  [3556]437  [3557]438  [3558]439  [3559]440
 [3560]441  [3561]442  [3562]443  [3563]444  [3564]445  [3565]446
 [3566]447  [3567]448  [3568]449  [3569]450  [3570]451  [3571]452
 [3572]453  [3573]454  [3574]455  [3575]456  [3576]457  [3577]458
 [3578]459  [3579]460  [3580]461  [3581]462  [3582]463  [3583]464
 [3584]465  [3585]466  [3586]467  [3587]468  [3588]469  [3589]470
 [3590]471  [3591]472  [3592]473  [3593]474  [3594]475  [3595]476
 [3596]477  [3597]478  [3598]479  [3599]480  [3600]481  [3601]482
 [3602]483  [3603]484  [3604]485  [3605]486  [3606]487  [3607]488
 [3608]489  [3609]490  [3610]491  [3611]492  [3612]493  [3613]494
 [3614]495  [3615]496  [3616]497  [3617]498  [3618]499  [3619]500
 [3620]501  [3621]502  [3622]503  [3623]504  [3624]505  [3625]506
 [3626]507  [3627]508  [3628]509  [3629]510  [3630]511  [3631]512
 [3632]513  [3633]514  [3634]515  [3635]516  [3636]517  [3637]518
 [3638]519  [3639]520  [3640]521  [3641]522  [3642]523  [3643]524
 [3644]525  [3645]526  [3646]527  [3647]528  [3648]529  [3649]530
 [3650]531  [3651]532  [3652]533  [3653]534  [3654]535  [3655]536
 [3656]537  [3657]538  [3658]539  [3659]540  [3660]541  [3661]542
 [3662]543

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
