Further Notes on the Molars of Hesperopithecus and of Pithecanthropus (William K. Gregory and Milo Hellman (appendix by Gerrit S. Miller Jr.), 1923)
====================================================================================================================================================
Gregory, Hellman and Miller's 1923 molar comparison — Hesperopithecus measured against Pithecanthropus tooth by tooth. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (bulletin-american-museum-natural-history-48-509-530) — Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History, vol. 48, art. 13.


56.9,88H:14.31,4

Article XIII.— FURTHER NOTES ON THE MOLARS OF HES-
PEROP1TH EC US AND OF PITHECANTHROPUS

3y William K. Gregory and Milo Hellman
With an Appendix Entitled

NOTES ON THE CASTS OF THE PITHECANTHROPUS MOLARS
By Gerrit S. Miller, Jr.

In response to our request, Dr. Gerrit S. Miller, Jr., of the U. S.
National Museum, has kindly examined our manuscript and submitted a
number of important suggestions and criticisms. The National Museum
has also very generously loaned us for comparison a large series of upper
molars of orangs, chimpanzees, and gorillas. Dr. Miller’s notes and
material raise again the following questions:

1. —Is the type of Hesperopithecus a third upper molar, as Dr.
Miller is inclined to think, or is it a second upper molar as suggested in
our previous paper? 1

2. —With regard to arrangement and form of the roots, is the Hes¬
peropithecus type more like the orang, the chimpanzee, the gorilla, or
man?

3. —Of the characters revealed in the Hesperopithecus type can we
separate those which indicate its position as a member of the man-
anthropoid series from those which distinguish it from the different
genera of this group?

4. —What is the homology of the paratype tooth of Hesperopithecus?
Is it an upper or a lower molar and which molar is it?

5. —Besides these questions the problem is again raised as to the
nearer resemblances and differences of the second and third molars com¬
monly attributed to Pithecanthropus .

6. —Finally, is it possible that the Hesperopithecus molar might
represent not a primate but a carnivore, as Dr. Smith Woodward is still
inclined to think?

1.—IS THE TYPE OF HESPEROPITHECUS A SECOND OR A THIRD
UPPER MOLAR?

We have been inclined to regard it as a second upper molar for the
following reasons.


Gregory, William K. t and Heilman, Milo. 1923. 4 Notes on the Type of Hesperopithecus harold-
cookii Osborn.* American Museum Novitates, No. 53.


509


510 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History [Vol. XLVIII

(a.) Its extreme wear, which is unusual in third upper molars of
known men and apes.

( b .) As noted in our first paper, it approaches the second upper
molar of a certain chimpanzee in the transverse diameter of the posterior
moiety of the crown, in the angle of the outer surface of the crown to the
anterior surface, and in the degree of divergence of the axis of the lingual
root to that of the anterior buccal root.

We have, however, recently noticed the cast of a very old gorilla
(A. M. N. H.'No. 198) in which the third upper molar is almost as much
worn down as that of the type of Hesperopithecus. One of the gorilla
third molars of the National Museum collection (No. 176212) has a
contour of the crown which is less unlike the Hesperopithecus type than
any other gorilla examined (Fig. 3). It widely differs, however, in the incli¬
nation of the occlusal surface to the axis of the palatal root (Fig. 3). In
Hesperopithecus , if the general occlusal plane is placed in a horizontal
position, the palatal root is inclined slightly forward. In this gorilla the
homologous axis is inclined strongly backward, and this seems to be true
of many third upper molars of various anthropoids and men. It must
be admitted that the general form of the crown of one specimen and the
appearance of the root of another gorilla m 3 approach Hesperopithecus
and afford support to Dr. Miller’s view. But, in our judgment, the wide
difference in inclination of the occlusal surface to the vertical axis of the
root constitutes an objection to the type of Hesperopithecus being a third
upper molar. In these relations its most significant resemblances appear
to be with the second or first upper molar of certain men (Fig. 3).

In answer to the preceding paragraph Dr. Miller replies (December
7, 1922) as follows:

I think you give undue weight and a wrong interpretation to the slant of the
inner root with relation to the plane of the occlusal surface. In the third molar of
gorillas I find that this slant appears always to begin by being backward, but as
wear of the crown goes on it tends to work over to a forward condition which in a
tooth as much worn as No. 176206 may become so like the slant in Hesperopithecus
that I think you are wholly unjustified in placing such reliance on this feature of the
fossil as your remarks on page 9 would indicate. With the third molar of No.
176206 I am sending the second [molar] tooth. Here you will see the slant of the
inner root ^ backward instead of forward.

Our Fig. 3 shows that with regard to the point under consideration
the Hesperopithecus type agrees with first and second upper human
molars more than with the third upper gorilla molars. To this statement
Dr. Miller, in turn, replies (March 14, 1923): “But the differences in
this respect between one gorilla tooth and the human teeth is very much
less than that between the two gorilla teeth.”


Gregory and Heilman, Hesperopithecus and Pithecanthropus


Fig. 1. Series of orang third upper molars showing wide variability in size.
U. S. Nat. Mus. specimens. Natural size. All but the lower right hand specimen
(whichjis an m 3 left) are third right upper molars, seen from the rear.

Upper row: U. S. Nat. Mus. Noe. 142181, 145313.

Middle row: U. S. Nat. Mus. Nos. 153807, 145300, 153820.

Lower row: U. S. Nat. Mus. Nos. 49853, 153805, 153813.


Fig. 2. Series of chimpanzee third right upper molars showing wide variability
size. Natural size.

A. M. N. H. 51394; U. S. Nat. Mus. Nos. 236977, 176235, 176240, 176241, 174710, 236971.


Fig. 3. Comparison of Gorilla , Hesperopithecus and human molars. X 2.

Upper row: Amerind m* (A. M. N. H. T 2162); mi of same; Amerind m* (A. M. N. H. T 2166).
Lingual view.

Middle row: Gorilla sp. m* (U. S. Nat. Mus. 176212); Hesperopithecus type; Gorilla sp. m 8 (U. 8.
Nat. Mus. 176206). Crown view.

Lower row: Gorilla sp. m 8 (U. S. Nat. Mus. 176212); Hesperopithecus type; Gorilla sp. m 8 (U. S.
Nat. Mus. 176206). Lingual view.


512


1923] Gregory and Heilman , Hesperopithecus and Pithecanthropus 513

2.—WITH REGARD TO THE ARRANGEMENT AND FORM OF THE
ROOTS, IS THE HESPEROPITHECUS TYPE MORE LIKE THE ORANG,
THE CHIMPANZEE, THE GORILLA, OR MAN?

The orang third upper molars of the National Museum series differ
immensely among themselves (Fig. 1) from a very large tooth 15.7 mm.
in antero-posterior length to a very small tooth only 9 mm. in length.
The former differs from the Hesperopithecus type in having a very large
hypocone and two widely separated buccal roots; the latter differs from
the same in having an excessively contracted crown with greatly crowded
external roots. Several of the orang molars have long straight, palatal
roots of subcylindrical appearance. The postero-external root in orangs
tends to be double and either to diverge from or not to converge toward
the palatal root.

The National Museum material (Fig. 2) indicates that in chimpan¬
zees the palatal roots of all the third molars are usually comparatively
short, pointed toward the root end, and relatively weak, while those of
the gorillas are long, stout, and not sharply tapering. In this point the
Hesperopithecus type is decidedly nearer to the gorilla.

Next, the palatal root of the Hesperopithecus type is deeply grooved
vertically on its buccal aspect. Dr. Miller suggests that there is a re¬
semblance here (Fig. 4) with certain gorilla third upper molars (U. S.
Nat. Mus. Nos. 174713 and 176205) in which the raised posterior border
of the groove is formed through the coalescence of the postero-external
(distobuccal) root with the palatal root. It is hardly possible that in
Hesperopithecus the posterior border of the deep groove in question can
be formed through a similar coalescence, because the radiographs (pub¬
lished in our previous paper, Fig.^ 5) show but one canal on the palatal
side, while if any part of the postero-external root were present it should
show another canal, or portions of it; secondly, a coalescence of this kind
assumed by Dr. Miller would not account for the similar upraised border
on the antero-internal side of the palatal root, where there is no question of
any coalescence. While the grooved internal border is more pronounced
than in any anthropoid or human specimen examined by us, this does not
necessarily mean that there was a coalescence of the postero-external
root with it. In fact, we are still inclined to think that the
antero-external root was free at its apex but confluent at the base with
the raised border of the palatal root and that a remnant of the forking
between the antero-external and the palatal root is still visible.

In reply to the foregoing Dr. Miller writes as follows:

I should not expect to find a second canal present in a tooth formed and broken
in the way I suppose the type tooth to have been formed and broken. My idea will


514


Bulletin American Museum of Natural History


[Vol. XLVIII


Fig. 4. Comparison of Gorilla , Hesperopithecus, orang and chimpanzee molars. Vi
from above showing roots. X 2.

Upper row: Gorilla , U.S .Nat. Mus. No. 176212; orang, U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 142181; chimpanzee, A. M. N.
No. 51394.

Lower row: Gorilla , U. S. Nat. Mus. 176206; Hesperopithecus type; Gorilla, U. S. Nat. Mus. 174716.


perhaps be made plain by the red ink on the roots of m 3 in gorilla No. 176206 which I
am now sending you. Here I have marked with red the entire portion of the roots
that I suppose to be absent in the type. The unmarked portion of the tooth No.
176206 is naturally not exactly like the type of Hesperopithecus because the speci¬
mens came from representatives of different genera, but the likeness is sufficiently
close to make me think that this is the most probable explanation of the type’s
history.

In Fig. 5 we figure on the left the two gorilla third molars, on the lower
one of which Dr. Miller has marked in red the region which he supposes
to be absent in the type of Hesperopithecus; next to this we show the
type of the latter, and at the right above a chimpanzee m 3 in which the
postero-external root has been broken off, and below a gorilla m 3 with the
same root preserved and distinct from the palatal root. We are, however,


1923] Gregory and Heilman , Hesperopithecus and Pithecanthropus <515


Fig. 5. Comparison of Gorilla , Hesperopithecus and chimpanzee molars.

Posterior side. X %■

Upper row: GoriUa, U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 176212; chimpanzee, A. M. N. H. No. 51394.

Middle row: Hesperopithecus type.

Lower row: GoriUa , U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 176206; Gorilla , U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 174716.

*

rather inclined to attribute the lack of projecting portions of this root
in the type to the same extreme attrition which has smoothed down all
other projections of the tooth. We still think that a small portion of the
place where the postero-external root forked away from the base of the
pulp cavity may be seen; also that the resemblance between the anterior
and posterior ridges flanking the median groove is too close for them to
have been formed in one case by coalescence with the postero-external
root, and in the other case not so. In other words, the evidence suggests
to us that the postero-external root was divergent as in certain chim¬
panzees, gorillas and men (Fig. 5).


516


Bulletin American Museum of Natural History [Vol. XLVIII


The buccal groove on the palatal root, while deeper than in any other
tooth we have seen, is feebly developed in certain orang, gorilla, and
chimpanzee teeth (Fig. 4).

In short, in the arrangements and form of the roots the Hesperopithe -
cus characters are distributed as shown in Table 1.


Table I. —Comparison op the Roots


Hespero-

pithecus

Orangs

1

f $

IB **
O

Gorillas

i i
II

V

§

2

Forward (+) Intermediate (0) Back¬
ward (—) Inclination of Palatal Root
to Occlusal Surface

+


■


o

+‘

Palatal Root Deeply Grooved on Palatal
Side

_


+

+

____

.. -

Palatal Root Deeply Grooved on Buccal
Side

+

HI

Usually

weak

+

_

_

Relative Antero-posterior Diameter of
Lingual Root

+

+

.

++

+

+


+

_

+

+

+

+

Relative Transverse Width of Antero-
external Root Compared with Palatal
Root


+


+

++

+ +

Divergence (+) or Confluence (—) of
Postero-extemal with Palatal Root


+

+

+


+


This shows the distribution of agreements and disagreements of root
characters to the best of our judgment.


3.—CAN WE SEPARATE THOSE CHARACTERS WHICH INDICATE
THE POSITION OF HESPEROPITHECUS AS A MEMBER OF THE MAN-
ANTHROPOID SERIES FROM THOSE WHICH DISTINGUISH IT FROM
THljp DIFFERENT GENERA OF THIS GROUP?

(a.) The members of the group tend to have an asymmetrical
molar crown, but in the anthropoids the transverse diameter of the pos¬
terior moiety as compared with that of the anterior moiety is relatively
smaller than in modernized man. In this character the type of Hes -
peropithecus conforms rather with anthropoid than with modernized
human conditions; but not too much weight should be given to this

*The variability is probably revealed by the more abundant material in comparison with that
available in the other groups.


1923]


Gregory and Heilman, Hesperopithecus and Pithecanthropus


517


character because the enamel shell which covers the outside of the crown
is lost in Hesperopithecus and this, if present, would alter considerably
the appearance of the outer side of the tooth. The resemblances of the
crown,.as shown in Index 1 of our previous paper, are rather with
chimpanzee molars than with human molars.

(6.) The great width and flatness of the lingual root distinguish
Hesperopithecus from the chimpanzee and approach the condition in the
gorilla, but in Hesperopithecus the palatal surface of the palatal root has
at most a very slight vertical groove, while in the gorillas this groove is
very large and deep.

(c.) In Hesperopithecus the transverse diameter of the antero-
external root is moderate as compared with the excessive width of this
root in man (some gorillas distinctly approach the human condition in
the wide transverse diameter of the antero-external root and in the
relatively small transverse diameter of the palatal root). In exhibiting
the opposite of these characters Hesperopithecus is somewhat nearer to
the chimpanzee.

(d.) The radiographs, aside from showing that the roots and pulp
cavity of Hesperopithecus conform to the general man-anthropoid type,
do not appear to.reveal any clear-cut generic characters.

In brief, the more important characters of the Hesperopithecus type,
the combination of which in one specimen may prove to be generic, are
as follows:

(a.) Relative antero-posterior diameter of crown of m 2 (?) greater
than in men and less than in apes.

(6.—Assuming that the Hesperopithecus type is an m 2 .) The small
size of the hypocone, contrasting with nearly all anthropoids and all
primitive men.

(c.) The more vertical relation of the palatal root to the worn
occlusal surface, most nearly approached in certain human teeth. 1

(d.) The deep groove on the buccal side of the palatal root, deeper
than any observed in apes or men.

(e.) Palatal root probably longer than in men excepting certain
Indian teeth and approaching gorilla type.

(/.) Transverse diameter of antero-external root relatively smaller
than in men and larger than in chimpanzees.


*Dr. Miller writes: “Yes, but your Fig. 3 shows that the difference between Hesperopithecus and
one gorilla is very much less than that between two gorillas.”


518


Bulletin American Museum of Natural History [Vol. XLVIII


4.—HOMOLOGY OF THE SECOND SPECIMEN REFERRED TO HES-
PEROPITHECUS

The second specimen (A. M. N. H. No. 17736) of Professor Osborn’s
original description (op. cit ., p. 4) is excessively worn and eroded (Fig.
6) but after prolonged comparisons we are inclined to accept Professor
Osborn’s provisional determination of it as a third right upper molar.
In the contour of the base of the crown it somewhat resembles the third
upper molar of a certain chimpanzee (A. M. N. H. No. 51394) but very
probably had a longer palatal root.


Fig. 6. Second specimen, or paratype, of Hesperopithecus haroldcookii compared
(upper pair) with m 8 of a chimpanzee and with (lower pair) the type.


5.— HESPEROPITHECUS AND PITHECANTHROPUS
In our preliminary report on the Hesperopithecus molar as cited by
Professor Osborn (op. cit., p. 2) we stated that “On the whole we think
its nearest resemblances are with Pithecanthropus and with men rather
than with apes.” One of us (M. H.) is still inclined toward this view,
while to the other (W. K. G.) it appears that, apart from the relation
of the occlusal plane to the palatal root, the prevailing resemblances of
the Hesperopithecus type are with the gorilla-chimpanzee group.

In our first report we cited the evenly concave wearing surface as a
point of resemblance to Pithecanthropus. This form of extreme wear is
quite common in Indians and Australians, but we have also found it in


1923]


Gregory and Heilman , Hesperopithecus and Pithecanthropus


519


a single gorilla (represented by a cast, A. M. N. H. No. 198) while Dr.
Miller informs us that he finds a similar condition in a chimpanzee (U. S.
Nat. Mus. 174700) also. Hence this character can hardly be taken as
diagnostic.

As we recognized at first, the Hesperopithecus molar could hardly
have supported a hypocone as large as that of the Pithecanthropus m 2 ;
it differs also in the transverse narrowness of the antero-external root and
in the much smaller antero-posterior diameter of the palatal root.


Fig. 7. Comparison of Pithecanthropus , Australian and orang molars. X 2.

Upper row: Third right upper molar (cast) referred to Pithecanthropus; m 3 , right, of Australian
aboriginal (A. M. N. H.); m 8 , right, of orang, U. S. Nat. Mus. 153805.

Lower row: Second left upper molar (cast) referred to Pithecanthropus, m 2 , left, of Australian
aboriginal (A. M. N. H.).


If the second specimen of Hesperopithecus be rightly regarded as an
extremely worn m 3 (see above), then the differences of Hesperopithecus
from Pithecanthropus become more emphatic, because the section of the
base of the crown of the “second specimen ” of Hesperopithecus had a
prominent postero-external and reduced postero-internal angles and its


520


Bulletin American Museum of Natural History (Vol. XLVIII


crown was relatively long antero-posteriorly and narrow transversely,
while the opposites of these features characterize m 3 of Pithecanthropus .

The nearer resemblances of the second and third upper molars re¬
ferred to Pithecanthropus appear (Figs. 7, 8) to be rather with the
corresponding molars of Australians than with those of apes. 1 They are


Fig. 8. Comparison of Pithecanthropus , Australian and orang molars. Same
specimens as in Fig. 7. Posterior (distal) view. X 2.

much larger than those of most Australian aborigines (though smaller
than those of the Talgai skull), and have much heavier and more
divergent inner and outer roots. The third upper molar differs from the
Australian here figured in having a less protuberant hypocone, while in
the second upper molar the relative length of the antero-posterior as
compared with the transverse diameter is much greater.

1 Dr. Miller writes: “This statement seems to me much too strong in view of the variation in crown
form shown by apes. See especially the orang teeth (m 2 ) left row sent” (Figs. 14, 15). On this point
see the Appendix, below.


1923] Gregory and' Hellman, Hesperopithecus and Pithecanthropus 521

G.—HESPEROPITHECUS NOT A CARNIVORE

Dr. Smith Woodward still doubts that the type molar of Hes¬
peropithecus belongs to a primate and inclines to regard it as one of the
primitive extinct bears ( Hyxnarctos ). 1 Dr. Matthew, who has had
exceptionally long and wide experience in studying the teeth of fossil and
recent carnivores, has endorsed the judgment of Professor Osborn that
the tooth is not that of a carnivore. One of us (W. K. G.) has repeatedly
searched the Museum collections of carnivores for further evidence bear-


Fig. 9. Upper molars of modern carnivores. Distal, or rear, view. X 2.

Upper row: Bassaricyon osbomi m 2 , A. M. N. H. No. 32609; ditto, m 1 ; Cercolevtes (Potos ) flatus
mi, A. M. N. H. No. 15475; ditto, m 2 .

Middle row: Nasua sp. m 3 , A. M. N. H. No! 35453; ditto, m 2 ; Viverra zibettha m 1 , A. M. N. H.

No. 91.

Lower row: Mlurus fulgens, m 1 , A. M. N. H. No. 32650; Procyon lotor, m 2 , A. M. N. H. No. 8335;
Mephitis sp. m 1 , A. M. N. H. No. 77.

ing on the problem. First, comparing the Hesperopithecus type with
carnivores in general, we find: (1) In the upper molars of carnivores of
all known families the vertical distance from the middle of the occlusal
surface to the bottom of the pulp cavity, where the inner and outer roots
fork, is proportionately much less than in Hesperopithecus (Figs. 8,9,13).


iNature, November 25,1922, CX, p. 707.


522 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History [Vol. XLVIII

In other words, the latter molar is not nearly so brachyodont, but has a
vertically deeper pulp cavity, as in apes and men, its apparent brachyo-
donty being due both to extreme natural wear and to the rounding and
attrition of the enamel borders. (2) In typical carnivores (Fig. 9) the two
outer roots are relatively slender and separated widely from each other
and from the inner root. (3) The antero-external root is usually narrower
transversely, less compressed antero-posteriorly, and more conical than


Fig. 10. Upper molars of modem carnivores. Viewed from above, showing
roots. X 2. Same specimens as in Fig. 9.

in Hesperopithecus. (4) The palatal, or inner, root of carnivores is often
more widely divergent from the outer roots, is not flattened on the palatal
surface, is not deeply grooved on its buccal side and is relatively shorter
and more pointed apically. (5) In these carnivore molars which have a
hypocone it juts obliquely backward and inward, and the crown at its
base is relatively wider than in Hesperopithecus.

Secondly, comparing the Hesperopithecus type molar with those of
Hyaenarctos and other ursids (Figs. 11, 12, 13), we find that some of the
modem ursids depart from the normal carnivore type described above,
in the following respects: (1) The palatal root (Fig. 12) becomes exces¬
sively wide, far wider than in Hesperopithecus , and (2) it exhibits a


1923]


Gregory and Heilman, Hesperopithecus and Pithecanthropus


523


Fig. 11. Comparison of Hesperopithecus molar with Hyaenarctos and other
ursoid carnivore molars. Occlusal view. X %.

Upper row: Amphicyon sinapius, A. M. N. H. No. 18259, Lower Snake Creek beds (Upper Miocene);
Ursus malayanus, A. M. N. H. No. 296. .

Middle row: Hesperopithecus type. Upper Snake Creek beds (Lower Pliocene).

Lower row: Indarctos (?) sp., Upper Snake Creek beds (Lower Pliocene), Coll. H. J. Cook; Hyaen¬
arctos gregoryi, Univ. Calif. No. 24025, Eden beds (Pliocene).

tendency to divide into anterior and posterior moieties; (3) as a con¬
sequence, the buccal side of the palatal root exhibits a prominent vertical
groove; (4) at the same time the antero-external (mesio-buccal) root
becomes widened transversely. But, these points of partial agreement,
either with Hesperopithecus or with other anthropoids, are at once seen
to be analogies and not homologies indicative of close relationships, first,
by reason of the wide dissimilarity of the ursid and Hyaenarctos molar
crowns to that of Hesperopithecus and other anthropoids and, second,
because the Hesperopithecus molar crown and roots differ totally from
the primitive carnivore types as described above, while the ursid and
Hyaenarctos crowns and roots are as clearly derived from it.


524


Bulletin American Museum of Natural History


[Vol. XLVIII


Fig. 12. Comparison of Hesperopithecus, Hyxnarctos. etc. (continued). Same
specimens as in Fig. 11, viewed from above. X %.


In conclusion, the profound differences of the Hesperopithecus
tooth from that of carnivores throws into stronger relief its numerous
*and fundamental points of agreement with those of the ape-man group
of the primates.

CONCLUSIONS

1. —The question whether the type of Hesperopithecus is a third
upper molar or a second is still open but we incline to the view that it is
a second.

2. —The greater number of resemblances of the type appear to be
with gorilla and chimpanzee rather than with orang. One of us (M. H.)
still regards the human resemblances as being of considerable signifi-


1923J


Gregory and Heilman , Hesperopithecus and Pithecanthropus


525


Fig. 13. Comparison of Hesperopithecus , Hyeenardas. etc. (continued).
Same specimens as in Figs. 11 and 12. Mesial or anterior view. X %.


cance, while the other (W. K. G.) leans toward the anthropoid affinities of
the type. The range of variability in crown and root characters of the
molars both in the Hominidse and the Simiidse is so great and so over¬
lapping as to warrant either interpretation.

3. —In view of the foregoing, the exact generic diagnosis of Hes¬
peropithecus must await further discoveries.

4. —The paratype, or second specimen, of Hesperopithecus is pretty
surely an upper molar and is probably a third.

5. —The second and third upper molars found near the Pithecan¬
thropus skull top approach those of an Australian aboriginal here figured,
but are even closer to those of certain orangs selected by Doctor Miller
(see Appendix), especially in the roots. We cannot, however, accept


526 Bulletin American Museum of Natural History [Vol. XLVIII

unreservedly his conclusion that the teeth referred to Pithecanthropus
are probably those of a now extinct Javan great ape, representing the
orangs of Sumatra and Borneo. Striking as these resemblances are, the
fact should not be dismissed that the third molar was found in apparent
association 1 with a cranium and femur of unquestionably human, or
subhuman, type, and in the lack of additional evidence we think it
profitless to assume that the teeth do not belong with the skull. The
peculiar contraction of the occlusal surface and the orang-like crenation
of the enamel of the Pithecanthropus m 8 is well shown in the molars
of a certain Bantu negro (A. M. N. H. No. D 7), while other features
(jutting hypocone, sloping ectoloph, etc.) may be matched in other
human teeth.

6.—Professor Osborn’s determination of the type of Hesperopithecus
as a new genus of anthropoid apes has not been universally accepted.
The following possible identifications of the type have been made by
various persons.

(1) Upper molar of an anthropoid ape, probably a new genus
(American Museum staff).

(2) Lower molar of Hydenarctos or allied genus of ursid.

(3) Upper molar of the same.

(4) A “bear’s tooth.”

(5) A molar of an otherwise wholly unknown type of carnivore.

(6) An upper or lower molar of some carnivore allied with
Mluropus.

(7) An upper molar of a gigantic relative of the procyonid
canivore Potos.

(8) An upper molar of a gigantic relative of such South Ameri¬
can monkeys as Pithecia and Lagothrix.

(9) The first upper deciduous premolar of a Pliocene horse.

(10) An incus bone of a gigantic mammal.

We have considered each of these with unbiased minds and com¬
pared the type with the various specimens suggested, as well as with
many others, but have returned with more confidence to the conclu¬
sions set forth above (Nos. 1 to 4).


According to Dubois (1894, pp. 2, 3) the calvarium was found only one meter distant from the site
of the third molar and in the same plane. In this connection Dr. Miller writes: “In publishing any¬
thing about the Javan teeth I particularly wish to avoid all discussion of the bones. Tne latter I have
never examined critically, and I have so many other things on hand that I do not wish to become inter¬
ested in a subject which I can foresee would be more than absorbing. About the teeth, however, I am
very glad to place my opinion on record.”


1923 ]


Gregory and Heilman , Hesperopithecus and Pithecanthropus


527


APPENDIX.—NOTES ON THE CASTS OF THE PITHECANTHROPUS

MOLARS 1

By Gerrit S. Miller, Jr.

Whatever the bones may prove to be, I think that the molars re¬
ferred to Pithecanthropus are probably those of a now extinct Javan
great ape representing the orangs of Sumatra and Borneo. Whether
or not this ape was strictly congeneric with the orangs I am not prepared
to say, because the teeth, like those of Hesperopithecus , are neither in
sufficiently good condition nor in sufficiently great number to show what
the animal’s dental characters really were; but, so far as they go, they
come almost within the limits of individual variation of the living orangs,
and in the slight peculiarities where they differ from orangs they do not
approach men. Hence I think it is entirely misleading to speak of your
fossil as showing resemblances “with Pithecanthropus and men rather
than with apes” (your p. 12).

Here is my evidence and I shall be interested to know what you think
of it.

(a.) 'The Second Upper Tooth.—Compare the cast with orangs
(Fig. 14 ard) Nos. 142170 (a), 142197 (6), 145304 (c), and 153808 (d).
These four specimens seem to me to cover all the essential features of the
cast. They show more tendency for the crown to swell out beyond the
level of the roots along the anterior border, and less to swell out in the
region of the hypocone; but I should hesitate to regard this as anything
more than an individual character unless it were known to be constant
in many teeth. The peculiar form of the roots in the cast is very nearly
duplicated in No. 145304 (Fig. 15 a, i). Notice in this connection the
striking difference in root form which exists between Nos. 145304 (Fig.
15 a, i), and 142197 (Fig. 15 c, k ); it is much greater than that between
145304 and the cast (6, j). The other specimens (Fig. 14 e-k) are sent
to show the range of variation in m 2 . Compare 153822 (Fig. 14 g) and
142185 (Fig. 14 e) for difference in length-breadth ratio; 142197 (6)
and 153816 (h) for difference in size of two males; 153822 (g) and 142185
(e) for difference in development of hypocone (that this is not a sexual
character is shown by the large hypocone in No. 153824 ( j )); Nos. 153808
(d) and 153822 ( g ) for difference in development of paracone and meta¬
cone and of the sulcus between them; No. 145322 ( q ) for a peculiar
narrowing of the area of wrinkled enamel. After examining all of these


Excerpts from two letters from Gerrit S. Miller, Jr. to W. K. Gregory; published here with Dr.
Miller’s kind permission. The orang molars illustrated in Figs. 14, 15 were loaned by the U. S. National
Museum. For these courtesies and for Dr. Miller’s unfailing cooperation the authors desire to express
their gratitude.


.. Fig. 14. Comparison of Pithecanthropus and orang molars. Occlusal view,
X %. Second upper molars:

a— U. S. N. M. 142170; fe—142197; c— 145304; d— 153808; e—142185; /—Pithecanthropus
g— 153822; h— 153816; i— 49856; j— 153824; k— 145307.

Third upper molars:

l— 142191; m— 142169; n—Pithecanthropus; o— 153806; jJ—142181; q— 145322.


528


Fig. 15. Comparison of Pithecanthropus and orang molars continued.

Anterior view, second upper molar:
a —145304; b — Pithecanthropus; c —142197.

Anterior view, third upper molar: *

d— 142191; e —142169; f—Pithecanthropus; 0—153806; h —142181.

Posterior view, second upper molar:
i —145304; j — Pithecanthropus; k —142197.

Posterior view, third upper molar:
l —142191; m —142169; n — Pithecanthropus; o —153806; p —142181.


530


Bulletin American Museum of Natural History


[Vol. XLVIII


can you show me any character in the cast that you would be willing
to call generic on the basis of one tooth?

(5.) The Third Upper Tooth. (Fig. 14 l-p ).—Compare the cast
(Fig. 14 n) with Nos. 142169 (m) and 142191 ( l ) and especially 153806 (o)
for near approach in crown outline; then compare these three orangs
with No. 142181 (p) in order to realize how much the third molar varies
in the living animal. It seems to me that the crown of the cast is easily
interpreted as an orang tooth with the general form of No. 153806 (o)
plus a slight tendency toward reduction of the wrinkled area like that
shown by m 2 No. 145322 (Fig. 14 q). The roots are not quite so easily
dealt with. I cannot find any recent specimen in which they exactly
agree with those in the cast, particularly as regards their angle of diver¬
gence; but in No. 142191 (Fig. 15 l ) the two outer prongs are partly
joined, and this process would need to be carried only a little farther (as
the joining of the postero-external with the lingual is carried in No.
142169 (Fig. 15 m) to produce the conditions seen in the cast.

Summary. —The only characters shown by the casts that appear to
be outside of the limits of individual variation in our series of recent
orangs are: (a) in both teeth a tendency for the posterior side of the
crown to bulge out beyond the level of the roots (nearly realized in 145322);
(6) in m 2 the absence of this tendency to bulge outward along the anterior
margin; and ( c ) in m 3 the wider angle of divergence of the roots. These
differences point to a probable specific distinctness of the extinct Javan
ape from the living ones of Borneo and Sumatra; but would you be
willing to regard them as of generic importance when you do not know
that they are actually constant in the extinct species; or do you find
some important characters in the casts that I have overlooked; or
can you point out any definitely human suggestions in any of the features
of the casts? In all this discussion we must keep in view the fact that/
it is only with casts of the Pithecanthropus molars that we are now
dealing; the actual teeth may show features which will cause us to
change our minds.
