Notes on the Type of Hesperopithecus haroldcookii (William K. Gregory and Milo Hellman, 1923)
=============================================================================================
Gregory and Hellman's 1923 re-study of the Hesperopithecus tooth — the careful anatomy that began the walk-back from 'Nebraska Man'. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (in.ernet.dli.2015.8169) — American Museum Novitates, no. 53.


NOTES ON THE TYPE OF HESPEROPITHECUS HAROLD *

COOKII OSBORN

By William K. Gregory and Milo Hellman

Through the courtesy of Professor Osborn, who has recently
described 1 the type of Hesperopithecus haroldcookii, we have had the
opportunity of making further studies upon this already famous speci-
men, the results of which are submitted below.

ANALYSIS OF CHARACTERS OF THE TYPE
A careful consideration of the characters afforded by the badly
eroded and worn type, an upper molar, leads us to distribute them under
the following categories.

I. — Characters due to long exposure to weathering, erosion and stream

OR WIND ACTION

(a) Extreme rounding of all angles margins, ridges, and projections of crown

and roots.

( b ) Breaking off of postero-external (disto-buccal) root and smoothing of site

of root.

( c ) Loss of enamel on entire external and half of posterior surface.

(d) Presence of numerous large and small cracks and fissures and rounding of

the margins of the cracks, causing them to simulate the natural
fissures between cusps.

II. — Characters due to extreme natural wear of the crown

(a) Extreme shortness or apparent brachyodonty of crown and loss of all

main cusps.

(b) Close apparent approximation of hypocone to protocone.

(c) Evenly concave wearing surface.

(d) Deposition of secondary dentine on roof of pulp cavity, beneath wearing

surface.

(e) Diminished size of root canals.

IIL — Chief diagnostic characters of Hesperopithecus type

(a) Upper molar crown conforming to the general type that is common to the

anthropoids and man.

(b) Evenly concave masticating surface, as in Pithecanthropus , certain chim-
panzees 1 and Australian aborigines.


1 Osborn, Henry Fairfield, 1922, * Hesperopithecus , the First Anthropoid Primate Found in Amer-
ica.’ American Museum Novitates, No. 37. 5 pp., 3 figs, preprinted without figures in Science, LV,

pp. 463-465, May 3, 1922).

*Fide G. S. Miller, in litteria.


2


AMERICAN MUSEUM NOVITATES


[No. 53


(c) Very large divergent roots, a primitive character retained in the gorilla,

in Pithecanthropus, and in certain human teeth.

(d) Transverse diameter of antero-extermil root smaller than in human molars.

(e) Floor of pulp-cavity raised well above bifurcation of roots, as in man (Fig.

5).

(f) Form of floor of pulp-cavity resembling that of anthropoids and man.

REMARKS ON FIGURES 1 TO 4
Figure 1

The crown of the Ilesper op ithecus molar was worn down by use
nearly to the base, so that the cusps had entirely disappeared. After
death the tooth was badly cracked, battered and waterworn. The cracks
and rounded edges are due to these processes.

The upper row of figures shows that the occlusal surface of the
Hesperop ithecus molar is more or less intermediate in contour between
m 3 and m 2 of the chimpanzee.

In the middle row the rounding of the antero-buccal edge of the
crown is probably due to extreme wear and subsequent erosion; so also
the bluntness of the root ends. The enamel on the lingual surface,
unlike that of the chimpanzee here figured, is not reflected toward the root
along the neck of the tooth. The lingual root (1) was extremely robust.

In the lower row we see the site of the posteroexternal (disto-
buccal) root, which has been brokeli off, and the site subsequently
smoothed down by erosion.

Figure 2

In Hesperopithecus the antero-external (mesio-buccal) root is very
large. The site of the missing postero-external root is also shown, as
well as the buccal aspect of the lingual root. The deep fissures and cracks
are probably due to erosion.

In the middle and lower rows the great width of the lingual root in
Hesperopithecus is well shown. The lower row shows the site of the miss-
ing postero-external root and the deep groove on the buccal side of the
lingual root. The great antero-posterior width of the lingual root, as
well as the extreme wear of the occlusal surface, indicates that the
tooth is an m 2 or m l rather than an m 8 .

Figure 3

The evenly concave wearing surface of the Hesperopithecm molar is
seen to resemble that of Pithecanthropus } In the upper row we note the

|Dr. Miller informs us that he finds nearly the same condition in certain chitnpansees, and we
find it also in a gorilla and in Australian aborigines and American Indians.


1923]


HESPEROPI TH EC US HA ROLDCOOK II


3


far greater antero-postcrior diameter in Pithecanthropus , which has a
very large hypocone.

The righthand figures in the upper and middle rows represent
the second upper molar of an American Indian, which has been artificially
ground down to near the base of the crown. The appearance of this
tooth indicates that the rounding of the edges in Hesperopithecus may
be due to erosion, since similar erosional features have been produced
experimentally in the modern tooth. Secondly, it shows the rapid les-
sening of the antero-posterior diameter of the inner or lingual side of the
tooth near the base of the crown.

The middle row shows the doubling of the antero-external (mesio-
buccal) root in Pithecanthropus and the extreme divergence of its inner
and outer roots. In Hesperopithecus the lingual root is much wider
transversely than that in the human molar and the antero-external root
Is narrower. The lack of a sharp reflection of the enamel toward the.
lingual side is seen also in the human molars here figured.

The lower row shows well the even concavity of the wearing surface
in Hesjyeropithecus and Pithecanthropus . The divergence of the lingual
and buccal roots is greater than that in the human molar figured.

Figure 4

In the* upper row we see the doubling of the antero-external root in
Pithecanthropus , this root being single in Hesperopithecus and in the
human tooth here figured. The grooving of the lingual root in Hespero-
pithecus is well shown, also the markedly asymmetrical contour of the
(Town as seen from above. This view especially, together with Fig. 2,
lower row, affords evidence that the type specimen of Hesperopithecus is
an upper molar of a member of the anthropoid-man group.

In the middle row considerable resemblance to the second upper
molar of Pithecanthropus and to the first upper molar of an American
Indian is shown.

In the lower row the Indian molar (m 2 ), which had been artificially
ground down to near the base of the crown, is compared with the un-
ground but worn second molar of the opposite side. Compare Fig. 3,
upper row, with remarks above.


Fig. 1 . Comparative figures of upper molars of Hesperopithecus and modern chim-
panzee ( Pan schweinfurthii) , X 2.

Upper row: occlusal aspect, third upper molar of chimpanzee, second (?) upper molar, type of Hesper-
opithecus, seftORd upper molar of chimpanzee.

Middle row: anterior (mesial) aspect of same specimens.

Lower row: posterior (distal) aspect.

Pr, protocone (mesio-lingual cusp) ; pa, paracone (mesio-bueeal); me, metacone (disto-buceal) ; hy, hypocone
(disto-lingual). 1 .lingual root; £, antero-exicmal (mesio-buccal) root; S, postero-external (disto-baccal) root
or site of same.


Fig. 2. Comparative figures of upper molars of Hesperopithecus and modern
1‘impanzee (continued), X 2.

Upper row: buccal aspect, m s chimpanzee, rn- (?) Hrsperopithecus, m- chimpanzee.

Middle row: lingual aspect, same series.

Lower row t : view from above, showing roots.


Fig. 3. Comparative figures of upper molars of Pithecanthropus, Heaperopith-
ecus and modern American Indian, X 2.

Upper row: occlusal aspect, second upper molar (cast) referred to Pithecanthropus, type upper molar
of flesperopithecus, and second upper molar of modern American Indian (ground down to near base
of crown).

Middle row: anterior or mesial view of same series. ,

Lower row: posterior or distal view of Pithecanthropus, flesperopithecus, and m 1 American Indian.


6


Fig. 4. Comparative figures of upper molars of Pithecanthropus , Hcspero •
pithecus and modern American Indian (continued).

Upper row: view from above, showing roots; second upper molar (east) referred to Pithecan-
thropus, type upper molar of Hcspero pithecus, first upper molar of American Indian (postero-
external root broken off) .

Middle row: lingual aspect of same specimens.

Lower row: occlusal aspect of molars of American Indians. Second upper molar ground down
to near base of crown, second upper molar of opposite side natural wear, first upper molar
much worn.


Table I.— COMPARATIVE MEASUREMENTS' AND INDICES OF HES-
PEROPITHECUS TYPE UPPER MOLAR


i

■c M

*5,®

II

3!

Chimpanzee

A. M. N. H. m a
51278

Chimpanzee

A. M. N. H. m*
51278

Pithecanthropus

Cast m ?

American Indian
A.M.N.H. m 2 2161
Crown ground down

American Indian
A.M.N.H. m’ 2161
Natural wear

American Indian
A.M.N.H.m 1 22166
Natural wear

a . — Antero-post. diam. middle
of crown at base

10

10

11.5

12

10

10.2

10

fe. — Distance inner base proto-
cone to outer base
paracone

12

12

13

13.4

12.2

12.5

12.3

Index 1 : Relative transv. width
ant. moiety of crown
lb X 100 : a]

120

120

113

112

122

123

123 .

c , — Distance inner base hypo-
cone to outer base
metacone

10.2

9

10.7

11.5

11.5

11.8

12

Index 2: Relative transv. width
post, moiety of crown
[c X 100 -5- a]

102

90

93

96

115

110

120

d. — Distance ant. base paracone
to post, base metacone

10.5

10.2

11.8

12.2

10 . 8

10.8

11.2

Index 3: Relative ant. post.

diam. outer margin of
crown

[d X 100 : a]

105

102

103

102

108

106

112

e. — Distance ant. base proto-
cone to post. base|
hypooone

9.3

9.2

10.5

11.7

9.5

10

9.8

Index 4: Relative ant. post.!
diam. inner part of
crown

[e X 100 : a]

|

93

i

92

!

91

97

95

100

98

/. — Angle of outer border of
crown to ant. border

02°

1

08° |

60°

60°

70°

70°

70°

g. — Ant. post. diam. lingual root

"luT

5 |

6.2

7.7

5.7

5?7

65

Index 5: Relative ant. post,
diam. of lingual root
\g X 100 - a]

08

50

54

04

57

50

65

h . — Angle of axis of lingual root
to that of ant ero-
buccal root

° !

!

s 1

25° |

i

i

i

22.5°

m 2

27°

m 8

35°

5°

5°

18°


’Measurements are in millimeters.


8


1923]


HESPEROPITHECUS HAROLDCOOKII


9


Table II. — VARIABILITY OF ANGLE OF AXIS OF LINGUAL ROOT
TO THAT OF ANTERO-BUCCAL ROOT IN HUMAN MOLARS


Am.

A. M. N. H.
2161

Ind.

A. M. N. H.
22166

Bedouin

A. M.N.H.
7224

White Man

Am. Ind.

A. M.N.H.
22165

m 2

5°

13°

14°


m 1

1

18°

18°

28°

43°


REMARKS ON THE MEASUREMENTS AND INDICES
(Cf. Tables I, II and Figures 1-4)

The type upper molar of Hesperopithecus approaches the third
upper molar of a certain chimpanzee in the general dimensions of the
base of the crown, that is in four measurements, a, b, d , and e, and in
two indices, 1, 4. This is the greatest number (six) of agreements
recorded in the table. It differs from the same in the much greater
relative width of the posterior moiety of the crown (index 2), in the
much greater relative antero-posterior diameter of the lingual root
(index 5) and in the lesser divergence, or forking, of the lingual and
aritero-buecal roots (h ) .

It approaches the second upper molar of the same chimpanzee in the
transverse diameter of the posterior moiety of the crown (c), in the angle
of the outer surface of the crown to the anterior surface (/*), and in the
degree of divergence of the axis of the lingual root to that of the antero-
buccal root (h). All these are important points in favor of the view that
the type is an m 2 rather than an in*.

The type upper molar of Hesperopithecus differs from the m 2 (cast)
of Pithecanthropus in nearly all the absolute measurements, but ap-
proaches it in the great size of the lingual root (index 5), in the angle of
the outer side of the crown to the anterior side (/), and especially in
the evenly concave form of the grinding surface.

While approaching the second upper molars of certain American
Indians in four absolute measurements, a , 6, d, and e, and in two indices,
1 and 3, the t}^pe upper molar of Hesperopithecus differs widely in the
more asymmetrical form of crown with narrower posterior moiety (index
2), 1 in the greater size of the lingual root and especially in the greater


1 The apparent asymmetry and relative narrowness of the posterior moiety of the crown in the
type may be due in a considerable degree to the advanced condition of wear in the region of the
hypocone. A difference of this character may be noticed in the comparison of a less worn and a more

worn second upper human molar of the same dentition (Figure 3).


10 AMERICAN MUSEUM NOVITATES [No. 53

divergence of the lingual and antero- buccal roots, 1 and in the smaller
transverse diameter of the antero-buccal root.

The marked asymmetry and small transverse diameter of the pos-
terior moiety are pronounced in the second upper molar of the “ Mous-
terian youth ” of the Neanderthal race, as well as in certain Australian
skulls

The type of Hesperopithecus approaches the first upper molar of a
certain American Indian (Table I) in three important characters (a, g,
and index 5). §


Fig. 5. Comparative radiographs of upper molars of chimpanzee, Hespero-
pithecus and American Indians.

Upper row: vertical projection; chimpanzee m 8 , chimpanzee m 2 , Hesperopithecus, American In-
dian m 2 , American Indian m 1 .

Middle row: anteroposterior projection; chimpanzee m 2 , Hcs peropithecus , American Indian
m 2 , American Indian m 1 .

Lower row: transverse projection; chimpanzee m 8 , Heeperopithecus , American Indian m*, Ameri-
can Indian m 1 .


*There is, however, a wide range of variability (from 5 to 43°) in this character in man (see
Table II).


1923]


HESPEROPI TH EC US HA ROLDCOOKll


11


RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION OF TYPE SPECIMEN
Dr. George Palmer Ratner, D.D.S., has kindly submitted the fol
lowing report, New York, August 25, 1922.

Under radiographic examination the specimen submitted has the appearance of a
molar tooth, i.e., crown portion and two roots: mesial-buccal and lingual; .distal
buccal apparently missing. Occlusal aspect discloses pulp floor having three openings
for three independent roots.

There is present the pulp chamber in crown portion of tooth, also outline of one
pulp in mesial-buccal root, terminating in two foramina. Large root, or lingual,
discloses two independent pulps present in this root .

Remarks 1

Radiographic examination of the type molar tooth of Hesperopithecus
reveals a triangular outline of the floor of the pulp chamber. At the
angles of this triangle corresponding to the position of the roots there are
three openings corresponding with the root canals. The floor of the
pulp-cavity is well raised above the bifurcation of the roots, as in man
(cf. Fig. 5). The floor of the pulp-cavity resembles that of anthropoids
and man.

GEOLOGICAL OCCURRENCE OF THE HESPEROPITHECUS TOOTH
In response to our request T)r. W. D. Matthew has kindly supplied
the following statement.

This specimen was found by Harold J . Cook in the upper level of t he Snake Creek
quarries at a point which has been named Olcott Hill, on the ranch of Mr. Harry
Ashbrook, twenty miles south of Agate, Nebraska. The Upper Snake Creek at this
point consists of sand, pebbles and numerous fragments of bone, forming irregular
lenses, or pockets, on the eroded surface of an older formation, the Sheep Creek beds.
They appear to be channel-fill lenses and extend for a distance of about three miles to
the westward, cropping out at the heads of a series of little ‘draws,’ or dry gullies on
the southwest margin of the sand-hill area between the Niobrara and North Platte
valleys. Associated with the channel-beds are finer, uniform, clean sands, partly of
eolian deposition, partly water-deposited, and varying in thickness from twenty
feet to zero, covered by the sodded surface of the plains.

Fossils are abundant and varied in the channel-beds but mostly very fragmentary
and usually rolled or waterworn to a varying degree. Generally they are mineralized
to the extent of partly filling the minute canals and pores of the bones, but the larger
hollows are either filled with loose sand or empty. The color is usually blue-black
from iron phosphate. Sometimes the bones are mottled light yellow, or completely
dead white, and the degree of mineralization varies to a considerable extent.

The finer sands contain the same or a slightly later faunal phase but fossils are
rare in them, although apt to be well preserved when found.


'By Milo Heilman.


12


AMERICAN MUSEUM NOVITATES


[No. 53


The fauna found in these upper Snake Creek beds has been extensively collected
and carefully studied by the writer, Harold Cook and others. It appears to be a unit
fauna and of Lower Pliocene age, save for occasional specimens of the Upper Miocene
Lower Snake Creek fauna, presumably due to re-deposit. Except for a single speci-
men, a Bison jaw found on the surface in 1908 (we have no exact record or recollection
of the exact circumstances), no fossils have been found at this locality which would
indicate an admixture of Upper Pliocene, Pleistocene or recent faunas. Thousands
of equid teeth have been found, all of the older Pliocene (or Upper Miocene) species,
not one that would suggest Pleistocene age. In view of the great number of fossils
it is safe to say that no Pleistocene admixture is present

As regards the H esperopithecus tooth, it was found by Mr. Cook in place in the
Upper Snake Creek channel-beds, and as the finder is an experienced geologist and
palaeontologist, thoroughly familiar with this fossil locality and the fauna, his
reports and conclusions are considered exceptionally valid proof of its occurrence.
The preservation of the tooth is entirely normal and similar to the rest of the Upper
Snake Creek fauna.

The following list of the associated fauna is not complete, but suffices to show its
relations:

Carnivora. — Ursidae — Hyaenarctos sp.

Mustelidae — Brachypsalis sp.

Canidae — Aelurodon haydeni var.

“ ssevus var.

Felidae — Machacrodus sp.

Perissodacty la — Equidae — Pliohippus leidycm us

“ cf. mirabilis

Protohippus cf. perditus
“ placidus var.

Hipparion a fi nis

u gratum var.

Rhinocerotidfe — P tracer as jap .

Aphelops sp. indesc.

Teleocera8 cf . fossiger

Artiodactyla. — Dicotylida? — Prosthennops cf. serus
Camel idae — Alticamelus cf. procerus
Pliauchenia gigas
? Procam elus sp .

Cervidae — ?Cervavus sp.

Ant ilocapridae — VMerycodus sp .

Bov idae — Neotragoceras improvisus

Edentata, — Megalonychidae — Megalonyx cf . leptostom us

Glires. — Sciuridae — Sciurus cf. aberti

Mylagaulidae— ~M ylagaulus sp .

Geomyidae — Thomomys sp.

Proboscidea .• — Mastodontidae — M iomastodon matthewi
Trilophodontidae — ?Trilophodon sp.

Insectivora. — Talpidae — Scaiops sp.

The above fauna is comparable with that of the Republican River of Kansas,
Nebraska and Colorado, with the Rattlesnake of the John Day basin in Oregon, the


1923]


HESPEROPITHECUS HAROLDCOOKII


13


Thousand Creek beds of Nevada and various early Pliocene formations in the western
United States. These are regarded by Osborn, Merriam and the writer as a practical
equivalent in a broad way of the Hipparion fauna of Europe and Asia, which is
assigned by most authorities to the Lower Pliocene.

The above data are considered by the writer to furnish fairly conclusive proof of
the Lower Pliocene age of the Hesperopithecus tooth. There is no reasonable doubt as
to its age.


CONCLUSIONS

1. — The differences from the third lower molar of Hijaenarctos, with
which Dr. Smith Woodward 1 suggested that the type upper molar of
Hesperopithecus should be compared, are so fundamental that it is diffi-
cult to find any significant points of agreement. The third lower molar
of Hydenarctos and of the modern bears has been derived by degeneration
of a normal tuber culo-sec tor ial molar, as may be seen readily by com-
parison with various amphicyonines and other canids, while the molar of
Hesperopithecus very clearly conforms to the modified tri- to quadri tu-
bercular type that is characteristic of the upper molars of anthropoid
apes and man. The illustrations in the plates surely establish this beyond
reasonable dispute.

2. — The posterior upper molar of the procyonid carnivore Cercoleptes
( Potos ) shows a distant resemblance to the type of Hesperopithecus
which does not stand close comparison.

3. — There is a certain superficial resemblance of the worn third
upper molar crown of Lagothrix , a South American monkey, to the type
of Hesperopithecus. But in the former the lingual root in old specimens
is directed strongly upward and backward, while in the latter it is
directed upward and forward, with reference to the general plane of the
masticating surface. Moreover, the great differences in size and in the
detailed characters of the teeth do not favor the possibility of a near
relationship of the two genera. 2

4. — Of the higher primates, the Old World monkeys are excluded
from close relationship to Hesperopithecus by the oblong contour of the
upper molar crown; the gibbons come nearer but have much smaller
molars, which are more elongate antero-posteriorly; in the gorilla, the
antero-posterior elongation attains an extreme, and this ape also sur-
passes Hesperopithecus in the antero-posterior width of the lingual root
and in the degree of its divergence from the outer roots; the orang has

Woodward, A. Smith, F. R. S., 1922, 'A Supposed Ancestral Man in North America.' Nature,
CIX, No. 2745, p. 151.

^Comparisons with all other known genera of South American monkeys show marked differences
from the type of Hesperopithecus either in crown or roots.


14


AMERICAN MUSEUM NOVITATES


[No. 53


quadrate molar crowns with extremely wide lingual roots 1 ; the chim-
panzees, while varying considerably in molar characters, appear to come
nearest to Hesperopithecus, but the specimens here figured differ from it
in the weakness of the roots, in the lingual reflection of the enamel upon
the neck, and in the greater relative antero-posterior diameter of the
crown (assuming that the type of Hesperopithecus is either an m 2 or an
m 1 ). 2

5. — Our results thus afford additional evidence in favor of Professor
Osborn’s conclusion 8 that the type of Hesperopithecus haroldcookii
represents an hitherto unknown form of the higher primates. It com-
bines characters seen in the molars of the chimpanzee, of Pithecanthropus ,
and of man, but, in view of the extremely worn and eroded state of the
crown, it is hardly safe to affirm more than that Hesperopithecus was
structurally related to all three.

6. — Whether Hesperopithecus itself is or is not ancestral to man can
only be determined by subsequent discovery, but meanwhile the only
part definitely known of it, namely, the much worn type upper molar,
represents a stage of evolution which comparative morphological
evidence indicates as preceding the following definitely human specializa-
tions: (a) the reduction of the lingual root; (6) the lessening of the
divergence of the lingual and buccal roots; (c) the widening of the
antero-external root; (d) the antero-posterior shortening and transverse
widening of the crown; (e) the tendency toward rectifying the asym-
metry due to the narrowness of the posterior moiety of the crown. The
Hesperopithecus molar shows the opposites of all these characters and
such an assemblage of primitive features has not hitherto, so far as we
are aware, been found in any single human molar.

7. — The anatomical, palaeontological, and other evidence 4 already
accumulated tends to show that man, Pithecanthropus , Hesperopithecus ,
and the various anthropoids form a natural superfamily group, which
may now be named the Hominoidea, in contrast with the Cercdpithe-
coidea, or Old World monkeys.

8. — The palaeontological, anatomical, and taxonomic evidence
considered together indicates that the stem forms of this group arose in
the early Tertiary times from primates that were closely allied to or
identical with the Lower Oligocene Parapithecus, which in turn, so far as


‘That iitin in 1 m*; m* varies greatly. ,

•Dr. Miller Tkotee that in other specimens of champansees the weakness of the roots seems to hold
as a constant character ; but that the reflection of the enamel upon the neck may be reduced by wear.
*0p. cit.

4 8ee W. K. Gregory, 1921, ‘The Origin and Evolution of the Human Dentition.’


RECENT [LEMURS TARSIUS 4 ] GIBBON ORANG CHIMP. GORILLA MANKIND 'Modmrn'ftmcm*


Fig. 6. Geological succession and relationships of the principal types of Primates, according to present evidence from palaeontology,
comparative anatomy, anthropology, etc. W. K. Gregory, 1922.


16


AMERICAN MUSEUM NOVITATES


[No. 53


known, shows a remarkable mingling of characters tending to connect
the whole Old World series of primates with the stem of the Eocene
tarsioids (Schlosser, Gregory).

9. — There was a wide adaptive radiation of this group in the
Middle Tertiary, very diverse species having been found fossil in western
and eastern Europe and India. Hesperopithecus was one of the Lower
Pliocene survivors of this group, which had apparently spread northeast-
ward along the route followed by various mastodons, antelopes, and other
mammals described by Professor Osborn. 1


Osborn, Henry jPairfield,' 1922, ‘Hesperopithecus, the Anthropoid Primate of Western Nebras-
ka.’ Nature, Aug. 26, 1922, d. 281. For a fuller discussion of the palaeontological evidence for the
faunal connection of western North America with northeastern Asia in late Tertiary times, see Mat-
thew, W. D., 1915, ‘Climate and Evolution,' Ann. N. Y. Acad. Shi., XXIV, pp. 234-255; also Matthew
and Cook, 1909, ‘A Pliocene Fauna from Western Nebraska,’ Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., XXXVII,
pp. 367-390, 413.


AMERPQA%^t^®UM NOVITATES
