LETTERS TO A CANDID INQUIRER, ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM.
By William Gregory. Philadelphia: Blanchard and Lea, 1851 (American edition of the London 1851 original).
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/letterstocandidi00greg).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LETTERS


A CANDID INQUIRER,


ON


ANIMAL MAGNETISM.


BY


WILLIAM GKEGOKY,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.,

PROFESSOR  OF  CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH.


PHILADELPHIA:

BLANCHARD AND LEA.

1851.


Is

o


I


PHILADELPHIA:
T.  K.  AND  P.  G.  COLLINS,  PRINTERS,


TO HIS GRACE

GEORGE-DOUGLAS CAMPBELL,

DUKE  OF  ARGYLL,  K.T.,  F.R.S.E.,  &c.  &c.  &c.

My  Lord  Duke,

In  availing  myself  of  your  Grace's  kind  permission  to
dedicate  to  you  the  following  Letters,  I  do  not  venture  to
suppose  that  your  Grace  will  adopt  all  the  views  which  may
be  found  in  them;  but  I  am  sure  that  every  attempt,  how-
ever inadequate,  to  investigate  obscure  natural  truths,  or  to
urge  the  investigation  on  men  of  science,  will  meet  with
your  Grace's  hearty  approbation.

I  rejoice,  moreover,  in  this  opportunity  of  expressing  the
very  high  respect  which  I  e*  tertain  for  your  Grace's  ardent
devotion  to  truth,  whether  in  natural  science  or  in  other
fields  of  intellectual  exertion,  which  has  added  new  lustre
to  the  historical  glories  of  a  name,  immortally  associated
with  the  religious  annals  of  Scotland.

I  have  the  honor  to  be,

My  Lord  Duke,
Your  Grace's  faithful  Servant,
WILLIAM  GREGORY.


PREFACE


The  following  Letters  were  projected,  the  plan  sketched
out,  and  a  part  of  the  work  written,  in  the  latter  months  of
1849.  But  the  translation  of  Reichenbach's  Researches  on
Magnetism,  and  other  labors,  besides  my  absence  abroad  in
the  summer  of  1850,  have  retarded  its  completion.  This  I
do  not  regret:  first,  because,  in  the  interval,  Mr.  Lewis  and
Dr.  Darling,  whose  interesting  experiments  are  fully  no-
ticed, have  visited  Edinburgh ;  and  secondly,  because,
partly  in  consequence  of  this,  many  of  our  scientific  men
have  become  convinced  that  there  are  many  facts  in  Animal
Magnetism,  too  long  neglected,  which  must  be  investigated.
Indeed  several  of  them  have  actually  commenced  observa-
tions on  the  subject.

In  later  times,  Animal  Magnetism  was  first  prominently
brought  before  the  British  public  by  Mr.  J.  C.  Colquhoun,
in  his  "Isis  Revelata,"  and  other  interesting  works.  But
these  works  did  not  produce  all  the  effect  which  might  have
been  anticipated  from  the  great  learning  and  research  they
displayed,  and  the  clear,  logical  style  and  temperate  tone  in
which  they  were  written;  perhaps  because,  Mr.  Colquhoun
being  a  lawyer,  and  not  a  professed  man  of  science,  he  may
have  been  erroneously  supposed,  without  investigation  into
his  works,  to  be  too  credulous  in  this  matter.  Subsequently,

1*


vi  PREFACE.

Dr.  Elliotson  took  up  the  subject,  and  has,  in  spite  of  much
opposition,  especially  from  his  professional  brethren,  perse-
vered in  the  practical  study  and  application  of  Animal  Mag-
netism, with  a  constancy  and  devotion  to  truth  that  do  him
the  highest  honor.  A  considerable  number  of  medical  men
have,  in  the  course  of  time,  rallied  round  him,  and  have,
like  him,  recorded  their  observations  in  periodical  works,
especially  in  the  Zoist.  But  Dr.  Elliotson  has  not  given  to
the  world  a  systematic  work  on  the  subject.  Two  respected
clergymen,  the  Rev.  Messrs.  Townsend  and  Sandby,  have
published  small  works  on  Mesmerism ;  and  more  recently
the  Rev.  Dr.  Scoresby,  so  highly  respected  in  the  scientific
world,  has  added  another.  These,  with  the  Letters  of  Miss
Martineau,  the  small  works  of  Mr.  Braid  and  Dr.  Haddock,
and  one  or  two  other  works  which  I  have  not  seen,  make  up
the  chief  part  of  the  English  Literature  on  the  subject,  till
the  appearance,  a  very  few  years  since,  of  Dr.  Esdaile's
interesting  and  valual  !e  contribution  to  the  medical  part  of
the  subject,  his  "Mesmerism  in  India."  Still  more  re-
cently, Mr.  Herbert  Mayo,  a  medical  man  of  eminence,
now  retired  from  practice,  has  in  various  forms  given  to  the
public  his  experience.

It  might  be  supposed,  that  the  works  above  mentioned
would  have  spread  abroad  a  general  knowledge  of  the  sub-
ject, and  would  have  had  the  more  effect,  because  a  large
proportion  of  them  proceeded  from  medical  men,  well  quali-
fied to  investigate  such  a  subject.  But,  whatever  may  have
been  the  cause  of  it,  nothing  is  more  certain,  than  that  a
knowledge  of  Animal  Magnetism  has  hitherto,  in  this
country,  been  confined  to  a  few,  and  that  it  is  in  the  medi-


PREFACE.  Vll

cal  profession  that  the  fiercest  opposition  has  been  met  with.
In  every  society  or  company,  the  large  majority  do  not  even
profess  to  have  studied  it,  although  that  does  not  prevent
many  from  expressing  tolerably  decided  opinions.  And  we
find,  even  among  such  as  have  paid  a  little  attention  to  the
subject,  many  ideas  and  views  which  are  quite  erroneous.
In  point  of  fact,  therefore,  a  new  work  on  Animal  Magnet-
ism is  far  from  being  superfluous ;  and  it  is  hoped  that  this
humble  effort  may  have  its  use,  were  it  merely  in  exciting
the  attention  of  some,  and  correcting  the  false  impressions
of  others.  It  makes  no  pretension  to  a  full  and  systematic
treatment  of  the  vast  subject;  and  its  only  object  is  to  con-
vince the  reader  that  there  exist,  in  nature,  a  multitude  of
most  valuable  and  interesting  facts,  which,  in  spite  of  their
appearing  strange  or  incredible  at  first  sight,  are  true,  and,
being  so,  demand  and  deserve  the  most  patient  and  complete
investigation.  If  I  shall  succeed  in  conveying  to  the  reader's
mind  that  conviction,  my  object  w:ll  be  attained,  and  we
may  look  forward  to  the  appearance  of  some  one,  qualified
for,  and  willing  to  undertake,  the  herculean  labor  of  a  com-
plete study  of  xinimal  Magnetism.

There  are  various  indications  that  the  time  is  approaching,
when  the  subject  must  receive  the  attention  it  deserves  from
men  of  science  in  general.  Within  the  last  ten  years,  there
has  been  a  growing  interest  in  it,  in  all  quarters,  which  is
now  reflected  in  the  changed  tone  of  many  of  the  leading
periodicals.  But,  besides  this,  scientific  men  begin  to  feel
that  they  must  attend  to  it,  or  be  left  behind.  Perhaps  this
feeling  has  been  considerably  strengthened  by  the  appear-
ance of  the  work  of  Reichenbach,  of  the  first  part  of  which,


Till  PREFACE.

the  most  material  to  this  subject,  I  published  an  abstract  in
1846.  In  this  work,  without  making  any  observations  on
the  mesmeric  sleep,  but  simply  by  studying,  in  the  most
strictly  physical  manner,  the  action  of  magnets,  of  crystals,
of  the  hand,  &c,  on  the  human  frame  in  the  waking  state,
the  Author  has  demonstrated  the  existence  of  a  power,  dis-
tinct from  all  known  influences,  pervading  universal  nature,
and  capable  of  producing  marked  effects  on  healthy  persons
in  the  ordinary  waking  state.  It  was  easy  to  see  that
Reichenbach,  by  following  a  different  route,  had  discovered
the  same  mysterious  agent  which  Mesmer  had  called  Ani-
mal Magnetism;  and  that,  while  some  of  Mesmer's  theories
might  probably  be  fallacious,  yet  the  main  facts  had  been
fortified  by  these  new  observations,  made  in  a  manner  so
different,  and,  scientifically  speaking,  so  satisfactory.  Such,
at  least,  was  the  impression  which  the  study  of  Reichenbach' s
work  produced  on  my  own  mind.  I  felt  that,  sooner  or
later,  the  whole  subject  would  be  investigated  in  the  same
way;  and  in  the  meantime,  I  was  desirous  to  satisfy  as
many  persons  as  possible,  not  only  that  certain  most  curious
facts  existed,  but  that  they  would  all,  in  time,  admit  of  a
natural  explanation.  It  was  then,  that  I  was  repeatedly
urged  to  publish  what  I  happened  to  know  on  the  subject,
but  various  things  interfered,  and  it  was  not  till  about
eighteen  months  ago  that  I  finally  agreed,  at  the  request  of
a  friend,  to  write  the  following  Letters.

I  have  not  ventured  to  direct  attention  to  this  interesting
subject  without  due  preparation,  and  some  acquaintance
with  it,  both  theoretical  and  practical.  My  attention  was
first  called  to  it  in  the  autumn  of  1827,  by  the  late  Dr.


PKEFACE.  IX

Coindet,  senior,  of  Geneva,  who lent  me several  works,
among  which  was  that  of  Dr.  Petetin  of  Lyons,  whose  cases
Dr.  Coindet,  had  seen. The  perusal  of  these  works  con-
vinced me  that  there  were  many  extraordinary  facts,  which
it  was  the  business  of  men  of  science  to  investigate ;  and
from  that  time  I  continued  to  read  all  the  works  on  Animal
Magnetism  I  could  find. But  it  was  not  for  a  long  time
that  I  was  enabled  to  see  any  of  the  phenomena. I  was
under  the  erroneous  impression  that  the  power  of  producing
them  was  confined  to  a  few,  and  consequently  did  not  my-
self try  to  do  so. I  took  every  opportunity,  however,  of
seeing  them,  as  produced  by  others,  both  in  public  and  pri-
vate; but  for  a  long  period  these  opportunities  were  few,
and  the  higher  phenomena  did  not  occur. At  length,  I
think  about  1842  or  1843,  when  I  resided  in  Aberdeen,  I
found  that  I  could  produce  the  magnetic  sleep  in  persons  in
whom  it  had  already  been  produced  by  others. In  some
instances,  in  which  I  tried  to  produce  it  for  the  first  time
myself,  I  failed,  no  doubt  from  want  of  perseverance,  and
thus  I  was  still  dependent  on  others  for  cases. But  after  a
time,  I  found  that  I  also,  with  the  help  of  patience  and
perseverance,  could  produce  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  many
other  phenomena. My  professional  engagements,  however,
prevented  me  from  studying  many  cases,  and  it  was  only
by  slow  degrees  that  I  was  enabled  to  see,  in  my  own  ex-
perience and  in  that  of  others,  almost  all  the  phenomena  of
Animal  Magnetism. I  now  find  that  it  is  not  difiicult  to
produce  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  that,  if  we  only  try  a  suf-
ficient number  of  cases,  we  are  sure  to  meet  with  some  in
which  the  higher  phenomena  appear. Had  I  been  able  to


X  PREFACE.

devote  my  whole  time  to  the  subject,  instead  of  only  an  in-
significant fraction  of  it,  I  should  long  ago  have  met  with  all
those  things  which  I  have  only  seen  by  slow  degrees.

But,  in  justice  to  those  who  have  labored  and  written  on
the  subject,  I  must  here  state,  that,  even  while  I  was  unable
myself  to  see,  or  to  produce,  the  higher  phenomena,  such
as  those  of  clairvoyance,  I  considered  the  published  evi-
dence as  amply  sufficient  to  establish  the  facts.  I  found  it
quite .  impossible  to  reject  the  consistent  testimony  of  so
many  able  men,  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  as  to  the  exist-
ence, in  the  magnetic  sleep,  of  powers  which  in  our  ordinary
state  we  do  not  possess.  Many  theories  were  broached,
which  appeared  untenable ;  but  the  facts  were  established
by  what  appeared  to  me,  before  I  had  myself  met  with
them,  sufficient  evidence.  As  there  was  no  reason  what-
ever to  doubt  the  honesty  or  truth  of  the  observers,  any
more  than  the  great  ability  of  many  of  them,  I  could  not
feel  justified  in  rejecting  their  evidence,  because  I  was  not
able  to  account  for  the  facts,  or  because  I  had  not  seen
them.  My  seeing  them  would  not  add  to  the  real  force  of
the  evidence,  if,  as  I  thought,  that  evidence  was  of  good
quality.  Accordingly,  I  admitted  the  facts  before  seeing
them,  as  is  done  every  day  in  other  branches  of  science,  on
good  evidence.  That  they  were  unaccountable,  or  appeared
so,  made  no  real  difference,  inasmuch  as  we  cannot,  truly
and  ultimately,  account  for  the  best  known  natural  facts;
and  I  was  well  convinced  that  we  know  but  a  small  part  of
the  secrets  of  Nature.

Accordingly,  when  in  process  of  time  I  was  enabled  to
see,  and  even  myself  to  produce,  these  phenomena,  I  found


PREFACE.  XI

that  I  could  only  confirm  what  had  been  stated,  with  most
remarkable  accuracy,  by  previous  observers.  And  such
has,  I  believe,  been  the  uniform  experience  of  all  who  have
fairly  investigated  the  matter  for  themselves.  At  least,
every  one  among  those  whom  I  know,  who  has  not  con-
tented himself  with  criticising  the  public  experiments  of
others  (always,  for  reasons  I  have  elsewhere  given,  more  or
less  unsatisfactory),  but  has  patiently  examined  the  subject
in  private,  has  ended  by  admitting  the  essential  facts,  as
recorded  by  Mesmer  and  his  successors,  however  strong  his
own  prejudices  may  have  been.  It  is  a  point  of  much  im-
portance, and  worthy  of  especial  notice,  that  the  essential
statements  of  the  early  writers  have  been  confirmed  by  all
who  have  really  studied  the  subject.

It  is  true  that  some  of  these  have  only  confirmed  a  part
of  those  statements;  but  this  is  because  they  have  as  yet
only  been  enabled  to  see  a  part  of  the  facts.  Thus,  within
a  few  weeks,  many  scientific  and  medical  men  in  Edinburgh
and  elsewhere,  have  become  entirely  satisfied  of  the  truth,
and  of  the  very  important  nature,  of  certain  facts  which
have  been  abundantly  exhibited,  on  persons  beyond  all  sus-
picion, by  Mr.  Lewis  and  Dr.  Darling.  These  facts,  how-
ever, constitute  but  a  very  small  part  of  the  vast  subject ;
they  consist,  namely,  of  those  which  demonstrate  the  power
of  suggestion  or  control  exercised  by  the  operator  over  the
muscular  motions,  sensations,  perceptions,  memory,  or  voli-
tion of  susceptible  subjects,  when  in  a  peculiar  state,  but
not  unconscious,  nor  in  the  magnetic  sleep.  On  the  con-
trary, these  persons  are  thoroughly  conscious,  and  will  rea-
son on  their  feelings,  and  try,  but  often  in  vain,  to  resist


Xll  PREFACE.

the  influence  of  the  operator.  All  this  is  now  admitted,
and  nothing  can  be  more  extraordinary  than  these  pheno-
mena. But  it  is  only  a  very  short  time  since  the  whole  of
these  very  phenomena  were  denied  and  rejected.  Nay,
very  recently,  in  a  large  city  where  Dr.  Darling  very  often
exhibited  them,  not  one  medical  man  of  note  did  otherwise
than  reject  them,  and  many  even  charged  Dr.  D.  with  im-
posture. Those  who  here  saw  and  studied  the  phenomena,
acted  more  rationally,  and  have  found  that  the  statements
originally  made  were  correct.  Yet  the  evidence  was  really
the  same  before  these  gentlemen  saw  the  phenomena,  and
has  acquired  no  real  addition  of  force  by  their  having  seen
them.  Having  often  seen  these  phenomena  in  the  sleep,
and  having  studied  the  evidence  of  their  occurrence  in  the
conscious  state,  I  was  satisfied  that  it  was  good,  and  that
the  phenomena  did  exist,  before  I  saw  them.  It  now  ap-
pears that  I  was  right  in  this  judgment.  Now,  I  venture
to  apply  this  instance  to  that  of  the  higher  phenomena,
which  many  persons,  not  having  seen,  deny,  while  they  ad-
mit such  as  they  have  seen.

It  must  be  observed,  that  they  denied  the  latter  also ;  at
least,  to  my  certain  knowledge,  many  did  so  before  tKey
saw  them,  when  the  real  evidence  was  as  good  as  now.
And  in  regard  to  the  higher  phenomena,  I  would  respect-
fully urge,  that  the  evidence  for  these,  if  examined,  will  be
found  as  good  as  we  can  have  for  any  fact,  short  of  ocular
proof.  Now,  as  they  have  just  found  that  evidence  con-
firmed, as  to  the  lower  phenomena,  by  what  they  have  seen,
the  natural  conclusion  is,  that  they  will  also  find  it  con-
firmed in  regard  to  the  higher  phenomena,  as  soon  as  they


PREFACE.  Xlll

have  the  means  of  studying  these.  It  is  the  evidence,  in
most  cases,  of  the  very  same  persons,  whose  testimony  has
been  confirmed  by  them  in  those  points  in  which  alone  they
have  tested  it ;  and  it  is  illogical  to  reject  that  evidence,  in
regard  to  certain  facts,  merely  because  we  have  not  seen
them,  when  we  have  found  it  correct  in  regard  to  those  facts
which  we  have  been  able  to  see.

I  speak  from  experience,  when  I  declare  my  conviction,
that  those  scientific  gentlemen  who  have  lately  seen  and
admitted  certain  beautiful  and  wonderful  phenomena,  will
also,  if  they  only  examine  for  themselves,  with  patience  and
perseverance,  see  and  admit  all  the  essential  phenomena
which  have  not  yet  been  presented  to  them.  The  truth  is,
that  although  good  cases  of  the  higher  phenomena  are  not
exactly  rare,  it  is  not  easy  to  find  cases  in  which  we  are
allowed  to  exhibit  these,  even  to  a  small  number  of  persons;
and,  moreover,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  facts,  they  can-
not be  exhibited  to  a  large  audience.  The  phenomena  of
suggestion,  in  the  conscious  state,  admit,  in  good  cases,  of
being  shown  in  public;  but  those  of  the  magnetic  sleep,  in-
cluding clairvoyance,  are  not  only  unfit  for  public  exhibi-
tion, inasmuch  as  only  those  who  are  close  to  the  sleeper
can  see  or  hear  what  he  does  or  speaks,  but  very  few  per-
sons will  agree  to  be  put  to  sleep  in  a  large  company,  and
of  these,  still  fewer  retain  their  powers  in  these  circum-
stances.

In  regard  to  clairvoyance,  I  have  never  seen  it  satisfac-
torily exhibited,  except  quite  in  private;  and  I  am  bound
to  say,  that  in  this  point  my  experience  has  simply  con-
firmed the  statements  made  by  the  best  observers. I  feel


XIV  PKEFACE.

confident  that  every  one  who  chooses  to  devote  some  time
and  labor  to  the  investigation,  may  meet  with  it,  either  in
his  own  cases,  or,  in  the  event  of  his  not  producing  this  phe-
nomenon, as  sometimes  occurs,  in  those  of  his  friends.

In  the  following  pages,  I  have  first  considered,  generally,
the  objections  commonly  brought  against  the  study  of  Ani-
mal Magnetism.  I  have  next  endeavored  to  describe  the
phenomena  in  an  order  which,  although  not  strict,  for  I
found  a  strict  arrangement  unattainable  at  present,  ap-
peared convenient ;  and  in  Part  II.  I  have  collected  a  con-
siderable number  of  facts  and  cases,  a  considerable  propor-
tion of  which  have  occurred  in  my  own  experience,  and  the
remainder  have  been  kindly  communicated  to  me  by  various
friends,  in  whose  accuracy  I  know  that  the  utmost  confi-
dence may  be  placed.

In  Part  I.,  after  describing  the  phenomena,  and  briefly
explaining  certain  useful  applications  of  our  knowledge  on
this  subject,  especially  to  medical  purposes,  and  to  the  ex-
planation of  much  that  is  obscure  in  what  is  called  Magic
or  Witchcraft,  a  great  part  of  which  appears  to  have  rested
on  a  knowledge  of  these  phenomena,  possessed  by  a  few  in
an  ignorant  age,  I  have  ventured  to  suggest,  not  as  a  fully
developed  theory,  but  simply  as  a  conceivable  idea,  an  ex-
planation of  the  modus  operandi  in  magnetic  phenomena,
especially  in  clairvoyance.  I  have  endeavored  to  show,  that
if  we  admit  the  existence  of  that  universally  diffused  power
or  influence,  whatever  be  its  true  nature,  the  reality  of
which  I  conceive  Reichenbach  to  have  demonstrated,  it  then
becomes  possible  to  conceive  the  phenomena  as  resulting
from  the  operation  of  natural  causes. These  speculations


PKEFACE.  XV

may  be  quite  erroneous;  but  my  sole  object  in  putting
them  forth,  is  to  show  that  we  may  hope  some  day  to  trace
the  natural  relations  of  Animal  Magnetism.  That  the  phe-
nomena depend  on  natural  causes,  cannot,  I  think,  be
doubted ;  and  of  all  the  known  influences,  that  of  odyle  ap-
pears to  offer  the  best  prospect  of  success  to  the  investiga-
tor. Whatever  may  be  the  essence  of  the  influence  which
causes  these  phenomena,  it  is  obvious,  that  it  has  analogies
with  heat,  light,  electricity,  and  ferro-magnetism;*  and  yet
that  it  is  not  identical  with  any  one  of  these.  Such  is  pre-
cisely the  case  with  odyle;  but  when  we  consider  the  effects
produced  on  the  human  frame  by  odyle,  we  find  the  pro-
bability greatly  increased,  that  Odyle  and  Animal  Mag-
netism are  one  and  the  same.  Still,  it  must  be  remembered,
that  even  if  this  idea  should  be  shown  hereafter  to  be  erro-
neous, the  facts  remain,  and  will  one  day  find  their  proper
place  among  the  results  of  natural  forces.

In  short,  my  object  has  been  to  draw  the  attention  of  sci-
entific men  to  the  existence  of  these  remarkable  phenomena  ;

*  I  must  here  correct  a  blunder  in  the  Letters,  in  which  I  ascribe  the  term
ferro-magnetism  to  Dr.  Faraday.  I  was  led  into  this  mistake  by  having  heard,
before  I  saw  his  recent  researches,  that  he  had  proposed  a  new  name  for  the
magnetism  of  iron,  nickel,  cobalt,  &c.  He  does  indeed  propose  to  include
under  the  general  term  Magnetism,  two  forms  of  it;  namely,  Para-magnetism
for  that  of  the  above  metals,  &c,  and  Dia-magnetism  for  the  peculiar  mag-
netism of  most  other  bodies.  It  was  the  word  Para-magnetism  which,  on
hearing  it,  I  supposed  was  Ferro-magnetism.  The  mistake  is  of  little  im-
portance, however,  as  I  understand  by  Ferro-magnetism  almost  the  same  as
Dr.  Faraday  does  by  Para-magnetism;  and  I  use  the  term  in  contradistinction
to  Vital  or  Animal  Magnetism,  or  rather  Odyle,  since,  although  analogous  to
Magnetism,  it  is  not  identical  with  it,  as  Reichenbach  has  shown.


XVI  PREFACE.

and,  so  far  from  regarding  them  as  understood,  or  attaching
any  value  to  any  attempts  I  have  made  to  suggest  explana-
tions of  them,  my  earnest  desire  is,  that  men  of  science
should  investigate  Animal  Magnetism,  just  as  they  would
any  other  class  of  natural  facts,  feeling  convinced  that  it  is
only  in  this  way  that  they  can  ever  be  at  all  understood,
and  that  if  scientific  men  ignore  their  existence,  and  refuse
to  examine  them,  they  will  nevertheless  continue  to  exist,
and  will  be  studied  by  others ;  for  they  cannot  now  be  safely
neglected.

I  have  but  briefly  alluded  to  the  history  of  Animal  Mag-
netism, and  to  its  relations  with  the  Ancient  Magic,  Divi-
nation, and  Oracles;  because  I  understood  that  this  inter-
esting department  of  the  subject  was  in  far  better  hands,
those,  namely,  of  Mr.  J.  C.  Colquhoun,  the  veteran  author
of  "Isis  Revelata,"  and  other  works.  The  student  of
Magnetism  will  anxiously  look  for  Mr.  C.'s  work.

I  cannot  conclude  without  gratefully  acknowledging  my
obligations  to  Earl  Stanhope,  to  the  Earl  of  Eglinton,  to
Sir  Walter  C.  Trevelyan,  to  Major  Buckley,  to  Dr.  J.  W.
Haddock,  to  Dr.  Macculloch,  and  to  Mr.  H.  Gr.  Atkinson,
for  the  communications  with  which  they  have  so  kindly
favored  me.  The  reader  will  find,  in  the  work  recently
published  by  Mr.  Atkinson  and  Miss  Martineau,  many
striking  facts  connected  with  Animal  Magnetism,  which  is
one  of  the  subjects  treated  of.  Mr.  Atkinson's  observa-
tions on  the  functions  of  different  parts  of  the  brain,  as  ex-
hibited in  the  magnetic  sleep,  are  of  the  highest  value,  from
that  gentleman's  great  experience,  and  intimate  knowledge
of  the  subject. I  should  have  made  use  of  them,  but  his


PREFACE.  XV11

work  did  not  appear  until  the  whole  of  the  First  Part  of
mine  was  written.  The  excellent  letter  of  the  Rev.  A.  Gil-
mour  will  speak  for  itself:  and  I  have  also  to  thank  a  large
number  of  friends  whose  names  do  not  appear.

I  would  here  particularly  point  out,  that  in  Part  II.  I
have  in  general  abstained  from  quoting  published  cases,  and
have  only  done  so  where  it  was  necessary  for  illustration,  or
where  I  could  refer  to  no  unpublished  cases  of  a  similar
kind.  It  is  obvious,  that  if  I  had  attempted  to  collect  all
the  recorded  and  well-attested  cases  of  the  higher  pheno-
mena, although  the  evidence  would  have  been  infinitely
strengthened,  the  work  would  have  attained  a  most  incon-
venient bulk.  I  have  therefore,  by  giving  chiefly  unpub-
lished cases,  endeavored  to  show  that  any  one  who  chooses,
may  obtain  evidence  of  the  facts.  And  I  must  here  repeat,
that  the  evidence  brought  forward  in  this  work,  is  as  no-
thing to  the  prodigious  mass  of  well-observed  and  well-at-
tested cases,  to  be  found  in  the  various  works  and  periodi-
cals on  the  subject,  from  the  time  of  Mesmer  to  the  present
day.  Few  people  have  studied  that  evidence,  so  as  to  have
any  accurate  idea  either  of  its  amount  or  of  its  quality,  and
my  object  will  be  gained,  if  I  can  induce  the  reader  to  make
himself  in  some  degree  acquainted  with  it.  If  this  be  done,
it  will  be  found  impossible  to  retain  the  notion,  so  prevalent
among  such  as  have  not  attended  either  to  the  practice  or  to
the  literature  of  Animal  Magnetism,  that  the  alleged  facts
are  the  result  of  imposture  or  of  delusion ;  or  to  resist  the
conviction,  which  investigation  will  confirm,  that  the  essen-
tial facts,  however  apparently  marvellous,  are  yet  true,  and
have  been  faithfully  reported. Lastly,  I  would  urge  on  the

2*


XV111  PREFACE.

reader,  the  important  consideration,  which  to  me  appears
the  turning  point  of  the  controversy,  that  all,  even  the  most
marvellous  facts  of  Magnetism,  have  occurred  spontaneously,
without  any  magnetic  process.  This  is  precisely  what  we
should  expect,  if  the  artificial  phenomena  be  true,  and  de-
pend on  natural  causes ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  un-
doubted occurrence  of  sleep-walking,  sympathy,  and  clair-
voyance, as  spontaneous  phenomena,  naturally  leads  to  the
expectation  that  they  may  be  produced  by  artificial  means.


CONTENTS.


PART  I.— General  Description  and  Analysis  oe  the
Phenomena.

PAGE

LETTER  I.

Objections  to  Animal  Magnetism  considered.  Objection  of  Incredibility
or  Impossibility.  No  natural  fact  is  fully  explained.  Objection  of
Imposture. Spontaneous  occurrence  of  the  Phenomena, - - - 25

LETTER  II.

Objection  from  Public  Failures.  Causes  of  Failure  numerous.  Influence
of  the  Bystanders.  Variety  in  the  Phenomena.  Absurd  Conditions
dictated  by  Sceptics.  Public  Tests  unsatisfactory.  Supposed  Hostility
of  the  Leaders  of  Science.  Lower  Phenomena  Admitted;  higher
Denied.  Gradual  Progress.  The  World's  Opinion.  Medical  Men
looked  to, 38

LETTER  III.

Objections  founded  on  Religion  and  Morality;  on  the  Abuses  of  Magnet-
ism. Magnetism  classed  with  Forbidden  Arts.  Said  to  lead  to  Mate-
rialism and  Infidelity.  Vagueness  of  the  Charge  of  Materialism.
Magnetism  ascribed  to  Imagination.  Said  to  be  of  no  Practical  Value.
Magnetism  must  be  Studied, 54

LETTER  IV.

Animal  Magnetism.  Names  given  to  it.  First  Effects  produced.  Sen-
sations. Process  for  causing  Magnetic  Sleep.  The  Sleep  or  Magnetic
State.  It  occurs  spontaneously  in  Sleep-walkers.  Phenomena  of  the
Sleep.  Divided  Consciousness.  Senses  Affected.  Insensibility  to
Pain, "73


XX  CONTENTS.


LETTER  V.


Control  exercised  by  the  Operator  over  the  Subject  in  various  Ways.
Striking  Expression  of  the  Feelings  in  Look  and  Gesture.  Effect  of
Music.  Truthfulness  of  the  Sleeper.  Various  Degrees  of  Suscepti-
bility. Sleep  caused  by  Silent  Will;  and  at  a  Distance.  Attraction  to-
wards the  Operator.  Effect  in  the  Waking  State  of  Commands  given
in  the  Sleep, ---88

LETTER  VI.

Sympathy.  Community  of  Sensations :  of  Emotions.  Danger  of  Rash
Experiments.  Public  Exhibitions  of  Doubtful  Advantage.  Sympathy
with  the  Bystanders.  Though t-Reading.  Sources  of  Error.  Medical
Intuition.  Sympathetic  Warnings.  Sympathies  and  Antipathies.  Ex-
istence of  a  Peculiar  Force  or  Influence, 101


LETTER  VII.

Direct  Clairvoyance  or  Lucid  Vision,  without  the  Eyes.  Vision  of  near
Objects :  through  Opaque  Bodies :  at  a  Distance.  Sympathy  and  Clair-
voyance in  regard  to  Absent  Persons. Retrovision. Introvision, - 116


LETTER  VIII.

Lucid  Prevision.  Duration  of  Sleep,  &c.  predicted.  Prediction  of  Changes
in  the  Health  or  State  of  the  Seer.  Prediction  of  Accidents,  and  of
Events  affecting  others.  Spontaneous  Clairvoyance.  Striking  Case
of  it.  Spontaneous  Retrovision  and  Prevision.  Peculiarities  of  Speech
and  of  Consciousness  in  Magnetized  Persons.  Transference  of  Senses
and  of  Pain, 132


LETTER  IX.

Animal  Magnetism,  Mesmerism,  Electro-biology,  Electro-Psychology,  and
Hypnotism,  essentially  the  same.  Phenomena  of  Suggestion  in  the
Conscious  or  Waking  State.  Dr.  Darling's  Method  and  its  Effects.  Mr.
Lewis's  Method  and  its  Results.  The  Impressible  State.  Control
exercised  by  the  Operator.  Gazing.  Mr.  Braid's  Hypnotism.  The
Author's  Experience.  Importance  of  Perseverance.  The  Subject
must  be  Studied, 151


CONTENTS.  XXI


LETTER  X.


Trance,  Natural  and  Accidental;  Magnetic.  Trance  Produced  at  Will
by  the  Subjects.  Col.  Townsend.  Faquirs.  Extasis.  Extatics  not
all  Impostors.  Luminous  Emanations.  Extasis  often  Predicted.  M.
Cahagnet's  Extatics.  Visions  of  the  Spiritual  World,  -  168

LETTER  XI.

Phreno-magnetism.  Progress  of  Phrenology.  Effects  of  Touching  the
Head  in  the  Sleep.  Variety  in  the  Phenomena.  Suggestion.  Sym-
pathy. There  are  cases  in  which  these  act,  and  others  in  which  they
do  not  act.  Phenomena  Described.  The  lower  Animals  susceptible
of  Magnetism.  Fascination  among  Animals.  Instinct.  Sympathy
of  Animals. Snail  Telegraph  founded  on  it, - - - - -  179

LETTER  XII.

Action  of  Magnets,  Crystals,  &c,  on  the  Human  Frame.  Researches  of
Reichenbach.  His  Odyle  is  identical  with  the  Magnetic  Fluid  of
Mesmer,  or  with  the  Influence  which  causes  the  Magnetic  Phenomena.
Odylic  or  Magnetic  Light.  Aurora  Borealis  artificially  Produced.
Magnetised  Water.  Useful  Applications  of  Magnetism,  Physiological,
Therapeutical,  &c.  Treatment  of  Insanity.  Magic,  Divination,  "Witch-
craft, &c.,  explained  by  Animal  Magnetism,  and  traced  to  Natural
Causes.  Apparitions.  Second  Sight  is  Waking  Clairvoyance.  Pre-
dictions of  various  kinds, 1 92

LETTER  XIII.

An  Explanation  of  the  Phenomena  attempted  or  suggested.  A  Force
(Odyle)  universally  diffused,  certainly  exists,  and  is  probably  the  me-
dium of  Sympathy  and  Lucid  Vision.  Its  Characters.  Difficulties  of
the  Subject.  Effects  of  Odyle.  Somnambulism.  Suggestion.  Sym-
pathy. Thought-reading.  Lucid  Vision.  Odylic  Emanations.  Odylic
Traces  followed  up  by  Lucid  Subjects.  Magic  and  Witchcraft.  The
Magic  Crystal,  and  Mirror,  &c,  induce  Waking  Clairvoyance.  Uni-
versal Sympathy. Lucid  Perception  of  the  Future, - - - -218

LETTER  XIV.

Concluding  Remarks.  Interest  felt  in  the  Subject  by  Men  of  Science.
Due  Limits  of  Scientific  Caution.  Practical  Hints.  Conditions  of  Suc-
cess in  Experiments.  Cause  of  Failure.  Magnetism  a  serious  thing.
Cautions  to  the  Student. Opposition  to  be  expected,  -  -  242


XX11  CONTENTS.

PAGE

PART  II. — Facts  and  Cases  ;  with  Observations.

LETTER  XV.

Phenomena  observed  in  the  Conscious  or  Waking  State.  Effects  of  Sug-
gestion on  Persons  in  an  Impressible  State.  Mr.  Lewis's  Experiments
with  and  without  Suggestion. — Cases.  Dr.  Darling's  Experiments. —
Cases.  Conscious  or  Waking  Clairvoyance,  produced  by  Passes,  or  by
Concentration.  Major  Buckley's  Method. — Cases.  The  Magic  Crys-
tal induces  Waking  Lucidity,  when  gazed  at. — Cases.  Magic  Mirror.
Magnetised  Water. Egyptian  Magic, - - - - - -257

LETTER  XVI.

Production  of  the  Magnetic  Sleep. — Cases.  Eight  out  of  nine  Persons
recently  tried  by  the  Author  thrown  into  Magnetic  Sleep.  Sleep  pro-
duced without  the  knowledge  of  the  Subject.  Suggestion  in  the  Sleep.
Phreno-Magnetism  in  the  Sleep.  Sympathetic  Clairvoyance  in  the
Sleep. — Cases.  Perception  of  Time. — Cases  ;  Sir  J.  Franklin ;  Major
Buckley's  case  of  Retrovision, - - - - - - - -281

LETTER  XVII.

Direct  Clairvoyance. — Cases.  Travelling  Clairvoyance. — Cases.  Singu-
lar Visions  of  Mr.  D.  Letters  of  two  Clergymen,  with  Cases.-  Clair-
voyance of  Alexis. Other  Cases, 312

LETTER  XVIII.

Trance.  Extasis.  Cases.  Spontaneous  Magnetic  Phenomena.  Appari-
tions. Predictions, 352

LETTER  XIX.

Curative  Agency  of  Magnetism. Concluding  Remarks,  and  Summary,  -  373


PART I


GENERAL DESCRIPTION  AND  ANALYSIS
OF  THE  PHENOMENA.


LETTERS


ON


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,


LETTER  I.

My  Dear  Friend,


It  is  with  sincere  pleasure  that  I  agree  to  your  request,
and  that  I  now  undertake,  in  my  few  moments  of  leisure,
to  give  you  some  account  of  Animal  Magnetism,  and  to  ex-
plain to  you  why  I  attach  so  little  importance,  to  the  objec-
tions frequently  urged,  by  men  of  all  classes,  against  the
results  said  to  have  been  obtained  by  those  who  have  investi-
gated the  subject,  and,  indeed,  against  the  very  study  and
investigation  of  the  phenomena  included  under  the  name  of
Animal  Magnetism.

As  these  phenomena  are  both  numerous  and  varied  in
their  character,  the  subject  is  one  of  considerable  extent,
and  I  shall  avail  myself  of  the  convenient  form  of  Letters,
in  which,  as  I  may  find  opportunity  to  write  them,  I  shall
take  up  different  parts  of  it  in  succession.

I  repeat,  that  I  do  this  with  pleasure,  because,  in  the
conversations  we  have  had  on  this  matter,  you  have  shown  an
ardent  desire  to  ascertain  the  truth,  along  with  a  very  lauda-
ble degree  of  caution  in  admitting  facts  of  so  startling  a
nature ;  you  have  shown  a  rational  incredulity,  without  any
share  of  that  irrational  scepticism  which  is  so  often  applied
to  this  as  well  as  to  all  other  new  investigations.  Had  I
ever  found  in  you  the  latter  form  of  spirit,  I  should  not,
believe  me,  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  enter  on  the  sub-
3


26  TIME  THE  BFST  CURE

ject  further.  Unless  men  are  not  only  actuated  by  the  sin-
cere love  of  truth  for  its  own  sake,  but  are  also  agreed  as
to  certain  general  laws,  applicable  to  such  matters,  they
cannot  with  profit  or  with  satisfaction  discuss  them  at  all.
Time  is  the  best,  perhaps  the  only  cure  for  that  tone  or
state  of  mind,  which  would  unhesitatingly  reject  facts,
alleged  on  respectable  testimony,  for  no  other  reason  than
that  they  appear  absurd,  incredible,  or,  in  a  vague  sense,
impossible  ;  or  because  the  observer  is  utterly  unable  to  ac-
count for  them ;  or  because  they  seem,  if  admitted,  to  con-
tradict the  notions  entertained  by  the  sceptic  on  certain
other  scientific  points;  or,  finally,  because  they  seem,  at
first  sight,  to  lead  to  conclusions  adverse  to,  or  inconsistent
with,  the  received  interpretation  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  to
tend,  in  the  opinion  of  the  sceptic,  to  results  unfavorable  to
morality.  When  we  argue  a  question  of  physical  fact  with
one  who  is  persuaded  that  such  objections,  as  applied  to
alleged  facts,  possess  either  logical  consistency  or  cogency,
no  considerations  that  we  can  adduce  have  the  slightest
effect,  so  long  as  that  fallacy  prevails  in  the  mind.  And  as
far  as  my  experience  goes,  I  should  say,  that  that  fallacy,
resting,  as  it  does,  on  estimable  feelings,  but  not  arrived  at
by  any  sound  logical  or  intellectual  process,  and  therefore
fortified  by  some  of  the  strongest  emotions  of  our  nature,
cannot  be  removed  by  mere  argument.

Time,  however,  is  more  powerful.  The  strongest  preju-
dices of  mankind  gradually  yield  to  its  influence,  especially
when  this  is  aided  by  the  constant  recurrence  of  the  alleged
facts;  which,  of  course,  must  always  happen,  when  such
alleged  facts  are  true.

Time  put  an  end  to  the  violent  opposition  which  was
offered  to  the  system  of  Copernicus,  on  the  ground  that  it
not  only  contradicted  the  evidence  of  our  senses,  according
to  which  the  sun  revolves  round  the  earth,  but  was  directly
contrary  to  the  plainest  declarations  of  Scripture.  It  was
time  which,  aided  by  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,
finally  established,  in  the  pubic  mind,  the  truth  that  the
Earth  is  spherical ;  a  truth  rejected  by  the  most  learned
professors,  on  account  of  the  inherent  absurdity  of  the  idea
of  antipodes,  its  necessary  consequence ;  of  the  impossibility
of  the  existence  of  countries  where  men  walked  head  down-
wards, and  trees  grew  downwards  in  the  air  from  their  roots


FOE  OBSTINATE  PREJUDICES.  27

in  the  soil;  and  also  on  account  of  its  inconsistency  with
the  scriptural  truth,  that  the  heavens  arc  spread  over  the
earth  like  a  tent.  Let  us  think  of  Columbus  trying  in  vain
to  convince  geographers  and  astronomers  of  the  probable
existence  of  a  western  hemisphere,  and  branded  by  them  as
an  adventurer  and  impostor,  up  to  the  day  of  his  sailing  on
his  first  voyage,  and  only  two  years  before  his  return  to
Spain,  with  his  ships  laden  with  the  gold  of  the  new  conti-
nent: let  us  think  of  his  fate,  and  we  can  easily  see  how
the  promulgator  of  true  facts  in  Animal  Magnetism  may  be
decried  and  reviled  as  a  visionary  and  a  cheat.

Time  alone  established  the  doctrine  of  the  circulation  of
the  blood,  a  doctrine  so  obviously  founded  on  the  most
easily  observable  facts,  that  we  can  hardly  now  conceive  how
it  could  be  doubted.  Many  learned  doctors  rejected  it  till
their  dying  day.  And,  at  the  present  day,  it  is  Time  which
is  gradually  but  surely  dissipating  the  prejudices  which  we
can  all  remember  to  have  seen  in  full  vigor  against  Geology,
because,  in  the  opinion  of  many  good  men,  it  contradicted
the  Mosaic  account  of  the  creation.  Men  now  begin  to
perceive  that,  the  better  geology  is  understood,  the  more
perfectly  does  it  harmonize  even  with  the  brief  account
given  by  Moses ;  and  that,  to  reconcile  them,  we  need  not
to  abandon  one  established  fact.  No  one  thinks  now  of
maintaining  that  mountain  ranges,  of  miles  in  depth,  bear-
ing, in  unmistakable  characters,  the  evidence  that  hundreds
and  thousands  of  generations  of  living  creatures  lived,  died,
and  were  embalmed  in  the  rock  during  its  formation ;  that
such  masses  of  rock  were  formed  in  their  present  shape
within  one  or  even  six  of  our  present  days.  Time  is  pro-
ducing the  conviction  that  the  facts  of  geology,  like  those
of  astronomy,  cannot  really  clash  with  scriptural  truth ;  in
short,  that  one  truth  cannot  possibly  contradict  another
truth ;  and  that,  instead  of  injuring  the  credit  of  scriptural
truth,  geology,  like  all  true  science,  serves  only  more  firmly
to  establish  it.

So  also  will  it  be  with  the  truths  of  Animal  Magnetism.
In  so  far  as  they  are,  or  shall  hereafter  be,  established  as
truths,  they  will  ultimately  be  found  not  to  interfere  ^vith,
but  to  corroborate  scriptural  truth.  And  it  is  to  Time  that
we  must  look  for  this  result,  provided  we  do  our  duty  in
ascertaining  natural  truths. Therefore,  as  I  have  said,  I


28  FACTS  NOT  TO  BE  REJECTED

should  never  think  of  trying  to  overcome,  by  argument,  the
prejudices  I  have  alluded  to,  when  they  possess  strongly
the  mind,  in  reference  to  Animal  Magnetism,  but  would
leave  the  conversion  of  such  prejudiced  persons,  like  that  of
the  Ptolemaic  Astronomers  of  old,  and  of  the  opponents  of
geology  in  modern  days,  to  the  omnipotent  arm  of  Time.

But  while  I  should  despair  of  convincing,  by  argument,
any  one  whose  mind  was  strongly  influenced  by  the  pre-
judiced feelings  above  alluded  to,  I  think  it  right,  before
entering  on  the  special  subject  of  Animal  Magnetism,  to
touch  more  fully  on  some  of  these  prejudiced  and  fallacious
objections  ;  because  they  are  frequently  started  by  persons
who  are  not  so  completely  blinded  by  prejudice  as  some  are,
and  who  take  them  up  without  due  reflection.  Such  per-
sons may  be  convinced  that  these  objections  are  essentially
groundless,  when  we  can  induce  them  to  examine  them
strictly,  and  thus  to  discover  how  illogical,  as  well  as  how
entirely  opposed  to  all  justice  and  good  feeling,  they  are.
Of  course  I  allude  here,  only  to  the  most  general  form  of
such  objections.  Specially,  I  shall  have  to  notice  them
hereafter.

First,  then :  It  is  often  said,  that  the  alleged  facts  are
obviously  incredible  and  impossible,  and  must,  therefore,  be
rejected  without  enquiry.  I  need  not  point  out  to  you,  that
this  very  common. objection  involves  a  complete  petitio  prin-
ciple or  rather,  a  "series  of  such  beggings  of  the  question.
But  I  may  nevertheless  observe,  that  it  assumes  a  complete
knowledge  on  our  part,  of  what  is,  and  is  not,  possible.
He  who  is  most  deeply  conversant  with  all  branches  of
natural  science,  and  with  the  extent  of  our  knowledge,  will,
like  Newton,  be  the  first  to  confess,  that  such  a  pretension,
on  our  part,  is  ludicrously  unfounded ;  that  he  is,  as  Newton
said  of  himself,  a  boy  gathering  pebbles  on  the  sea-shore,  and
knowing  scarce  anything  of  the  vast  ocean  of  truth  that  rolls
at  his  feet.  There  are  some  things  which  we  know  to  be  im-
possible. It  is,  for  example,  impossible  for  two  and  two  to
make  more  or  less  than  four.  It  is  impossible  for  the  three
angles  of  any  triangle  to  exceed  or  fall  short  of  two  right
angles,  or  180°.  It  is  impossible  for  a  living  or  dead  mass
of  matter  to  be  in  two  or  more  places  at  the  same  time.
But  it  will  be  found  on  examination,  that  none  of  the  facts,
alleged  to occur  in  Animal  Magnetism,  are  impossible  in


AS  IMPOSSIBLE  OR  INCREDIBLE.  29

this  sense.  They  are  only,  at  the  utmost,  exceedingly
difficult,  or  rather,  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  account  for
or  explain  them.  We  cannot  even  say  tha  it  is  impossible  to
transmute  lead  into  gold ;  for  we  are  ignorant  of  the  inti-
mate nature  of  these  metals  ;  nay  we  only  call  them  ele-
ments or  simple  bodies,  because  we  cannot  prove  them  to
be  otherwise.  And,  even  if  they  were  absolutely  simple,  it
is  not  inconceivable,  nor  absolutely  impossible^  that  they
might  be  mutually  convertible,  and  that  the  difference  in
their  properties  might  depend  on  a  mere  difference  in  the
mode  of  arrangement  of  the  ultimate  atoms,  these  last  being,
in  their  own  nature,  all  identical ;  just  as  phosphorus,  sul-
phur and  carbon,  three  non-metallic  elements  (as  far  as  we
know)  appear  to  us  each  of  them  in  at  least  two  totally  dis-
tinct forms,  differing  as  much  from  each  other  as  sulphur
does  from  phosphorus,  or  phosphorus  from  carbon,  that  is,
in  physical  external  properties.  And  yet,  while  we  cannot
say  that  the  transmutation  of  lead  to  gold  is  impossible,  no
one  has,  in  modern  times,  professed  to  transmute  lead  into
gold,  and  still  less  has  any  one  ventured  to  say  that  all  can
accomplish  that  transmutation.  Whereas,  the  alleged  facts
of  Animal  Magnetism  have  not  only  been  repeatedly  ob-
served and  produced  by  well-qualified  experimenters,  but
theyrhave  been  described  in  such  a  way  as  to  enable  all
who  choose  to  produce  them  at  pleasure.

It  is,  therefore,  in  the  highest  degree  illogical  to  reject
these  facts,  because  of  their  alleged  impossibility  or  incredi-
bility; which  can  mean  nothing  more,  than  that  we  find  it
impossible  to  account  for  them,  and  are,  therefore,  entitled
without  inquiry  to  reject  them.

This,  indeed,  is  the  second  form  of  general  objections
usually  brought  forward  against  the  alleged  facts  of  Ani-
mal Magnetism.  "How,"  it  is  said,  "do  you  account  for
them  ?  How  can  you  explain  them,  without  rejecting  all
established  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature?"  And  the
objector,  not  receiving,  at  once,  a  satisfactory  answer  to
these  enquiries,  makes  up  his  mind  to  reject  the  alleged
facts,  and  to  regard  them  as  quite  unworthy  of  investiga-
tion.

This  objection,  as  I  have  shown,  is  essentially  the  same
as  the  former.  It  is,  therefore,  the  same  as_  that  which
was  urged  by  the  opponents  of  Copernicus,  Galileo,  Colum-

3*


30  FACTS,  TO  BE  ACCOUNTED  FOR,

bus,  Newton,  and  Harvey,  as  well  as  in  numberless  other
cases.  It  proceeds  on  the  assumption,  that  we  know  all  the
laws  of  nature ;  and  that  the  observer  of  a  fact  is  bound  to
account  for  it,  before  he  can  challenge  belief  of  the  fact
itself.

I  need  hardly  point  out  how  utterly  illogical  this  is.  It
is  obvious,  that,  in  order  to  account  for  any  fact  or  series
of  facts,  we  must  first  know  and  admit  them  as  facts.  The
great  merit  of  such  men  as  Kepler,  Copernicus,  Galileo,
and  Newton,  was  that  they  made  use  of  the  facts  established
by  earlier  astronomers,  who  certainly  could  not  truly
account  for  them.  Yet  the  facts  were  admitted  by  these
great  men,  who,  by  arranging  and  comparing  them,  as  well
as  by  adding  to  them,  gradually  attained  to  those  general
laws  of  astronomy,  by  which  the  facts  are  accounted  for,
and  may  be  predicted  in  their  continual  recurrence,  with
the  utmost  accuracy.  The  discovery  of  Neptune  by  Lever-
rier,  was  the  result  of  an  attempt  to  account  for  certain
unaccountable  perturbations  in  the  motions  of  Uranus  or
other  planets,  which  perturbations  were  necessarily  ob-
served and  admitted  before  their  cause  could  be  discovered.
Why  then  should  those  who  have  observed,  with  care  and
labor,  the  most  interesting  facts  in  Animal  Magnetism,  be
called  on  to  account  for  them,  before  the  facts  are  admitted?
Why  are  these  men  to  be  subjected  to  an  ordeal  never
dreamed  of  in  other  branches  of  science  ?  There  is  evi-
dently, here,  a  fallacy ;  and  I  conceive  that  fallacy  to  be  a
lurking  opinion,  that  we  are  now  acquainted  with  all  the
natural  laws.  Hence,  whatever  cannot  be  at  once  accounted
for  in  accordance  with  our  views  of  the  general  laws  of
nature,  we  are  apt  to  hold  as  impossible,  or  at  least  un-
worthy of  attention.

But  I  think  you  will  find,  as  we  proceed,  that  there  is
nothing  in  Animal  Magnetism  at  all  inconsistent  with,  or
contrary  to,  the  well-established  physical  laws  admitted  by
philosophers.  It  may  be  that  these  facts  will  hereafter  lead
us  to  new  laws,  but  in  order  to  attain  to  these,  the  facts
must  be  studied ;  and  it  is  at  least  equally  probable,  that
they  may  one  day  be  ranged  under  the  known  laws ;  and
there  is  no  reason  whatever,  so  far  as  I  know,  to  anticipate
that  they  will  contradict  the  established  laws  of  physical
science. Even  if  they  appeared  to  do  so,  however,  these


MUST  BE  KNOWN  AND  STUDIED.  31

facts  would  only  be  in  the  same  position  as  were  the  great
facts  of  astronomy  when  first  announced.  Those  who  re-
ject the  facts  of  Animal  Magnetism  at  the  present  day,
because  they  seem  to  them  inconsistent  with  natural  laws,
are  only  imitating  the  conduct  of  those  learned  men  who
refused  to  look  at  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  through  the  tele-
scope of  Galileo.  The  wilful  blindness  of  these  ancient
sages,  however,  has  not  annihilated  the  fact  of  the  exist-
ence and  the  revolutions  of  those  satellites ;  neither  will  the
rejection  of  the  facts  of  Animal  Magnetism  interfere  with
the  occurrence  of  these  facts,  which,  to  those  who  avail
themselves  of  the  telescope  of  observation,  will  continue  to
exhibit  themselves  till  some  Newton  arises  to  account  for
them.

I  must  observe,  further,  that  many  have  very  erroneous
ideas  of  the  extent  to  which  even  those  admitted  facts,  for
example,  the  facts  of  astronomy,  which  are  best  understood,
are  really  explained  or  accounted  for  by  the  admitted  laws
of  nature.

Every  one  knows  that  one  of  the  most  important  of  these
laws,  in  reference  to  astronomy,  is  the  law  of  gravitation.
Now  this  law  assumes  that  there  exists  between  all  masses
of  matter  in  the  universe,  a  mutual  attraction,  in  conse-
quence of  which  they  tend  towards  each  other  with  a  force
which  varies  directly  as  their  mass  and  inversely  as  the
square  of  the  distance  between  them.  Assuming  this,  all
the  facts  are  explained ;  and  it  is  quite  logical  to  conclude,
that  the  assumption  which  explains  all  the  facts,  and  enables
us  even  to  predict  them,  is  true.  But  does  this  law  of  the
force  of  gravitation,  the  law  according  to  which  it  varies,
account  for  or  explain  the  fact  of  gravitation?  Why  do
two  masses  of  matter  tend  towards  each  other?  Why  do
they  do  so  with  a  force  varying  as  above  described  ?  The
only  answer  to  this  question  is,  that  there  is  an  attraction
between  them,  that  they  mutually  attract  each  other.  But
this,  it  will  be  perceived,  is  merely  stating,  in  other  words,
the  fact  itself,  and  not  the  cause  of  it.  The  law  of  gravita-
tion laid  down  by  Newton,  when  once  admitted,  explains  or
accounts  for  the  facts  of  gravitation,  but  does  not  touch  the
cause  of  them.  It  shows  the  shape  and  limits  of  the  force,
but  leaves  us  in  the  dark  as  to  its  real  nature.  And  the
same  is  true  of  all  natural  laws ;  of  the  laws  of  heat,  light,


32  HYSTERIA  AND  SIMULATION

electricity, galvanism, magnetism proper, chemical ac-
tion, &c.

In  like  manner,  if,  as  is  most  probable,  we  shall  never
succeed  in  detecting  the  ultimate  cause  on  which  the  facts
of  Animal  Magnetism  depend,  we  may  yet,  by  diligent  ob-
servation of  these  facts,  and  by  reflection  on  them,  discover
the  laws  which  regulate  them,  and  thus  explain  or  account
for  the  facts,  in  the  same  sense  and  in  the  same  degree,  as
we  explain  or  account  for  the  facts  of  astronomy,  electricity,
heat,  light,  and  magnetism  proper;  in  none  of  which  cases
are  we  able  to  point  out  the  ultimate  cause  or  the  true  es-
sence of  the  phenomena.  Nor  need  we  fear  that  the  laws
of  Animal  Magnetism,  once  discovered,  shall  contradict  or
clash  with  those  already  ascertained  in  other  branches  of
science.

Thirdly,  it  is  often  objected,  that  the  facts  of  Animal
Magnetism  are  observed  only,  or  chiefly,  in  nervous,  hyste-
rical persons,  commonly  females,  on  whose  statements  no
reliance  can  be  placed.  In  answer  to  this  objection,  I  would
observe,  that  even  if  the  truth  were  as  here  stated,  it  would
not  constitute  a  valid  objection  to  facts  ascertained  with  due
care  and  caution.  Many  of  the  facts  of  medicine  are  thus
obtained ;  and  the  argument  goes  at  most  to  show,  that  such
observations  have  difficulties  peculiar  to  themselves.  But  it
cannot  be  maintained,  least  of  all  by  medical  men,  that  these
difficulties  are  insurmountable,  and  they  ought  only  to  stimu-
late us  to  increased  care  in  observing.  Farther,  a  fact  is  not
the  less  a  fact,  because  it  occurs  as  a  symptom  of  nervous  or
hysterical  disease.  Such  facts,  like  all  others,  must  be
studied,  and  it  is  only  by  studying  them  that  we  can  ascer-
tain how  far  they  are  consistent  with  each  other,  and  with
other  facts.  Many  of  them  admit  of  verification  indepen-
dently of  the  patients  or  subjects,  and  do  not  rest  on  their
testimony ;  as,  for  example,  cataleptic  rigidity.

.  But  the  objection,  in  point  of  fact,  is  not  well  founded.
It  is  probable  that  the  facts,  or  some  of  the  facts  of  Animal
Magnetism,  may  have  been  first  noticed  in  such  cases,  be-
cause a  nervous  hysterical  state  of  the  system  renders  the
subject  more  susceptible,  in  general,  to  the  magnetic  influ-
ences. But  all  who  have  attended  even  slightly  to  these
phenomena,  must  know  that  magnetic  phenomena  are  daily
produced  on  persons  in  health  as  perfect  as  is  known  to  hu-


DO  NOT  EXPLAIN  THE  FACTS.  33

inanity,  and  in  males  as  easily  and  completely  as  in  females.
This  objection  must,  therefore  be  relinquished.

Fourthly,  it  is  very  often  said,  and  that  by  persons  from
whom  better  things  might  be  expected,  that  the  subjects  of
magnetic  operations  simulate  or  act  the  phenomena;  in  other
words,  that  they  are  impostors,  and  that  the  observers  are
at  least  their  dupes,  if  not  their  accomplices.  I  have  often
heard  all  these  charges  made,  without  a  shadow  of  reason,
save  the  strangeness  of  the  phenomena.  An  educated  per-
son who  saw  some  of  these  strange  phenomena  exhibited  a
few  days  ago  on  a  young  man,  of  whom  he  knew  nothing,
by  a  mesmerist,  of  whom  he  knew  only  that  he  was  con-
sidered by  those  who  knew  him  to  be  an  honest  man,  told
me  he  was  sure  the  youth  had  been  bribed  by  the  mesmerist
to  act  what  he  saw.  And  this,  although  a  somewhat  ex-
treme case,  is  only  a  specimen  of  the  line  of  argument  pur-
sued by  many  educated  persons.

In  answer  to  such  assertions,  I  would  observe,  first,  that
nothing  can  justify  us  in  ascribing  dishonesty  or  imposture
to  persons  of  otherwise  blameless  character,  merely  because
they  exhibit  to  us  phenomena  which  we  cannot  understand
or  imagine  to  be  possible.  The  evidence  of  persons  of  bad
character  ought  to  be  entirely  rejected,  and  the  evidence  of
all  persons  ought  to  be  carefully  sifted ;  but  it  is  unjust  and
cruel,  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  immoral,  to  brand  with  the
charge  of  deceit,  without  enquiry  into  the  truth,  persons
whose  character,  so  far  as  we  know,  is  irreproachable.

Again,  I  would  point  out,  that  many  of  the  phenomena
cannot  be  simulated  at  all.  Such  are,  the  acceleration  of
the  pulse,  while  its  strength  diminishes ;  the  insensibility  to
light,  and  the  fixed  state  of  the  pupil,  and  generally  the  state
of  the  eye  during  magnetic  sleep  ;  the  very  common  and  ut-
ter insensibility  of  the  ear  to  all  sounds,  save  the  voice  of
the  magnetiser ;  the  complete  insensibility  to  pain,  seen  in
certain  stages ;  and  cataleptic  rigidity  of  the  limbs ;  besides
many  others.  It  is  easy,  by  a  little  investigation,  to  become
satisfied  of  these  phenomena.

Further,  the  acting,  if  acting  it  be,  in  reference  to  other
phenomena,  is  so  perfect  and  beautiful,  so  true  to  nature,
that,  on  the  assumption  of  imposture,  we  must  ascribe  to
every  apprentice  boy  or  girl,  educated  or  not,  mimic  powers
of  the  very  highest  order,  such  as  would  do  honor  even  to  a


34  THE  CHARGE  OF  IMPOSTURE

Garrick  or  a  Siddons.  This  would  be,  in  my  opinion,  far
more  difficult  to  believe  than  that  the  phenomena  were
genuine.

Besides,  there  is,  in  the  experiments  made  in  the  privacy
of  the  philosopher's  cabinet,  as  all  experiments  on  which  we
intend  to  found  conclusions  ought  to  be  made,  absolutely  no
motive  for  simulation  or  acting.  I  have  seen  the  most  beau-
tiful phenomena  in  private ;  nay,  I  have  often  produced  them,
in  persons  whom  no  consideration,  had  it  been  tried,  could
have  induced  to  deviate  from  strict  truth ;  and  I  have  no
reason  to  suppose  that  others  could  have  been  at  all  more
likely  to  deceive,  in  whom  these  phenomena  have  been  thou-
sands of  times  observed.  It  often  happens,  that  magnetism
is  used  to  relieve  pain,  much  oftener  than  is  generally  known
or  avowed;  and  in  such  cases,  where  the  patient  has  perhaps
to  be  magnetised  20,  50,  100,  or  even  500  times,  certain
phenomena,  not  at  all  looked  for,  nay,  not  wished  for  when
they  do  come,  present  themselves.  The  operator  is  com-
monly called  on  by  the  patient  to  observe  them,  and  both  are
surprised  to  see  them.  In  many  cases,  also,  where  the  mag-
netic sleep  and  higher  phenomena  have  occurred,  the  opera-
tor has  had  to  continue  the  troublesome  process  of  passes,
&c.  for  20,  50,  100,  or  500  successive  days,  before  he  has
obtained  the  desired  result,  nay,  often  before  he  has  obtain-
ed any  distinct  effect  at  all.  I  need  not  say  how  utterly  ir-
reconcileable  all  this  is  with  the  notion  of  imposture.

I  would  here  particularly  point  out  to  you  the  great  force
of  the  evidence  obtained  in  favor  of  the  genuine  nature  of
the  phenomena,  and  the  sincerity  of  both  operator  and  sub-
ject, by  closely  watching,  in  private  of  course,  the  process
of  inducing  the  magnetic  sleep  for  the  first  time,  whether  it
be  done  by  a  practiced  operator  or  by  yourself,  for  example.
The  appearances  exhibited  as  the  operation  proceeds,  the
change  in  the  eyes  as  sleep  begins  to  approach,  the  remark-
able alteration  in  the  expression  of  the  countenance,  in  the
voice,  and  in  the  manner  of  the  sleeper,  not  to  speak  of  his
hearing  and  answering  without  waking  ;  and,  finally,  his  ut-
ter unconsciousness,  when  awakened,  of  all  that  has  passed,
but  especially  the  changes  above  specified,  and  the  whole
gesture  and  natural  language  of  the  sleeper  ; — these  things
are  amply  sufficient,  in  the  case  of  an  utter  stranger,  to


UNJUSTIFIABLE  AND  GROUNDLESS.  35

banish  all  idea  of  simulation  or  deception  ;  for  which,  in  the
case  of  a  person  known  to  us,  there  is,  besides,  no  room.

The  cry  of  imposture  is  no  new  one.  It  was  raised
against  Columbus;  it  was  raised,  and  fiercely  too,  against
Bruce,  when  he  detailed  his  Abyssinian  discoveries,  because
these  appeared  impossible  to  the  critics.  It  is  well  known
how  deeply  Bruce,  whose  character  was  previously  unim-
peached,  felt  the  imputation  of  falsehood.  He  retired  to
his  country-seat,  and,  with  a  bitter  sense  of  injustice,  await-
ed the  award  of  Time.  It  came — whether  too  late  for  him
I  know  not,  but  subsequent  discoverers  have  confirmed  the
most  startling  of  his  statements.  I  do  not  believe  that  any
man  will  defend  the  conduct  of  his  calumniators ;  but  many
pursue  the  same  course,  with  as  little  justification,  in  refer-
ence to  persons  who  describe  the  phenomena  of  Animal
Magnetism.

It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  the  attempt  to  deceive  should
be  made  in  magnetic  experiments,  especially  when  the  sub-
ject hopes  either  to  gain  money  or  to  excite  public  wonder
by  his  exhibition.  This  is  possible,  just  as  it  is  possible  for
a  traveller,  from  similar  motives,  to  give  a  false  account  of
a  remote  country.  But  such  attempts  are  easily  detected
by  those  who  have  studied  the  subject,  and  the  objection
cannot  apply  to  the  hundreds  of  cases  daily  occurring  in
our  own  families,  where  neither  these  motives  nor  any  other
motive  for  deception  can  be  supposed  to  operate.  It  is
right  to  detect  and  expose  all  cheats,  in  Magnetism  as  in
other  things ;  but  that  is  no  reason  for  rejecting  alleged
facts  without  enquiry.

Moreover,  when  we  reflect  on  the  large  number  of  ob-
servers who,  since  the  time  of  Mesmer,  and  even  before
that  period,  have  observed  and  recorded  facts  in  Animal
Magnetism,  and  on  the  still  greater  number  of  persons  in
whom  the  phenomena  have  been  observed  or  produced,  most
of  them  persons  of  altogether  blameless  character,  we  shall
find  it  impossible  to  believe  that  all  of  the  latter  class  were
or  could  be  impostors,  and  all  of  the  former  either  dupes  or
impostors ;  more  especially  when  we  remember  that  every
observer  has  described  his  methods  and  invited  repetition
and  testing  of  his  experiments,  and  that  the  great  majority
of  subjects  had  no  conceivable  motive  for  deceit.  I  do  not
hesitate  to  say  that  these  considerations  are  sufficient  to  put


36  OBJECTIONS  DRAWN  FROM

an  end,  in  the  mind  of  a  candid  enquirer,  to  all  idea  of  im-
posture as  a  probable  or  frequent  occurrence,  while  he  may
admit  its  possibility,  as  in  all  other  branches  of  human
knowledge,  none  of  which  are  exempt  from  the  chance  of
falling  into  the  hands  of  bad  or  deceitful  men.  To  believe
that  all  who  have  exhibited  in  their  own  persons  the  facts
of  Animal  Magnetism  have  been  impostors,  and  all  the  ob-
servers, at  the  best,  duped  by  these  impostors,  makes  an
infinitely  more  startling  demand  on  our  credulity  than  does
faith  in  the  most  apparently  marvellous  of  the  alleged  phe-
nomena ;  and  it  is  truly  worthy  of  remark  that  many  good
and  estimable  persons,  who  reject  the  latter  phenomena
with  disdain,  and  regard  those  who  admit  them,  or  even
enquire  into  them,  as  the  victims  of  a  weak  credulity  and
of  love  of  the  wonderful,  should  exhibit  in  their  own  per-
sons a  credulity  so  enormous  as  is  required  for  believing
that  imposture  has  not  only  been  practised  by  all  magnetic
subjects,  but  has  also  been  successfully  practised  on  men
of  the  greatest  acuteness  and  scientific  caution.

It  may  be  proper  in  this  place  also  to  remark,  although  I
shall  have  to  return  to  it,  that  all  the  phenomena,  without
exception,  of  Animal  Magnetism,  have  been  often  observed
and  recorded  as  occurring  spontaneously,  without  any  arti-
ficial process  whatever.  Every  one  knows  that  catalepsy,
and  cataleptic  rigidity  of  certain  muscles,  is  of  very  frequent
occurrence  as  a  natural  symptom  in  certain  diseases.  The
same  may  be  said  of  preternatural  acuteness  of  the  senses ;
of  utter  insensibility,  for  the  time,  to  sounds,  tonight,  to
smell,  to  taste,  and  even  to  pain ;  of  divided  consciousness ;
of  the  state  of  somnambulism  or  sleep-walking,  more  properly
sleep-waking,  with  its  multitudinously  attested  train  of  strange
phenomena,  such  as  walking  securely  in  the  dark,  and  with
closed  eyes  ;  writing,  and  writing  well,  in  the  same  condi-
tions ;  seeing,  remembering,  and  finding  objects  sought  for
in  vain  during  the  waking  hours,  &c.  &c. ;  and  lastly,  of  even
clairvoyance,  that  stumbling-block  to  the  sceptic.  I  shall
have  to  mention,  hereafter,  facts  establishing  the  existence
of  spontaneous  clairvoyance ;  and  the  spontaneous  occur-
rence of  trance  or  extasis,  the  highest  stage  of  Animal  Mag-
netism, is  quite  notorious.

Now,  since  all  these  things  occur  naturally,  is  it  logical
to  doubt  that  they  may  occur  when  artificial  means  are  em-


PULLIC  FAILURES.  37

ployed  to  produce  them?  or  is  it  just,  when  the  fact  is  al-
leged by  trustworthy,  or  even  by  unknown  observers,  to
accuse  them  or  their  subjects  of  imposture  ?  Should  not  the
natural  occurrence  of  such  facts,  on  the  contrary,  lead  us  to
anticipate  their  production  by  artificial  means  ?

I  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  objection  of  imposture
must  be  relinquished,  as  at  most  applicable  to  a  small  frac-
tion of  cases,  and  not  at  all  to  observations  made  privately
and  with  due  care.

Fifthly :  it  is  objected,  that,  in  the  attempts  to  exhibit
these  phenomena  in  public,  complete  failure  has  often  taken
place.  Those  who  see  the  failure,  at  once  jump  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  whole  thing  is  without  foundation  ;  and  they
frequently  brand  the  party  who  fails  as  an  impostor  and
cheat.  Now,  a  person  who  undertakes,  with  perfect  confi-
dence, as  some  have  done,  to  exhibit  in  public  the  highest
and  most  delicate  magnetic  phenomena,  does  that  which  is
unjustifiable,  and  he  is  justly  visited  with  the  displeasure  of
those  whom  he  has  disappointed,  more  especially  if  he  has
made  the  exhibition  a  means  of  pecuniary  advantage  to  him-
self. But  it  is  surely  going  too  far  to  conclude,  that  the
phenomena  which  he  fails  to  produce  are,  when  exhibited,
the  results  of  fraud ;  for,  if  an  impostor,  he  would  never,
for  his  own  sake,  fail  in  producing  what  he  promised,  how-
ever ill  he  might  stand  the  testing  which  might  ensue.  On
the  contrary,  frequent  failures  are,  to  a  great  extent,  a  proof
of  his  bona  fides.

It  is  also  utterly  illogical  to  reason  that  because  of  fail-
ures, the  alleged  facts  are  false.  Were  any  man  to  fail  in
the  simple  experiment  of  dipping  his  finger,  without  injury,
into  red-hot  melted  lead,  and  to  burn  himself  severely,  we
should  not  be  justified  in  denying  the  fact  that  it  may  be  done
with  impunity.  Nay,  a  thousand  failures  could  only  prove,
that  we  did  not  perform,  or  know  how  to  perform,  the  experi-
ment properly ;  that  we  did  not  know,  or  did  not  attend  to,
the  conditions  necessary  to  success ;  and  "one  succesful  trial
would  out-weigh  them  all.  Precisely  so  is  it  with  Animal
Magnetism.  The  causes  of  failure,  from  the  nature  of  the
subject,  are  very  numerous,  and  many  of  them  but  little
understood ;  indeed  they  are  so  numerous,  that  no  one,  who
has  really  studied  the  phenomena  with  care,  would  be  so
4


38  CAUSES  OF  FAILURE

rash,  as  to  promise  uniform  or  certain  success ;  least  of  all,
in  regard  to  the  higher  stages  of  magnetism.  But  I  must
reserve  the  consideration  of  this  matter  for  another  Letter.


LETTER  II.

I  now  proceed  to  consider,  generally,  the  causes  of  failure
in  magnetic  experiments,  especially  when  made  in  public ;
and  to  show  that  such  failures,  if  they  prove  any  thing,
prove  the  truth  and  reality  of  Animal  Magnetism.

In  the  first  place:  The  state  of  the  subject  is  variable,
so  that  what  may  be  easily  done  to-day,  may  be  found  im-
possible, or  at  least  very  difficult,  to-morrow.  It  is  hardly
necessary  to  dwell  on  so  obvious  a  truth  as  the  variable
state  of  the  nervous  system  in  man.  Ask  the  poet  whether
he  find  it  at  all  times  equally  easy  to  string  words  and
rhymes  together ;  ask  the  orator,  whether  he  be  not  subject
to  differences  of  mood,  deeply  affecting  the  character  of
his  public  appearances ;  ask  any  man,  whether  he  have  not
often  observed  in  himself,  or  in  his  family  circle,  very
marked  variations  in  temper,  humor,  or  aptitude  for  work.
How  is  it  that  equanimity  is  so  rare  and  so  admired  a
quality?  The  influences  which  affect  our  nervous  system,
and  through  it,  the  mind,  are  so  numerous,  and  so  little
known,  that  we  know  not  how  to  ward  off  their  effects.
ISTow  the  same  is  true  of  magnetic  subjects.  To-day  they
maybe  lucid  and  willing;  to-morrow  dull,  or  unwilling  to
try.  At  one  time  they  may  exhibit  one  phenomenon,  and
at  another  fall  short  of  that,  and  present  only  a  different
one.  Every  one  who  has  experience  of  the  matter  knows
this ;  yet  exhibitors,  carried  away  by  general  success,  per-
haps in  private,  err  in  undertaking  to  perform,  on  any  given
occasion,  exactly  what  they  have  been  able  to  do,  perhaps
only  once,  previously.

Thus  it  often  happens  that  an  experiment,  which  has  suc-
ceeded in  private,  fails  in  public.  The  subject  was  first
tried  by  the  operator,  no  one  else  being  present ;  and  the
latter  is  so  rash  as  to  promise  the  same  results  when  the


IN  MAGNETIC  EXPERIMENTS.  39

subject,  possibly  a  most  sensitive  one,  is  surrounded  by  an
eager  crowd,  many  of  them  touching  him,  and  all,  involun-
tarily, exerting  an  influence  on  him,  if  there  be  any  truth
in  Animal  Magnetism.

Now,  one  of  the  most  uniformly  observed  and  recorded
facts  of  Animal  Magnetism,  is  that  of  the  disturbance  pro-
duced by  cross  magnetism,  that  is,  by  the  interference  of
the  influence  of  more  than  the  operator.  This  often  amounts
to  utter  extinction  of  all  the  higher  powers,  and  is  frequently
so  intense  as  to  cause  the  most  intolerable  sensations,  and
even  serious  illness,  to  the  subject.  I  consider  it,  as  a
general  rule,  absurd  to  expect  anything  but  failure  when
the  spectators  crowd,  as  they  usually  do,  about  the  subject;
and  that  failure  does  not  always  ensue,  proves  only  that
some  subjects  are  less  sensitive  to  this  cause  of  disturbance
than  others.

Again,  it  is  by  no  means  a  matter  of  indifference,  what
is  the  frame  of  mind  of  the  spectators,  especially  of  those
nearest  to  the  patient.  Their  whole  attention  is  fixed  on
him,  and,  if  the  influence  of  one  human  being  on  another
be  a  fact,  they  must  affect  him.  Now  if,  as  always  happens
in  public  meetings,  some  of  the  spectators  be  already
(whether  justly  or  logically,  since  they  have  made  no  en-
quiry, is  another  question)  satisfied  that  the  subject  is  an,
impostor,  this  feeling  will,  nay  must,  if  he  be  very  suscepti-
ble, most  injuriously  affect  him.  The  presence  of  one  such
person  will  often  deprive  a  lucid  subject  of  his  lucidity;
nay,  this  may  occur  from  the  presence  of  one,  who,  without
being  so  prejudiced,  exerts,  without  knowing  it,  an  influence
on  the  subject  stronger  than  that  of  his  magnetiser,  which
is  thus  neutralized.  All  this  has  often  been  stated  by  au-
thors on  Animal  Magnetism,  and  every  prudent  exhibitor
will  bear  it  in  mind,  and  will  never  undertake  to  do  more
than  to  exhibit  those  powers  which  his  subject  may  on  that
occasion  be  found  to  possess.

Deleuze  records  a  striking  case,  in  which  a  gentleman
went  to  visit  a  clairvoyant,  with  the  firm  conviction  that  his
clairvoyance  was  sheer  imposture,  but  took  care  not  to  ex-
press that  unfavorable  opinion  to  any  of  the  persons  present.
When,  however,  he  was  placed  en  rapport  with  the  subject,
the  latter  at  once  told  him  what  was  passing  in  his  mind,
adding  that,  so  long  as  he  continued  in  that  frame  of  thought,


40  GREAT  VARIETY  IN  THE

he,  the  subject,  could  not  exhibit  any  power,  in  consequence
of  the  unfavorable  influence  thus  exerted.  The  sceptic  was
much  struck  with  the  fact  that  his  secret  thoughts  had  thus
been  read,  which  convinced  him  that  imposture  was  not  suf-
ficient to  explain  the  results ;  and,  returning  in  a  more
rational  and  just  temper,  he  not  only  became  convinced  of
the  genuine  powers  possessed  J)y  the  subject,  but  was  led
himself  to  study  the  phenomena,  and  afterwards  distin-
guished himself  as  a  mesmerist.

I  have  been  informed,  on  perfectly  good  authority,  of  the
case  of  a  lady,  highly  susceptible  to  the  magnetic  influence,
who  could  never  be  magnetised  if  a  certain  person  were  pre-
sent ;  and  I  know  another  lady,  who  is  easily  and  pleasantly
magnetised  by  one  person,  while  the  magnetic  influence  of  a
third  individual  is  to  her  insupportable.

How  great,  then,  must  be  the  chance  of  disturbance,  in
very  sensitive  subjects,  when  surrounded  by  an  excited  crowd
of  spectators,  many  of  them  in  close  proximity,  and  some
of  these  entertaining,  perhaps  even  expressing,  the  most  in-
sulting doubts  of  their  honesty  and  sincerity.  Such  dis-
turbance is  to  be  looked  for,  on  the  showing  of  all  authors
of  experience,  if  magnetism  be  a  genuine  fact ;  and  the  very
occurrence  of  some  failures  in  public  from  such  causes,  is
itself  a  strong  proof  of  one  of  the  facts  alleged,  namely,
of  the  power  of  sympathizing  with  the  unexpressed  thoughts
and  feelings  of  others,  or  of  thought-reading,  as  it  is  called.

Another  class  of  failures  depends  on  a  different  cause  ;  I
mean,  the  prevailing  fallacy,  that  all  cases  of  Animal  Mag-
netism, in  their  different  stages,  exhibit  precisely  the  same
phenomena  ;  that  is,  that  if  we  have  seen,  or  read  of,  a  case,
in  which  the  various  stages  of  the  state  of  somnambulism  have
each  exhibited  the  principal  phenomena  peculiar  to  such
stage,  the  next  case  or  cases  must,  of  necessity,  present  the
same  facts,  and  in  the  same  order.  This  fallacy  is  nearly
universal,  and  the  consequence  is,  that  many  persons,  who
have  seen,  or  heard  of,  for  example,  thought-reading,  or
clairvoyance  in  any  other  form,  in  one  case,  cannot  imagine
that  these  phenomena  may  be  absent  in  another.  They  cla-
mor for  what  they  have  seen  before  ;  the  exhibitor  rashly
tries  to  produce  it;  but  the  subject  is  an  inferior  one,  or  in
a  different  stage,  and  entirely  fails  to  realize  the  expecta-
tions  so ignorantly formed. This, however, would be


MAGNETIC  PHENOMENA.  41

nothing,  were  it  not  that  the  failure  is  seized  on  by  many  as
a  proof  of  imposture.  It  proves,  however,  only  this,  that
the  spectators  were  mistaken  in  expecting  the  same  results
in  every  case,  and  the  exhibitor  entirely  wrong  in  attempt-
ing to  gratify  them.  Every  case  must  be  studied  for  itself,
and,  although  certain  general  laws  apply  to  all  cases,  yet
the  variety  in  the  details,  both  as  to  their  nature  and  degree,
is  infinite.

Not  only  do  different  subjects  differ  in  the  nature  of  the
phenomena  they  exhibit,  as,  for  example,  when  they  can
only  be  got  into  different  stages  of  the  somnambulistic  state,
each  persisting  in  his  own  stage,  but,  even  in  the  phenomena
of  one  stage  alone,  the  same  variety  is  observed.  Thus,  in
the  lucid  ,or  clairvoyant  stage  or  state,  some  are  utterly  in-
sensible to  all  sounds  save  the  voice  of  their  magnetiser ;
others  hear  every  sound,  often  with  increased  acuteness.
Some  will  only  answer  the  magnetiser,  or  those  placed  by
him  en  rapport  with  them  ;  others  will  answer  questions  put
by  any  one.  Some  retain  their  sense  of  identity,  others
lose  it.  Some  require  contact  with  the  person  or  thing  to
be  observed,  others  do  not.  Some  see  their  own  frame,  in
all  its  minutest  details,  as  well  as  the  bodily  state  of  other
persons ;  others  see  nothing  of  all  this.  Some  possess  vi-
sion at  a  distance  ;  others  are  devoid  of  it.  Some  can  read
closed  letters,  or  letters  shut  up  in  a  box,  or  mottoes  in-
closed in  nuts  ;  others  fail  entirely  to  do  this,  while  they  can
perhaps  read  our  inmost  thoughts,  a  feat  which,  possibly  the
letter-readers  may  not  be  able  to  accomplish.

Such  is  a  small  sample  of  the  variety  in  one  of  the  pheno-
mena alone.  I  shall  have  to  mention  many  more  proofs  of
it  hereafter.  But,  in  these  general  observations,  enough
has  been  said  to  show  the  absurdity  of  expecting  the  same
results  in  all  cases,  and  of  regarding  failures  to  gratify  the
extravagant  and  unreasonable  expectations  which  result  from
that  fallacy,  as  proofs  of  imposture,  instead  of  looking  upon
them  as  evidences  of  our  own  ignorance  of  the  character  of
the  facts  to  be  investigated.

But  there  is  another  kind  of  failure,  besides  those  already
mentioned.  This  kind  of  failure  depends  on  the  ignorance
of  the  true  laws  and  limits  of  experimental  investigation,  on
the  part  both  of  the  sceptical  spectators,  and  of  the  exhi-
bitor. The  latter  produces,  we  shall  suppose,  a  subject,  who

4*


42  SCEPTICS  OFTEN  DICTATE

exhibits  some  of  the  usual  forms  of  clairvoyance.  The
former  propose  to  test  the  powers  of  the  subject,  while  they
frequently  expect  and  hope,  that  he  will  not  be  able  to  stand
the  test.  If,  for  example,  the  subject  has  been  found  to
possess  the  power  of  perceiving  with  closed  eyes  what  goes
on  behind  him,  or  the  contents  of  a  closed  or  sealed  box ;
the  sceptics,  to  test  him,  as  they  call  it,  insist  that  his  eyes
shall  not  only  be  closed,  but  bandaged ;  not  only  simply
bandaged,  but  doubly  or  trebly,  while  perhaps  plugs  of  cot-
ton-wool are  inserted  between  the  bandages  and  the  cheek-
bone. Perhaps  also,  below  the  bandage,  a  hard  body  is  laid
over  the  eyes.  Observe,  that  all  these  precautions  generally
proceed  from  a  conviction  that  the  subject  deceitfully  uses
his  eyes,  while  pretending  to  keep  them  shut.  ,  Observe,
further,  that  the  experiment  has  probably  never  been  tried,
in  this  form,  by  the  subject ;  and  finally,  that  he  is  sur-
rounded by  persons,  eager,  as  I  have  often  seen,  to  convict
him  of  deceit.  Under  these  circumstances,  which,  if  there
be  any  truth  in  Animal  Magnetism,  must  be  most  injurious
to  the  powers  of  a  susceptible  or  sensitive  subject,  the  ex-
hibitor, whether  from  rashness  or  ignorance,  but  certainly
from  confidence  in  what  he  knows  to  be  true,  and  in  good
faith,  accepts  the  proposed  test.  But  the  experiment,  per-
haps, totally  fails,  as  any  one  acquainted  with  the  matter
might  have  known  to  be  highly  probable.  But  what  does
the  failure  prove?  Simply,  in  the  first  place,  that,  under
these  circumstances,  the  subject  cannot  see  or  read  as  before.
But,  so  far  as  *I  know,  no  well-informed  writer  on  Animal
Magnetism  ever  maintained  that,  in  any  given  case,  success
was  certain,  a  priori,  under  such  conditions.  On  the  con-
trary, is  it  not  obvious  to  common  sense,  that  the  discomfort
of  such  an  operation,  combined  with  the  unfavorable  moral
impression  conveyed  by  it,  must  operate  most  disadvan-
tageously  on  him  ?  Moreover,  by  what  right  does  the  ope-
rator undertake  that  his  subject  shall  see  or  perceive,  through
a  hard  body,  three  handkerchiefs,  and  cotton  plugs,  before
he  has  tried  the  experiment  ?  And  by  what  right  do  the
sceptics  dictate  conditions,  under  which  nature  must  exhibit
a  fact,  before  they  will  believe  it  ?  Both  parties  are  obvi-
ously misled  by  theory.  The  operator,  who  flatters  himself
that  he  knows  how  the  subject  perceives  objects  with  closed
eyes,  sees,  in  the  bandages,  &c,  no  obstacle  to  the  subject's


VERY  ABSURD  CONDITIONS.  43

perception;  while  the  sceptics  forget,  that,  while  we  may
modify,  as  we  please,  the  conditions  of  an  experiment,  it  is
easy  to  do  so  in  such  a  way  as  to  prevent  the  result,  so  long
as  the  laws  of  the  phenomena  are  unknown.  Both  parties
are  wrong.  They  should  begin  by  studying  the  fact,  as  pre-
sented by  nature,  and  then,  by  degrees,  alter  the  conditions
till  they  ascertain  which  are  essential,  which  accidental.
But  no  one  is  entitled  to  say,  because,  under  certain  condi-
tions, a  certain  power  fails  to  manifest  itself,  that  therefore
it  cannot  occur  under  other  and  more  natural  conditions.
To  suppose,  that  unless  the  eyes  are  bandaged,  we  cannot
ascertain  whether  they  are  used  or  not,  would  argue  a  po-
verty of  resources  which  would  give  but  a  mean  idea  of  the
qualifications  of  him  who  thus  decides  for  experimental  re-
search.

Nothing  can  be  easier  than  to  place  an  object  where  the
eye  cannot  possibly  reach  it,  without  interfering  with  that
freedom  from  annoyance,  so  desirable  for  the  subjects  in
these  interesting  experiments.

Such  failures,  then,  prove  nothing.  It  is  wonderful  in-
deed, how  often,  in  spite  of  all  such  absurdly  clumsy
arrangements  as  I  have  described,  clairvoyants  will  succeed.
But  this,  again,  only  proves  that  some  subjects  are  not  in-
juriously affected  by  what  would  deprive  others  of  all
lucidity.

It  is  sometimes  said,  that,  if  magnetic  experiments  are
exposed  to  so  many  causes  of  failure,  it  must  be  impossible
to  make  them  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  Now,  as  far  as
concerns  public  experiments,  I  agree  in  that  opinion  to  a
great  extent,  and  the  preceding  remarks  apply  solely  to
such  public  exhibitions.  In  private,  although  we  are  still,
as  in  all  researches,  and  more  especially  in  such  as  concern
the  nervous  system,  exposed  to  not  a  few  causes  of  failure,
some  of  them  accidental,  and  often  beyond  our  control,  yet
we  are  free  from  all  the  chief  and  most  efficient  causes  of
such  want  of  success,  which  I  have  alluded  to.  The  best
proof  of  this  is  the  success  which  never  fails  to  attend  ex-
periments, made  even  by  persons  not  trained  to  scientific
pursuits,  when  entered  on  with  a  single-hearted  desire  after
truth,  and  under  moderately  favorable  circumstances.  My
own  experience  leads  me  to  the  conclusion,  that  any  one
who  thus  devotes  himself,  with  patience  and  perseverance,


44  PUBLIC  EXPERIMENTS  UNSATISFACTORY.

to  the  study  of  Animal  Magnetism,  will  be  sure  to  obtain,
sooner  or  later,  satisfactory  evidence  of  all  the  leading
facts.  I  protest  against  the  notion,  that  Animal  Magnet-
ism, or  any  other  branch  of  natural  science,  is  to  be  judged
by  the  rough  experiments  of  a  public  platform,  or  by  such
tests  as  can  be  publicly  applied.  The  very  nature  of  the
phenomena  is  inconsistent  with  such  an  idea.

I  may  here  allude  to  another  kind  of  alleged  failure,  in
which  a  sceptic  undertakes  to  examine  a  case,  and  after
doing  so,  declares  his  conviction,  or  reiterates  the  foregone
conclusion,  that  the  subject  is  an  impostor.  He  perhaps
publishes  a  detail  of  his  experiments,  and  we  find,  on  ex-
amining them,  the  fullest  possible  proof  that  he  was  not
only  ignorant  of  the  matter  to  be  investigated,  and  of  the
peculiar  properties  or  powers  alleged  to  belong  to  the  sub-
ject submitted  to  his  examination,  but  also  of  the  very
simplest  rules  of  experimental  research.  Instead  of  adher-
ing to  the  conditions  described  as  essential  to  certain  re-
sults, he  alters  them  in  the  most  arbitrary  and  unheard  of
manner.  He  brings  the  patient  in  contact  with  substances,
which,  but  for  his  disdain  of  all  study  of  the  matter,  he
would  know  were  capable  of  destroying  all,  or  part,  of  his
powers.  He  substitutes  one  body  for  another,  and  expects,
without  the  slightest  warrant,  the  same  result  as  before.
He  renders  the  state  of  the  subject,  finally,  one  of  hopeless
confusion,  aggravated  by  accusations  of  imposture  liberally
dealt  forth,  and  not  obtaining  satisfactory  results,  he  brands
the  unhappy  subject  as  an  impostor;  while  (as  Baron  von
Reichenbach  has  well  remarked,)  he  himself  is  the  only
impostor,  having  undertaken,  with  the  most  ludicrous  self-
sufficiency,  a  task  for  which  he  was  utterly  unqualified.  I
might  produce  instances  of  this  kind  of  alleged  failure,
from  the  early  as  well  as  the  more  recent  history  of  Animal
Magnetism.  But  this  would  be  invidious,  and  I  gladly
pass  on  to  other  matters,  leaving  such  lucubrations  as  I  have
sketched  to  the  oblivion  which  has  already  overtaken  them.
I  shall  only  add,  that,  in  justice  as  well  as  common  sense,
he  who  undertakes  to  pronounce  a  judgment  on  any  matter,
should  at  least  be  acquainted  with  its  features,  as  presented
by  those  who  have  described  and  studied  it ;  and  that  this
qualification  is  above all  things  indispensable,  where  the


LEADERS  OF  SCIENCE  HOSTILE  TO  MAGNETISM.  45

judgment affects the moral character of  any  individual,
however  humble  in  station.

Sixthly  :  it  is  often  objected,  that  the  great  and  distin-
guished in  science  and  medicine,  do  not  believe  the  truth
of  the  facts  of  Animal  Magnetism.  "They,"  it  is  urged,
"  are  qualified  to  decide  the  question,  and  when  they  shall
have  done  so  favorably,  we  shall  then  be  ready  to  admit  it."

Here  I  would  observe,  that  this  is  merely  another  shape
of  the  Protean  argument,  or  rather  prejudice,  against  every-
thing that  is  new  and  startling.  Can  any  great  truth  be
pointed  out,  which,  when  new,  or  at  its  first  announcement,
was  adopted  by  the  scientific  leaders  of  the  time  ?  This
was  certainly  not  the  case  with  the  great  truths  of  Astro-
nomy ,  nor  with  the  existence  of  the  new  world,  as  a  corol-
lary from  the  spherical  form  of  the  earth  ;  nor  with  the  doc-
trine itself  that  the  earth  is  a  sphere ;  nor  with  the  doctrine
of  phlogiston,  the  best  attainable  at  the  time ;  nor  with  the
anti-phlogistic  doctrine ;  nor  with  the  discovery  of  the  simple
nature  of  chlorine ;  nor  with  the  truths  of  Geology ;  nor
with  the  discovery  of  steam  navigation ;  nor  with  that  of
travelling  on  railways  by  locomotive  steam-engines ;  nor
with  that  of  gas  light ;  nor  with  the  philosophy  of  Bacon ;
nor  with  that  of  Newton.  In  short,  the  established  leaders
of  science,  being  generally  men  advanced  in  life,  are  by
nature  averse  to  novelty.  It  is  a  trite  remark,  that  no
physician  who  was  above  forty  years  of  age,  when  Harvey
promulgated  his  doctrine  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,
ever  adopted  it  as  true.  It  was  left  for  the  rising  genera-
tion of  Harvey's  time,  as  for  that  of  Newton's,  to  adopt  dis-
coveries, to  doubt  which  would  now  be  regarded  as  a  proof
of  insanity  or  imbecility.  Gall's  doctrine  of  Phrenology,
or  of  Cerebral  Physiology,  is  just  beginning  to  emerge  from
the  period  of  prejudiced  and  irrational  opposition  which  all
new  views  must,  as  if  by  a  law  of  nature,  pass  through.  We
may  see  in  the  tone  of  the  more  recent  writings  on  ethical
subjects,  that  the  younger  generation  of  authors  and  teach-
ers have,  to  a  great  extent,  adopted  the  main  principles  of
Gall's  doctrine.  The  great  truths  of  Geology,  thanks  to
those  geologists  who  were  young  when  they  were  first  an-
nounced, have  passed  through  that  period,  and  are  now
admitted  and employed, in religious discussions, by  the


46  OPPOSITION  ON  THE  PART

very  class  of  men,  namely  the  clergy,  who  at  first  most
fiercely  attacked  them.

Such  being  the  case,  the  hostility  to  Animal  Magnetism
of  the  leaders  of  science,  even  were  it  true  to  the  extent
assumed  by  the  objectors,  is  no  more  than  history  would
lead  us  to  expect,  and  certainly  can  form  no  argument  against
the  reality  of  the  truths  of  that  science,  any  more  than  in
the  case  of  the  truths  and  discoveries  above  enumerated.
But,  happily  for  science,  the  alleged  hostility  of  its  leaders
is  not  true  to  that  extent.  Many  estimable  names,  of  per-
sons highly  respected  in  science,  in  medicine,  and  in  litera-
ture, are  to  be  found  in  the  list  of  those  who  are  convinced
of  the  reality  of  Animal  Magnetism.  Many  of  the  leading
journals,  but  lately  hostile,  now  treat  the  subject  as  they
would  any  other  branch  of  enquiry.  Indeed,  we  may  go
so  far  as  to  say,  that  a  large  majority  of  intelligent  persons
in  all  classes  of  society,  admit  generally  that  there  is  truth
in  Animal  Magnetism,  and  only  differ  as  to  the  precise
point  to  which  this  conviction  extends.  Many  now  admit
the  truth  and  reality  of  the  magnetic  sleep,  of  magnetic
catalepsy,  of  divided  consciousness,  and  of  some  other
phenomena,  while  they  cannot  persuade  themselves  to  ad-
mit the  possibility  of  the  higher  phenomena,  such  as  sym-
pathy or  clairvoyance.  As  the  testimony  to  all  these  facts
is  the  very  same,  it  may  confidently  be  anticipated,  that
the  latter  will,  in  process  of  time,  be  also  recognised  as
true.

And  here  I  would  remark,  in  a  very  general  way,  reserv-
ing all  details  for  their  proper  place,  that  one  reason  why
many  who  admit  certain  phenomena  reject  others  is,  that
they  persuade  themselves  that  they  can  explain  or  account
for  the  former,  and  are  not  able  to  do  so  in  the  case  of  the
latter.  They  form,  perhaps  unconsciously,  a  hypothesis,
sufficient,  in  their  opinion,  to  explain  the  former,  and  be-
cause it  will  not  explain  the  latter,  they  must  be  rejected.
But  I  would  refer  to  what  I  have  said  in  my  first  Letter,  as
to  the  absolute  impossibility  of  truly  explaining  any  fact,  in
the  sense  of  why  or  liow  it  occurs.  These  persons  take  for
granted,  without  enquiry  or  investigation,  that  the  pheno-
mena are  inconsistent  with  the  known  truths  and  laws  of
science. But  it  is  a  safe  rule,  to  take  nothing  for  granted ;


OF  THE  LEADERS  OF  SCIENCE.  47

and  this  applies  to  other  sciences,  as  well  as  to  Animal
Magnetism.

Further,  I  would  observe,  that  the  leaders  of  science  who
are  opposed  to  Animal  Magnetism,  are  so  opposed  to  it
without  having  studied  it,  just  as  were  their  predecessors,
when,  without  enquiry  into  the  subject,  they  denounced  Co-
pernicus, and  imprisoned  Galileo.  Under  these  circumstances
their  opinion  is  not  entitled  to  that  weight  or  value  which
is  so  justly  given  to  it  in  those  matters  with  which  they  are
acquainted.  No  man,  however  distinguished  for  knowledge
and  ability,  has  a  right  to  decide  on  a  question  of  scienti-
fic fact  without  investigation  into  it ;  and  the  most  acute
argument,  d  priori,  to  prove  that  certain  alleged  phenomena
are  impossible,  crumbles  away  at  the  touch  of  a  single  well-
observed  fact,  even  though  observed  by  a  tyro  in  science.
We  cannot,  therefore  consent  that  Animal  Magnetism  should
be  judged  by  the  opinions  of  any  leaders  in  science,  however
eminent,  unless  they  have  fairly  studied  the  subject,  and
thus  rendered  themselves  qualified  to  appreciate  the  evi-
dence. I  have  known  many  persons,  more  or  less  trained
to  science,  who  were  sceptical,  nay,  decidedly  hostile,  in
regard  to  Animal  Magnetism,  until  they  were  persuaded  by
others,  or  induced  by  their  own  sense  of  justice  and  love  of
truth,  to  investigate  for  themselves,  but  who  soon  found  that
truth  and  nature  were  too  strong  for  their  prejudices.  I  do
not  know  one,  who  has  studied  the  subject  for  himself,  (of
course  I  do  not  here  allude  to  the  mere  cavilling  at  the
experiments  of  others  with  a  conviction  that  they  are  false
or  feigned,  but  a  bond  fide  research  into  the  matter,  for
the  sake  of  truth,)  and  has  yet  retained  those  prejudices.

It  may  be  proper  here  to  allude,  more  fully  than  I  have
done  above,  to  the  very  common  opinion,  especially  among
men  of  some  scientific  knowledge  and  training,  that  certain
phenomena,  which  they  consider  as  lower,  are  established,
but  that  others,  which  they  call  the  higher  phenomena,  are
utterly  without  foundation.

I  would  first  remark,  that  not  many  years,  nay,  not  many
months,  or  weeks,  ago,  the  very  phenomena  they  now  admit
were,  by  these  very  persons,  unhesitatingly  denied.  The
evidence  was  the  same  then  as  now,  that  rigidity,  the  state
of  somnambulism,  and  insensibility  to  pain,  were  produced  by
magnetic  passes  or  by  gazing. Yet  I  have  often  heard  per-


48  LOWER  PHENOMENA  ADMITTED.

sons,  who  now  regard  these  phenomena  as  established,  not
only  deny  them,  but  assert  with  confidence,  that  they  were
mere  humbug  and  imposture.  I  have  heard  the  idea  that
one  human  being  could  send  another  into  a  peculiar  state  of
sleep,  with  divided  consciousness,  in  short,  into  the  state  of
somnambulism,  ridiculed  as  only  fit  for  the  brain  of  a  luna-
tic or  idiot ;  and  yet  that  state  occurs  spontaneously,  or  is
induced  artificially,  every  day!  Now,  indeed,  the  persons
who  expressed  their  opinions  adopt  quite  a  different  tone.
"Oh!"  say  they,  "these  things  are  well  known;  nobody
can  doubt  them;  they  are  nothing  new;  we  never  doubted
them."  If  so,  it  is  very  strange  that  they  should  have
been  so  misunderstood,  and  should  even  have  been  supposed
to  write  and  publish  their  opinion,  that  the  magnetic  sleep,
for  example,  as  produced  by  passes,  was  "a  humbug."  The
truth  is,  that  according  to  what  appears  to  be  a  natural  law,
and  at  all  events  is  known  to  have  always  occurred,  this  is  a
never-failing  stage  in  the  progress  of  new  truths.  They  are
first  denied  with  scorn,  and  denounced  as  imposture ;  then,
when  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  deny  them,  it  is  discovered
that  they  are  not  new.  And,  in  truth,  there  is  some  foun-
dation for  the  statement.  Few  facts  in  nature  are  new;
and  certainly  those  of  Animal  Magnetism,  as  detached  facts,
are  not  new.  But,  although  no  doubt  often  observed,  as  the
fall  of  the  apple  was  observed  ages  before  Newton,  they
have  been  neglected  and  forgotten.  When  revived,  the
sceptic,  shocked  by  their  apparent  incredibility,  does  not
take  time  to  reflect,  or  to  discover  whether  they  may  not
have  occurred  before,  either  spontaneously  or  otherwise.
He  denounces  them  forthwith;  and  when  by  chance  he  is
compelled,  by  the  evidence  of  his  senses,  to  admit  them,  he
cools  down.  Now,  he  does  what  he  ought  to  have  done  at
first.  He  studies,  examines,  reads,  reflects ;  and  the  result
is,  that  the  facts  are  found  to  be  not  only  not  new,  but  old,
and,  in  one  or  other  form,  familiar.  He  finds,  that  he  at
first,  in  his  ardor,  had  attributed  to  these  facts,  characters
not  their  own,  and  when  he  has  come  to  see  them  in  their
true  natural  shape,  he  is  surprised  to  recognise  old,  perhaps
forgotten  or  neglected  friends.  I  have  seen  this  process
going  on  in  so  many  minds,  that  I  now  look  for  it  as  the
normal  one,  in  those  who  at  first  recoil  from  Animal  Mag-


GRADUAL  PROGRESS  OF  SCEPTICS.  49

netism,  and  I  am  rarely,  if  ever,  disappointed  in  the  ex-
pectation.

But  our  sceptic,  be  it  observed,  before  reaching  his  pre-
sent position,  had  long  denied  and  ridiculed  even  those  so
called  lower  phenomena  which-  he  now  admits.  He  had
done  so,  without  enquiry,  simply  because,  in  the  view  he
took  of  them,they  appeared  incredible  ;  he  now  finds  them
not  only  credible,  but  true;  and,  as  he  says,  long  known.
He  had  disdainfully  rejected  the  evidence  of  many  persons
of  good  character  and  abilities,  as  well  qualified  as  himself,
perhaps  better  qualified,  to  observe  such  facts,  and  had
wantonly  accused  them  of  imposture ;  he  now  finds,  not
only  that  they  were  innocent  of  that  offence,  but  that
they  were  remarkably  accurate  in  the  account  they  gave
of  the  phenomena.  But  here  he  stops.  He  admits  the
facts,  for  example,  of  the  artificial  production  of  genuine
somnambulism,  or  of  insensibility  to  pain ;  but  he  rejects
(as  decidedly  as  he  formerly  did  these  facts)  those  further
phenomena,  which  are  often  called  the  higher  phenomena
of  Animal  Magnetism,  such  as  sympathy,  thought-reading,
community  of  senses,  of  taste,  smell,  &c. ;  the  control  exer-
cised by  the  operator  over  the  will  and  imagination  of  the
subject,  and  all  the  forms  of  clairvoyance.

In  short,  he  repeats,  deliberately  or  recklessly,  his  former
error.  He  rejects  facts,  alleged  not  only  on  respectable
testimony,  but  on  the  very  same  testimony,  which  he  has
been  compelled  to  acknowledge  as  true  to  nature  in  regard
to  the  lower  phenomena ;  and  he  ascribes  deceit  and  impos-
ture to  those  who  profess  to  have  observed  these  facts,  sim-
ply because  he  has  again  formed  the  opinion,  that  they  are
incredible,  or  that  they  contradict  established  natural  laws.

Now,  if  he  will  make  up  his  mind  to  study  the  facts,  he
will  then  find,  as  he  found  in  regard  to  the  others,  that  they
also  are  not  new ;  that  they  have  often  occurred,  both  spon-
taneouly  and  otherwise ;  that,  in  point  of  fact,  they  do
occur,  whatever  may  be  the  true  explanation  of  them ;  and
that  the  observers  are  just  as  trustworthy  here,  as  they
were  found  to  be  in  the  former  case.

It  is  so  obvious  as  not  to  require  me  to  dwell  on  it,  that

the  more  wonderful  and apparently  incredible  an  alleged

fact  is,  the  more  strictly  ought  we  to  scrutinize  the  quality

of  the evidence adduced. No  fact  should be  taken  for

5


50 ^  LOWER  AND  HIGHER

granted,  and  none  should  be  lightly  admitted,  in  Animal
Magnetism,  any  more  than  in  any  other  branch  of  science.
But  this  is  a  very  different  thing  from  rejecting,  without
enquiry,  facts,  however  marvellous  they  may  appear,  if  sup-
ported by  good  evidence.

But  further,  are  these  latter  phenomena,  in  any  sense
affecting  the  present  enquiry,  really  of  a  higher  order  than
the  others  ?  Are  they  more  wonderful  or  less  capable  of
explanation  ? I  answer,  No.

The  production  of  somnambulism,  or  the  magnetic  sleep,
of  insensibility  to  pain,  of  cataleptic  rigidity,  &c,  by  passes
at  a  certain  distance,  and  without  contact,  appears  to  me
as  wonderful,  and  is  certainly  as  little  explainable  by  known
laws,  as  that  of  clairvoyance,  or  of  the  highest  degree  of
sympathy.  These  so  called  lower  phenomena  prove  the  exist-
ence of  an  influence,  which  can  be  exerted  by  one  human
being  on  another,  and  which  is  not  one  of  the  known
influences,  such  as  heat,  electricity,  or  ordinary  magnetism.
This  being  admitted,  distance,  as  in  the  case  of  these  im-
ponderables, is  a  matter  of  little  or  no  moment.  The  vital
magnetic  influence  can  as  easily  be  supposed  capable  of
passing  through  enormous  distances,  as  light,  electricity,  or
magnetism  proper ;  and  all  its  effects  are  equally  wonderful,
and  equally  explainable.

Our  sceptic  admits  the  fact  of  the  magnetic  sleep.  Nay,
he  goes  so  far  as  to  produce  it ;  and  his  subject,  while  sleep-
ing, converses  sensibly  with  him.  All  of  a  sudden,  and
perhaps  accidentally,  the  question  arises,  how  long  he  is  to
sleep  ?  and  he  answers  at  once,  ten,  fifteen,  forty,  or  any
number  of  minutes,  and  is  found  correct  to  a  second.  Or
the  operator  commands  him  to  sleep  exactly  one  hour,  or
an  hour  and  a  quarter,  and  he  does  so,  to  a  second,  again.
Now  all  the  so-called  higher  phenomena  constantly  present
themselves  in  this  way.  The  operator  puts  a  lozenge  in  his
mouth,  while  the  sleeper  cannot  see  him.  All  at  once  the
sleeper  begins  chewing  and  tasting — nothing;  but  on  enquiry
he  declares  he  is  eating  a  lozenge.  Here  is  community  of
taste ;  we  had,  before,  control  of  the  imagination  as  to  the
duration  of  the  sleep.  Again,  the  subject  all  at  once  ex-
claims, I  see  Mr.  A.  or  Mrs.  B. ;  describes  the  room,  which
perhaps  he  has  never  seen,  and  the  occupation  and  dress  of
the  person  seen,  with  perfect  accuracy. Here  is  clairvoy-


PHENOMENA  COMPARED.  51

ance,  which  daily  thus  forces  itself  on  our  notice.  I  do
not  here  enter  into  the  question  of  its  explanation ;  but  here
is  the  fact.  And  thus  I  might  go  on,  illustrating  all  the
higher  phenomena,  which,  resting  on  the  same  testimony  as
that  which  supports  the  lower,  are,  when  duly  observed,  of
course  equally  true.

When,  in  addition  to  this,  we  bear  in  mind,  that  every
known  phenomenon,  or  rather  class  of  phenomena,  in  Ani-
mal Magnetism,  is  on  record  as  having  occurred,  or  is  daily
occurring,  as  a  spontaneous  fact,  without  any  magnetic
process,  we  may  feel  assured,  that  time  will  convince  the
sceptic  of  all  the  well  observed  and  established  magnetic  or
mesmeric  facts,  as  it  has  already  convinced  him  of  some  of
them,  in  truth  not  less  unaccountable  than  the  others.

Is  it  logical,  or  even  morally  possible,  to  suppose,  that
those  operators  and  those  subjects,  whose  accounts  of  the
lower  phenomena  we  find  so  accurate  and  truthful,  should
at  once  deviate  into  falsehood  in  describing  other  phenomena
which  accompany  or  follow  these  ?  I  say  no,  again,  most
emphatically.

He  who  once  admits  the  magnetic  sleep,  and,  with  spon-
taneous somnambulism  staring  him  in  the  face,  no  man  can
long  hesitate  to  do  so,  will  find  that  he  has  lost  even  the
insecure  footing  he  once  had.  If  the  sleep  be  a  fact,  then
its  characters  are  also  facts.  Now  one  of  these  is  the  oc-
currence of  divided  or  double  consciousness,  almost  inva-
riably observed  in  magnetised  subjects,  in  a  certain  stage.
This  is  a  truly  astounding  phenomenon.  That  a  man  should
hear,  feel,  think  and  speak  for  hours,  and  retain  no  con-
sciousness, in  his  ordinary  state,  of  his  proceedings,  might
well  excuse  incredulity,  if  the  facts  did  not  render  that  im-
possible in  those  who  see  them.

Now,  admitting  double  consciousness,  it  is  impossible  for
an  impostor  to  give  a  lesson  in  fraud,  in  the  ordinary  state,
which  shall  have  any  effect  on  his  pupil  in  the  sleep.  And
if  it  be  said,  that  the  fraud  is  taught  in  the  sleep,  this  im-
plies the  truth  of  the  sleep,  and  of  the  divided  conscious-
ness. We  have  seen  what  conclusions  must  follow,  when
these  facts  are  admitted  to  be  true.

I  conclude,  therefore,  that,  as  the  higher  phenomena  are
observed  to  occur  spontaneously,  while  their  artificial  pro-
duction rests  upon  the  very  same  testimony  which  has  been


52  THE  world's  opinion.

found  trustworthy  in  regard  to  the  lower  phenomena,  it  is
illogical  to  admit  the  latter  and  deny  the  former ;  and  that,
in  process  of  time,  just  as  has  occurred  in  other  natural
sciences,  the  whole  facts  will  come  to  be  as  well  established
in  the  minds  of  medical  and  scientific  men,  as  a  part  of  them
now  is.

There  is  another  form,  in  which  the  natural  respect  we
feel  for  the  learned,  as  well  as  the  natural  regard  for  the
opinion  of  the  world,  operate  as  a  bar  to  the  advancement
of  Animal  Magnetism.  As  long  as  the  great,  the  learned,
the  rich,  and  the  influential,  hold  aloof,  in  hostility  or  in-
difference, so  long  will  many,  in  whose  minds  the  feeling  of
regard  for  the  world's  opinion,  of  the  qu'en  dira-t-on?  pre-
dominates, either  decline  to  attend  to  the  subject,  or,  having
attended  to  it,  suppress  their  conviction,  from  the  fear  of
encountering  abuse,  or,  what  is  worse  to  bear,  ridicule.
This  is  very  frequent,  far  more  frequent  than  is  generally
supposed.  Even  in  the  medical  profession,  there  are  many,
who  are  not  only  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Animal  Magnet-
ism, but  actually  use  it,  privately,  in  cases  in  which  it  is
an  appropriate  means  of  cure ;  and  who  yet  do  not  publicly
acknowledge  their  conviction,  partly  from  fear  of  the  world,
partly  from  fear  of  the  disapprobation  of  the  leaders  of  their
profession.  While  I  consider  this  as  much  to  be  regretted,
since  it  would  seem  to  indicate  a  deficiency  of  moral  courage,
yet  it  is  so  natural  a  feeling,  so  strong  in  many  minds,  and
so  insidious  in  its  operation,  that  I  would  not  judge  harshly
those  who  act  in  this  way.  But  I  would  beg  to  point  out
to  such  persons,  that  their  policy  is  short-sighted  and  bad.
He  who  openly  proclaims  his  conviction,  not  impertinently
thrusting  it  forward,  but  when  the  necessity  arises,  is  sure
to  acquire  the  respect  of  those  who  know  him,  for  his  regard
to  the  truth,  even  should  he,  for  a  time,  suffer  from  the
hostility  of  those  who  oppose  that  truth.  Here,  as  in  all
else,  honesty  is  the  best  policy.  Were  all  the  physicians
who  believe  in  the  truth  and  efficacy  of  Animal  Magnetism
to  publish,  as  a  body,  the  avowal  of  that  belief,  they  would
find,  with  surprise  perhaps,  that  they  had  been  frightened
by  shadows;  and  that  they  are  numerous  and  influential
enough  to  have  nothing  to  fear.

It  is  to  medical  men  that  the  public  will  look  for  the  fur-
ther prosecution  of  the  enquiry. Not  only  have  they  the


MEDICAL  MEN  AEE  LOOKED  TO.  53

best  opportunities,  but  they  have,  or  ought  to  have,  a  train-
ing, qualifying  them  for  the  investigation ;  and,  although  it
is  impossible,  as  yet,  to  predict  all,  or  nearly  all,  of  the  pos-
sible and  probable  applications  of  Animal  Magnetism,  its  ap-
plications to  medicine  and  surgery  are  the  most  obvious,  and
among  the  most  important.  I  shall  return  to  this  part  of
the  subject  in  detail  hereafter;  here  I  shall  only  say,  that,
as  might  be  expected  from  its  nature,  Animal  Magnetism
operates  chiefly  on  the  nervous  system,  and  is  therefore  ap-
plicable chiefly,  or  most  naturally,  to  nervous  diseases,  such
as  hysteria,  catalepsy,  convulsions,  paralysis,  both  of  the
nerves  of  motion  and  those  of  sensation,  neuralgia,  insanity,
&c.  &c. ;  while  Dr.  Esdaile  in  India,  and  numerous  highly
respectable  practitioners  in  England  and  in  France,  have
fully  demonstrated  its  great  value  as  a  means  of  producing
insensibility  to  pain  in  surgical  operations.

I  am  well  aware,  that  in  the  strict  march  of  science,  the
study  of  the  laws  and  effects  of  any  power  or  force  should
be  the  first  object  of  investigation,  and  should  precede  its
applications  to  practical  purposes  ;  because  it  is  only  by  such
a  full  and  minute  study  of  its  effects,  and  of  the  laws  which
regulate  them,  that  we  can  learn  its  applications,  that  we
can  discover  how  to  render  them  easier  and  more  certain,
and  that  we  can  hope  to  be  able  in  any  measure  to  account
for  them,  and  thus  pave  the  way  for  new  applications.  Some
men  must,  I  trust  many  will,  devote  themselves  to  the  purely
scientific  and  inductive  experimental  investigation  of  the  sub-
ject ;  but  its  empirical  application,  especially  to  medical  pur-
poses, need  not,  in  the  mean  time,  be  neglected.

Indeed,  the  curative  or  anodyne  effects  of  Animal  Mag-
netism are  so  marked,  in  certain  cases,  most  of  which,  as  is
well  known  to  the  medical  profession,  are  among  the  opjjro-
hria  medicorum,  and  it  is,  in  proper  hands,  so  safe  a  remedy,
that  it  would  be  inexcusable  not  to  employ  it,  especially
where,  as  too  often  happens,  other  means  have  failed.  These
empirical  trials  will  not  only  tend  to  alleviate  suffering,  but
will  also  supply  a  large  and  valuable  store  of  facts,  to  be
hereafter  drawn  upon,  in  giving  to  Animal  Magnetism  a  co-
herent scientific  form.

For  all  these  reasons,  it  is  to  the  medical  profession  that
rneii  look  for  instruction  on  this  subject;  and  so  strong  is
the  public  feeling  already  in  this  respect,  that  ere  long  every

5*


54  OBJECTIONS  FOUNDED

medical  man  will  be  compelled  to  learn,  either  how  to  apply
Magnetism  himself,  or  to  direct  and  superintend  its  applica-
tion, by  qualified  magnetisers,  since  few  medical  men  can
spare  the  time  required  for  the  magnetic  operations  they
may  recommend.  We  shall  soon,  I  am  well  convinced,  see
the  establishment  of  a  class  of  professional  magnetisers,
qualified  by  nature  and  education  for  the  task  they  under-
take ;  just  as  we  have  professional  midwives,  nurses,  cuppers,
bathers  and  rubbers,  who  act  under  the  superintendence  of
the  physician.

In  my  next  Letter,  I  shall  take  notice  of  a  different  class
of  objections — those,  namely,  which  are,  or  profess  to  be,
founded  on  considerations  of  religion  and  morality.


LETTER  III.

Seventhly :  We  now  come  to  a  peculiar  class  of  objec-
tions, which  have  a  remarkable  influence  on  certain  minds.
It  is  that  kind  of  objection  which  is  founded  on  considera-
tions connected  with  religion  and  morality.

The  first  remark  I  would  make  here  is,  that  these  objec-
tions are  not,  in  general,  directed  so  much  against  the  truth
of  the  facts  as  against  the  consequences  which  appear  to
the  objector  to  follow  from  them,  if  admitted.  Some,  in-
deed, go  so  far  as  to  say  that,  since  such  consequences
necessarily  follow,  the  facts  cannot  be  true;  they  endeavor
to  make  use  of  a  reductio  ad  falsum.  But  the  majority,  so
far  as  I  have  seen,  are  really  actuated  by  a  dread  of  the
supposed  consequences,  and  rather  recoil  from  the  facts
with  aversion  and  fear  than  actually  deny  them.

Now,  I  maintain  that  it  is  not  logical  to  reason  against
the  truth  of  a  fact  because  we  dislike  its  consequences.  If,
indeed,  we  could  show,  with  logical  accuracy,  that  certain
conclusions  necessarily  follow  from  the  admission  of  certain
facts,  and  that  these  conclusions  are  glaringly  false,  we
should  be  entitled  to  say  that  the  error  lay  in  the  admission
or  assumption  of  the  facts.  If,  as  a  necessary  conclusion
from  any  alleged  magnetic  fact,  we  came,  by  close  decluc-


ON  RELIGION  AND  MORALITY.  55

tion,  to  the  result  that  two  and  two  make  five,  or  that  the
three  angles  of  a  triangle  arc  equal  to  100°  or  to  200°,  then
the  alleged  fact  must  be  rejected.  But  you  will  not  find
that  any  such  glaringly  false  or  absurd  conclusions  are  de-
ducible  from  the  facts  of  Animal  Magnetism.

If  we  suppose  the  admission  of  any  fact  in  Animal  Mag-
netism to  lead,  logically,  to  the  conclusion,  that  vice  and
virtue  are  indifferent  things,  or  that  crimes  may  be  committed
with  impunity ;  I  say,  if  such  conclusions  were  logically  de-
ducible,  as  necessary  inferences,  from  the  fact,  we  should  be
compelled  to  reject  it,  on  the  ground  that  some  fallacy,  un-
known to  us,  lurked  in  its  assumption.  But  then  we  must
show  that  these,  or  any  similar  false  conclusions,  are  strictly
necessary  inferences  from  the  alleged  fact,  which  cannot,  I
think,  be  done.

When,  again,  the  conclusions,  supposed  to  be  necessary
inferences  from  the  fact,  are  not  obviously  false,  or  incon-
sistent with  morality,  but  only  disagreeable  to  us  personally,
then  we  are  no  longer  entitled  to  reason  against  the  fact
from  its  consequences,  even  if  we  can  prove  these  to  be  ne-
cessary inferences.  We  must  then,  if  no  fallacy  can  be  de-
tected, accept  them,  and  make  the  best  of  them.

Now,  in  the  reasonings  of  those  who  make  the  objections
under  consideration,  all  possible  fallacies  are  accumulated.
The  supposed  consequences  are  not  necessary  inferences  from
the  alleged  facts;  and  they  are,  moreover,  objectionable  to
us,  not  on  universal  grounds,  but  because  they  clash  with  our
peculiar  views  or  hypotheses.

It  is  said,  then,  that  if  the  facts  of  Animal  Magnetism  be
true,  then  one  individual  possesses,  or  may  possess,  an  influ-
ence over  another,  or  others,  which  the  Deity  never  could
have  intended  to  confer  on  man.

Here  I  would  observe,  First :  That  if  the  fact  be  true,  the
Deity  has  conferred  that  power  on  man.  Secondly :  that
since  he  has  done  so,  the  natural  inference  is,  that  he  has
given  it,  like  all  other  powers,  for  good  purposes,  some  of
which,  such  as  the  alleviation  of  suffering,  are  so  obvious  as
not  to  require  notice  here.  Thirdly :  that  we  have  no  means
of  ascertaining  the  intentions  of  the  Creator,  except  in  his
Acts,  and  his  Word.  The  former  are  in  favor  of  Animal
Magnetism,  if  it  truly  exist ;  the  latter  certainly  does  not
contain  any  distinct  reference  to  this  point. Fourthly  :  that


56  MAGNETISM  EXALTS

this  power  of  one  human  being  over  another,  is  only  one  of
the  manifestations  of  an  universally  diffused  influence  ;  and
that,  even  were  it  injurious,  which  is  not  proved,  in  certain
circumstances,  it  would,  in  this  respect,  agree  with  all  other
influences.  Thus  electricity  produces  destructive  thunder-
bolts, and  fire  burns  and  destroys.  Both  appear,  in  certain
cases,  injurious  ;  yet  no  one  doubts  the  wisdom  and  benevo-
lence of  their  Creator.  Let  us  apply  the  same  rule  to  Ani-
mal Magnetism,  bearing  in  mind,  that  it  is  only  asserted,  not
proved,  that  the  control  which  it  enables  one  man  to  exert
over  another  is  really,  even  to  our  limited  apprehension,  in-
jurious.

Secondly :  It  is  further  said,  that  not  only  is  the  exist-
ence of  this  power  a  thing  never  intended  by  the  Deity,  but
it  may  be  used  for  the  worst  and  most  immoral  purposes.

Here  I  would  remark,  that  no  power  is  known  which  con-
not  be  perverted  and  abused  by  human  depravity.  We  can
employ  salutary  medicines  as  poisons.  Men  have  been
known  to  exert  their  utmost  powers  for  evil.  We  use  gun-
powder to  blast  rocks,  we  abuse  it  to  destroy  human  life.
Nor  can  Animal  Magnetism  be  exempt  from  the  liability  to
abuse  or  perversion.  But  so  far  is  this  from  being  an  argu-
ment against  its  truth,  that  the  very  fear  of  such  perversion
rests  on  the  admission  of  that  truth.  Moreover,  in  that,  as
in  all  such  pervertible  things,  the  best  and  only  security  we
can  have  is  the  utmost  possible  knowledge  of  the  subject.
Did  one  man  alone  know  the  powers  of  chloroform,  he  might,
without  suspicion,  render  others  unconscious,  and  rob,  or
otherwise  injure  them ;  but  if  every  man  knew  its  powers
equally  well,  this  would  be  impossible,  or,  at  least,  not  so
easy  as  to  shoot  others  with  a  pistol,  which  is  difficult  to  do
without  detection,  just  because  every  man  knows  the  abuse
of  gunpowder.  He  who  would  rob  by  means  of  chloroform
must  be  close  to  his  victim,  the  murderer  may  be  at  a  dis-
tance and  concealed.  In  short,  we  cannot  argue  against
the  truth  of  anything,  nor  against  its  use,  from  its  abuse  or
perversion,  and  the  best  safeguard  is  not  ignorance,  but  the
greatest  possible  knowledge.

I  may  add,  that  while  I  would  not  deny  the  possibility  of
the  perversion  of  Animal  Magnetism  to  bad  purposes,  this
is  not  so  easy  as  may  be  supposed.  It  is  true  that  the  sub-
ject, in  things  indifferent,  or  in  things  good  in  themselves,


THE  MORAL  FEELINGS.  57

obeys  implicitly,  in  many  cases,  the  will  of  the  operator.
But  this  obedience  is  not  unlimited  or  unconditional.  It  is,
on  the  contrary,  an  observed  and  well-authenticated  fact,
that,  in  general,  the  moral  perceptions  and  feelings  of  the
somnambulist  are  exalted  and  strengthened  in  the  sleep,  and
he  generally  exhibits  a  profound  aversion  for  all  that  is  bad,
false,  and  mean.  In  vain  might  we  try,  in  many  cases  at
least,  to  induce  the  subject  to  violate  confidence,  or  to  betray
a  secret  which  he  has  learned  in  his  sleeping  state,  while  he
usually  forgets  it  entirely  in  his  usual  state.  Were  we
capable  of  trying  to  persuade  the  sleeper  to  do  a  bad  action,
we  should  soon  discover  that  he  is  awake  to  moral  obligations,
and  usually  much  more  so  than  in  his  ordinary  waking  con-
dition. In  most  cases,  perhaps  in  all,  the  very  countenance
becomes  more  refined,  and  indicates  a  higher  tone  of  moral
feeling.  The  state  of  somnambulism  is  not  a  true  sleep,  but
a  state  in  which  ordinary  vision  is  cut  off,  while  the  mind  is,
in  other  respects,  not  only  awake,  but,  intellectually  and
morally,  more  active  than  usual,  so  as  to  fill  the  observer
with  astonishment.  The  language  of  the  subject  is  of  a
higher  character,  more  correct  and  refined,  than  his  ordinary
speech.  And  he  is  only  subject  to  the  will  of  the  operator,
as  a  general  rule,  (for  so  great  is  the  variety  in  these  cases,
that  we  must  admit  the  possibility  of  exceptions,)  in  matters
which  do  not  imply  a  violation  of  duty  and  morality.  The
fear,  therefore,  of  the  perversion  af  Animal  Magnetism  to
bad  ends,  which  in  itself  is  no  argument  against  its  truth  or
utility,  is  much  exaggerated  in  the  minds  of  those  who  are
not  familiar  with  the  phenomena,  especially  with  the  truly
beautiful,  I  might  say  angelic  disposition,  so  frequently  mani-
fested in  the  magnetic  sleep  by  the  higher  class  of  minds,
and,  in  a  less  degree,  by  all.

Thirdly :  I  have  often  heard  it  said,  that  if  the  facts  of
clairvoyance,  for  example,  be  true,  then  they  prove  the
clairvoyant  to  be  possessed  of  omniscience,  and  as  that  is
impossible,  the  fact  cannot  be  true.

Here,  I  would  say,  that  when  we  see  the  fact  of  vision
at  a  distance,  and  find  it  verified  in  hundreds  of  cases,  we
cannot  doubt  the  fact.  We  are  compelled,  therefore,  to
doubt  the  validity  of  the  chain  of  reasoning  above  alluded
to.  Does  vision  at  a  distance  necessarily  imply  omniscience  ?
I  answer,  no ;  no  more  than  does  the  use  of  Lord  Rosse's


58  CLAIRVOYANTS  NOT  OMNISCIENT.

telescope.  The  clairvoyant  does  not  see  in  the  usual  sense
with  his  external  organs  of  vision  or  eyes ;  he  sees,  however,
with  the  internal,  cerebral  vision,  but  not  by  means  of  or-
dinary light,  which  is  excluded  by  the  shut  eyes,  and  other
circumstances,  such  as  an  intervening  wall.  We  can  easily
suppose  the  sensations  of  form,  light,  and  color,  to  be  excited
in  the  internal  cerebral  seat  of  vision  by  other  means  than
ordinary  light ;  for  we  know  that  these  sensations  may  be
excited  in  the  dark  by  pressure  on  the  eye-ball,  or  by  con-
gestion of  the  vessels  of  the  eye,  or  by  other  more  obscure
causes.  Such  is  the  origin  of  many  spectral  illusions.
Now,  the  clairvoyant  sees  real,  not  illusive  objects,  by  some
unknown  means,  whatever  these  may  be,  which  reach  his
internal  vision,  which  is  the  cerebral  or  true  seat  of  com-
mon vision,  (the  eye,  including  the  retina  and  optic  nerve,
being  merely  an  apparatus  for  exciting  sensations  there  by
means  of  ordinary  light,)  without  having  to  pass  through
the  eye-ball,  or  to  fall  on  the  retina.  We  shall  see,  here-
after, what  we  can  ascertain  as  to  the  nature  of  this  means
of  vision.  But,  of  whatever  nature  it  be,  its  use  cannot
confer  omniscience.  If,  with  our  ordinary  eye-sight,  we
constantly  fall  into  error  in  examining  objects  presented  to
us,  this  must  be  to  the  full  as  likely,  but  indeed  far  more
likely,  with  any  other  means  of  vision,  or  other  sensuous
perception.  Even  the  power  of  seeing  all  things,  which  no
clairvoyant  possesses,  clairvoyance  being  apparently  both
limited  and  varied  in  its  character,  would  not  confer  an  un-
erring judgment.  No  magnetiser  has  ever  dreamt  of  omnis-
cience being  a  gift  of  his  clairvoyants ;  it  is  those  who  have
never  seen  or  studied  the  phenomena  who  fancy  that  such
must  be  the  result.  In  point  of  fact,  clairvoyants  make
many  blunders,  and  are  exposed  to  peculiar  difficulties.
They  find  it,  for  example,  difficult  to  distinguish  between
the  impressions  of  past  events,  (memory,)  and  those  of
actual  vision,  in  their  peculiar  form  of  it,  both  being  inter-
nal impressions,  and  both  equally,  or  nearly  equally,  vivid.
In  like  manner,  they  find  it  difficult  to  distinguish  impres-
sions caused  by  suggested  ideas,  or  by  thought-reading,
from  those  excited  by  real  external  objects  at  a  distance.
It  is  our  business  to  discover  means  of  distinguishing  all
these ;  and  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that,  in  the  absence  of
the  objects,  we  are  apt  to  misinterpret  the  statements  of


SORCERY  AND  WITCHCRAFT.


59


clairvoyants,  according  to  our  own  preconceived  ideas,  so
that,  when  we  examine  them  aright,  we  find  our  clairvoyants
more  clear  and  precise  than  we  had  supposed.  But  assured-
ly, omniscience  is  the  very  last  thing  which  would  occur  to
an  experienced  magnetiser,  as  characterising  the  state  of
clairvoyance.

Fourthly:  It  is  further  objected,  by  those  who  admit  the
facts  of  Animal  Magnetism,  that  it  amounts  to  sorcery  or
witchcraft,  which  are  distinctly  prohibited  by  Scripture.
Without  referring  in  detail  to  the  fact,  that  this  objection
has  been  in  all  ages  brought  against  the  cultivation  of  phy-
sical science,  and  especially  of  astronomy  and  chemistry,
the  votaries  of  which  were  inevitably  branded  as  sorcerers
and  witches  by  those  more  ignorant  than  themselves,  I  may
point  out,  that  if,  by  sorcery,  or  witchcraft,  be  meant  any-
thing supernatural,  then  is  Animal  Magnetism,  which  has
to  do  only  with  obscure  natural  phenomena,  entirely  inno-
cent of  these  offences.

Some,  indeed,  maintain,  that  the  phenomena  of  magnet-
ism are  supernatural,  and  are  only  produced  by  the  power
of  the  evil  one.  But  surely,  as  long  as  I  can  produce  these
phenomena  without  the  slightest  reference  to  that  personage,
as  long  as  I  can  do  so  without  invoking  his  aid,  or  entering
into  a  compact  with  him,  I  am  entitled  to  regard  the  phe-
nomena as  entirely  natural.  You  would  think  I  was  insult-
ing you,  were  I  to  disclaim  seriously  any  complicity  with
Satan  or  Beelzebub,  and  yet  the  notion  above  alluded  to  is
widely  prevalent.

But  the  firm  belief  in  witchcraft,  as  the  result  of  a  com-
pact with  evil  spirits,  now  banished  from  the  minds  of  men,
was  once,  and  that  at  no  distant  period,  as  widely  diffused,
and  more  firmly  rooted.  The  royal  pedant,  James  I.,  when
he  wrote  against  witchcraft,  and  put  hundreds  to  a  cruel
death  for  that  offence,  was  firmly  convinced  that  he  did  but
his  duty ;  and  that  he  ought  not  to  "suffer  a  witch  to  live."
Why  is  that  notion,  in  his  sense  of  it,  now  obsolete  ?  _  Be-
cause we  know,  that  when  the  Bible  was  translated  in  his
time,  ignorance  and  superstition  prevailed,  and  the  word
translated  "witchcraft,"  was  applied  to  that  which  men,
because  they  could  not  explain  it,  chose  to  ascribe  to  an  in-
fernal power.  What  that  word  originally  meant,  I  know
not,  but,  by  common  consent,  it  is  not  now  ascribed  to  King


60  MAGNETISM  SAID  TO  LEAD

James's  ideal  of  witchcraft,  the  existence  of  which  as  a  super-
natural thing,  is  no  longer  believed.  If  any  man  say,  that
the  true  word  in  question  is  Animal  Magnetism,  let  him  be-
ware, lest  he  make  as  great  an  error  as  King  James  I.  did.
The  same  remark  applies  to  sorcery.  We  do  not  know  the
precise  meaning  of  the  word  so  translated.

Were  I  to  hazard  a  conjecture,  I  should  say,  that  witches
and  sorcerers,  as  denounced  in  the  Bible,  were  persons  who
made  use  of  natural  knowledge  for  bad  and  immoral  pur-
poses; that  they  were,  in  fact,  cheats  and  impostors,  who
deceived  the  people  by  pretended  divinations,  and  claimed
the  possession  of  supernatural,  perhaps  of  divine,  powers.
But,  in  any  case,  I  cannot  admit,  that  those  who  study  the
Creator's  works,  and  who  refer  all  the  wonders  they  dis-
cover there  to  his  power  and  goodness,  and  who,  moreover,
apply  them  to  good  and  beneficient  purposes,  are  justly  to
be  stigmatized  as  practising  forbidden  arts.

When  I  come  to  consider,  in  detail,  certain  phenomena,
I  shall  endeavor  to  show  that  Animal  Magnetism  enables  us
to  account  for  many  things,  which,  in  a  former  age,  were
supposed  to  be  of  supernatural  or  diabolical  origin ;  such  as
possession,  the  effects  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  malignant
persons,  or  witches  ;  divination,  &c.  We  shall  see,  that,  as
in  the  case  of  Chemistry,  natural  facts  have  led  to  the  im-
pression among  the  ignorant,  that  those  who  knew  them
were  in  league  with  the  devil.

Eighthly :  It  is  often  said  that  Animal  Magnetism  leads,
if  admitted,  to  Materialism  and  Infidelity  ;  and  this  is  urged,
by  many  sincerely  pious  and  estimable  persons,  as  an  argu-
ment both  against  the  truth  of  it  and  against  the  study  of  it.

I  need  not  here  repeat  what  has  been  already  said  as  to
the  illogical  nature  of  this  attempt  to  employ  the  argumentum
aclfalsum,  except  only  when  it  can  be  clearly  shown  that
the  alleged  consequences  are  absolutely  necessary  inferences,
and,  farther,  that  being  necessary  inferences,  they  are  cer-
tainly false  or  injurious.

But  I  may  point  out,  that  those  who  sincerely  believe  the
Holy  Scriptures  to  be  the  Word  of  God,  cannot  logically
believe,  or  fear,  that  any  other  truth,  any  natural  fact  for
example,  which,  if  true,  must  be  also  the  work  of  God,  is,
or  can  be,  inconsistent  with  his  word.  It  may  appear  to  be
so,  or  rather  it  may  seem  to  us  to  clash  with  our  notions,


TO  MATERIALISM  AND  INFIDELITY.  61

or  our  interpretations,  of  that  word;  but  the  case  of  As-
tronomy, that  of  the  discovery  of  the  Antipodes,  and  the
history  of  recent  Geology,  ought  to  serve  as  warnings  to  us
against  the  error  of  stickling,  against  facts,  for  our  peculiar
interpretation  of  any  passage  or  passages  of  Scripture.  To
say  that  we  fear  for  God's  written  truth,  if  compared  with
his  truths  as  displayed  in  his  works,  is,  in  fact,  to  say  that
our  belief  in  the  former  is  not  a  thorough,  genuine  faith.
One  truth  cannot  contradict  another  truth ;  and  hitherto,
whenever  well  ascertained  natural  facts  have  been  said  to
contradict  scripture,  it  has  always  been  found  that  the  facts
have  prevailed,  and  that,  not  indeed  scripture,  but  our  in-
terpretation of  it,  has  been  of  necessity  modified.

Now  I  cannot  perceive  the  slightest  grounds  for  the
opinion  that  the  study  of  Animal  Magnetism  has  a  tendency
towards  infidelity.  Its  most  striking  peculiarity  appears  to
me  to  be,  the  power  with  which  it  teaches  us  how  small  and
limited  is  our  actual  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  man,  and
of  God's  admirable  perfections  as  therein  displayed.  It  is
impossible  to  see  how  this  study  can  clash  or  interfere  with
the  peculiar  doctrines  of  the  Christian  faith,  and,  therefore,
we  must  suppose  the  term  Infidelity  to  be  used  in  a  vague
sense,  and  rather  to  imply  that  the  study  of  Magnetism
tends  to  raise  doubts  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  This
is  the  more  probable,  as  the  charge  is  usually  coupled  with
that  of  leading  to  Materialism.

Now,  to  say  that  the  phenomena  of  Animal  Magnetism
lead  to  doubts  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  is  a  signal
proof  that  the  objector  has  not  made  himself  acquainted
with  these  phenomena.  For  not  only  have  they  no  such
tendency,  but  they  have  exactly  the  opposite  one.  I  have
heard,  times  innumerable,  religious  persons  declare,  on  see-
ing these  phenomena,  that  nothing  could  more  clearly  de-
monstrate the  immateriality  and  consequently  the  immor-
tality of  the  soul.  "In  clairvoyance,"  say  these  persons,
"we  observe  the  mind  acting  separate  from  the  body,  and
entirely  independent  of  it.  How  beautiful  a  proof  of  the
infinite  difference  between  spirit  and  matter  !"  This,  which
I  mention  only  as  a  fact,  not  as  a  proof  of  the  opinion  held,
is  the  most  frequent  remark  made  by  those  who  see  clairvoy-
ance. It  never  occurs  to  them  to  suppose  that  Animal
Magnetism  furnishes  an  argument  against  the  immortality
6


62  MATERIALISM  A  VAGUE  TERM.

of  the  soul.  That  idea  occurs  only  to  those  who  do  not
know  the  facts,  and  who  form  to  themselves  an  erroneous
impression  of  them.  This  bugbear  frightens  them,  and  they
can  no  longer  look  calmly  at  the  question.  Could  they  do
so,  they  would  soon  find  how  far  wrong  they  had  gone  in
regard  to  the  facts.  How  indeed  can  the  fact  of  perception
without  the  ordinary  senses,  that  is,  by  means  of  some  un-
known subtle  influence,  create  doubts  on  that  point  ?  This
fact  at  least  proves  the  mind  to  be  less  dependent  for  per-
ception or  sensation  on  the  known  forms  of  matter,  than  we
formerly  thought  it,  which  is  certainly  no  argument  against
immortality.  Many  cases  have  also  occurred,  and  I  could
specify,  if  I  were  permitted,  one  remarkable  case,  known
to  me,  in  which  the  study  of  Animal  Magnetism  has  led  to
a  firm  conviction  of  man's  spiritual  nature  and  immortality,
in  persons  formerly  sceptical  on  these  points.

But,  further,  I  must  here  declare  my  belief  that  the  term
Materialism,  as  used  in  this  objection,  has  so  vague  and
undefined  a  meaning,  that  I  have  never  found  any  one  who
used  it,  able  to  give  a  consistent  account  of  it.  This  is  not
at  all  surprising ;  for  if  we  were  to  ask  the  most  profound
philosopher  for  a  definition  of  matter,  we  should  be  disap-
pointed. What,  indeed,  is  known  of  matter  save  its  proper-
ties? Thus,  we  say,  matter  is  that  which  occupies  space,
which  possesses  impenetrability,  gravity,  cohesion,  chemical
attraction,  and  the  like.  But  when  we  proceed  to  ask,  what
is  that  to  which  these  properties  are  attached  or  belong,
considered  apart  or  abstracted  from  these  properties  ?  Is
there  a  substratum  possessing  the  essential  properties  of
matter  ?  If  so,  what  is  the  definition  of  this  substratum  ?
Or  again,  is  matter  a  congeries  of  atoms,  to  which  belong
certain  properties,  and  which  are  indefinitely  small?  or  is
it  a  congeries  of  mere  mathematical  points,  from  which,  as
centres,  certain  attractions  and  repulsions  act  to  certain
distances  ?  Is  not  gravitation  an  attraction  ?  is  not  cohesion,
is  not  affinity  an  attraction  ?  Is  not  impenetrability,  or  the
power  of  occupying  space,  to  the  exclusion  of  another  por-
tion of  matter,  is  not  indestructibility  also,  a  repulsion  ?  Is
not  magnetism,  is  not  electricity,  made  up  of  attractions
and  repulsions?  May  not  heat  and  light  be  equally  attrac-
tions and  repulsions  ?  What  then  remains  ?  If  the  pre-
sence of  all  these  forces,  acting  from  central  points,  would


MATTER  NOT  DEFINABLE,  DJJ

produce  on  our  senses  all  the  effect  produced  by  matter,
may  not  matter,  or  rather  may  not  the  properties  of  matter,
which  alone  we  know,  be  simply  the  results  of  forces  thus
grouped?  If  we  ask  these  and  similar  questions,  we  shall
not  easily  obtain  an  answer.  We  cannot,  in  truth,  conceive
of  matter  without  its  properties,  and  these  are  all  that  we
do  know  about  it.  Hence  the  tendency  of  science  at  the
present  day  is,  not  to  deny  the  existence  of  an  immortal
being  in  man,  but  rather  to  conceive  matter  itself  to  be
merely  force,  or  rather  a  congeries  of  forces.  Surely  this
has  no  tendency  unfavorable  to  the  idea  of  immortality,  but
the  reverse.

Again,  if  we  cannot  define  the  term  material,  how  is  it
possible  to  define  the  term  immaterial  ?  Unless  we  know
what  matter  is,  how  can  we  tell  what  it  is  not  ?  or  rather,
what  is  not  matter  ?  The  terms  materiality  and  immateri-
ality, being  indefinable,  cannot  be  used  in  such  a  controversy.
Nay  more,  if  we  choose  to  adopt  some  definition  of  matter,
say,  for  example,  that  it  "occupies  space,"  and  if  we  try  to
apply  this  definition  in  aiding  us  to  define  immateriality,  we
shall  not  find  the  task  an  easy  one.  Let  us  try  to  conceive
the  existence  of  a  being  which  does  not  occupy  space.  I
confess  myself  unable  to  do  so.

Moreover,  all  that  we  know  of  matter  justifies  us  in  declar-
ing it  to  be,  in  this  world  at  least,  and  to  our  apprehension,
indestructible,  and  consequently  immortal.  We  cannot
destroy  nor  annihilate  one  atom  of  matter;  we  can  only
change  its  form  and  place.  The  burning  coals  in  our  fires
are  not  destroyed  as  matter,  but  only  as  coals  ;  they  continue
to  exist  in  the  form  of  ash,  soot,  and  gaseous  matters.  If,
then,  we  could  imagine  the  soul  to  be  formed  of  any  kind
of  matter,  and  therefore  to  occupy  space,  (and,  as  I  have
said,  we  cannot  conceive  it  as  not  occupying  space,)  this  con-
ception would  by  no  means  militate  against  its  immortality,
but  the  reverse,  seeing  that  it  is  matter  only  of  which  we
can  say  with  truth,  that,  so  far  as  we  know,  it  is  indestruc-
tible and  immortal.  Whereas  we  do  not  know  anything  of
the  properties  of  spirit ;  we  cannot  form  a  distinct  conception
of  an  immaterial  substance ;  and,  lastly,  we  know  nothing,
in  this  life  at  least,  of  the  mind  or  soul,  save  as  connected
with  matter;  we  cannot  conceive,  in  this  life,  thought  with-
out a  brain.


64  THE  MODERN  DOCTRINE  OF

In  truth,  however,  the  doctrine  of  Materialism,  as  objected
to,  is  rather  that  which  has  been  held  by  some  of  those  who
have  studied  Animal  Magnetism,  not,  however,  in  conse-
quence of  that  study,  namely,  that  we  know  nothing  of
thought,  save  that  it  is  the  result  of  the  action  of  the  brain,
and  that,  consequently,  we  are  not  entitled  to  assume  the
existence  of  another  being  called  the  soul  or  mind,  since  that
assumption  is  not  required  to  explain  the  fact  of  thought.
It  is  supposed,  somehow,  that  that  doctrine  amounts  to  a
denial  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.

Now,  even  were  I  to  admit  the  doctrine  to  its  full  extent,
I  cannot  see  how  that  should  affect-  the  question  of  immor-
tality, since,  as  already  explained,  we  know  of  matter  alone,
that  it  is  indestructible.  Besides,  those  who  hold  firmly  the
doctrine  of  the  soul's  immortality  and  of  a  future  life,  also
believe,  on  the  testimony  of  Scripture,  in  the  resurrection,
not  of  the  soul  alone,  but  of  the  body.  Now,  I  would  ask,
is  it  believed  that  the  body  rises  for  no  purpose  ?  Has  it  no
function  to  perform  in  the  future  state  ?  I  cannot,  for  my
part,  imagine  this ;  but  rather  believe  that  man  will  then
continue  to  think  and  to  feel,  by  no  means  of  an  organiza-
tion as  in  this  life,  save  that,  as  we  shall  no  longer  require
to  perform  many  functions  purely  terrestrial,  we  shall  have,
as  St.  Paul  says,  a  spiritual  body,  sufficient  for,  and  admi-
rably adapted  to,  our  new  state  of  being,  in  which  the  nobler
faculties  of  thought  and  feeling  alone  will  be  exercised.
And  surely  it  is  as  easy  for  the  omnipotent  Creator  to  render
this  spiritual,  even  although  material  body,  immortal,  as  to
give  immortality  to  an  unknown,  and  strictly,  by  us,  incon-
ceivable being.

But  I  do  not  admit  that  doctrine  of  Materialism,  to  the
extent  of  excluding  a  thinking  principle  or  soul  distinct
from  the  body.  It  is  true  that  we  cannot  demonstrate  the
actual  existence  of  such  a  principle  or  being,  but  neither
can  we  prove  that  it  does  not  exist.  It  may  be  that  such  a
being  exists,  and  uses  the  brain  as  its  organ  for  thought  and
sensation ;  and  our  instinctive  consciousness  tells  us  that  it
is  so.  It  may  be,  on  the  other  hand,  that  there  is  no  such
being,  although  that  cannot  be  proved.  On  either  supposi-
tion, the  eternity  of  life,  thought,  and  sensation,  that  is,  the
immortality  of  man,  is  equally  secure.  It  is  not,  I  conceive,
given  to  man  by  his  faculties,  limited  as  they  are,  to  decide


MATERIALISM  NOT  PROVEABLE.  65

this  question  of  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  a  soul  or
thinking  principle  apart  from  the  body,  one  way  or  the  other.
It  will  never  be  decided  in  this  life.  But  while  I  admit  that
the  notion  of  a  distinct  being,  soul,  mind,  or  thinking  prin-
ciple, cannot  be  rigidly  demonstrated,  we  have  a  conscious-
ness which  declares  its  existence,  and  whose  testimony
cannot,  I  think,  be  altogether  rejected.  We  regard  the
brain  as  its  instrument,  by  divine,  therefore  by  infallible
appointment.  But  although  such  is  the  view  I  feel  com-
pelled to  adopt,  I  cannot  see  that  the  opposite  view  has  any
bearing  on  the  question  of  immortality,  which  is  equally
conceivable,  and  equally  easy,  on  either  supposition.  ^  And
most  certainly  Animal  Magnetism,  if  it  has  any  bearing  on
the  question,  fortifies  the  position  of  those  who  admit  the
existence  of  a  separate  thinking  principle  or  soul,  whether
material  or  immaterial  man  cannot  know,  but  indestructible
and  immortal  in  either  case.

Ninthly :  I  come  now  to  an  objection  which  meets  us  at
every  turn,  when  we  demonstrate  the  physical  effects  of
Animal  Magnetism  on  the  human  frame ;  when  we  produce,
for  example,  cataleptic  rigidity ;  paralysis  of  a  limb  ;  accele-
ration of  the  heart's  action  ;  insensibility  to  pain,  or  to  other
external  impressions ;  insensibility  of  the  pupil  of  the  eye
to  light,  and  immobility  of  the  iris  ;  stammering ;  strong  con-
traction of  the  muscles  against  the  will  of  the  subject ;  and
many  similar  phenomena ; — all  of  which  I  have  often  seen,
and  most  of  which  I  have  myself  produced ;  while  all  may
easily  be  shown  on  a  susceptible  subject.

It  is  said  by  many,  when  they  see  and  admit  these  facts,
that  they  are  produced  by  the  imagination.

Now  it  is  not  easy  to  discover  the  real  meaning  of  these
words  as  generally  used.  Do  they  mean  that  the  facts  are
imaginary,  and  not  true  facts  ?  Strange  as  it  may  appear,
such  is  often  the  meaning  present  to  the  mind  of  objectors,
when  they  have  not  only  seen,  but  admitted,  the  facts.  They
cannot,  apparently,  distinguish  between  what  is  produced
through  the  medium  of  an  excited  imagination,  which  is  their
theory  of  the  facts,  and  what  is  merely  imaginary  and  not
true.  Whatever  is  caused  by  imagination,  they  consider,
by  a  loose  and  vague  use  of  the  term,  as  imaginary.  _  But
surely,  a  rigid  limb  is  a  fact;  a  fixed  and  insensible  pupil,  an
accelerated  pulse,  &c.  are  facts,  whatever  be  the  exciting

6*


66  MAGNETISM  ASCRIBED

cause  of  them.  Nay,  cases  are  on  record,  in  which,  without
magnetism,  death  has  been  caused  by  imagination.  Was
the  death  in  these  cases  imaginary?  Did  the  subjects  only
fancy  they  were  dead  ?  If  such  objectors  would  only  endea-
vor clearly  to  distinguish  between  a  fact  and  its  explana-
tion, they  would  find  that  the  above-mentioned  phenomena
are  facts,  which  we  may,  if  we  please,  ascribe  to  the  imagi-
nation, but  which  are  not  on  that  account  the  less  real.

And  this,  indeed,  is  the  meaning  attached,  by  others  who
think  more  clearly  and  precisely,  to  the  present  objection.
The  ultimate  drift  of  it  is  this,  that  these  effects  are  not
produced  by  an  external  influence,  but  by  a  subjective  ope-
ration in  the  mind  of  the  person  operated  on,  which  is  called
the  action  of  the  imagination.  Now  there  is  no  objection  to
such  a  theory,  if  it  be  only  consistent  with  all  the  facts,  and
clearly  defined.  Let  us  suppose  it  to  be  consistent  with  all
the  facts,  for  the  sake  of  the  argument,  and  let  us  define  it
as  follows.  The  mind  of  the  person  operated  on,  excited  by
certain  gestures,  &c,  reacts  on  his  body,  and  produces  all
the  above  phenomena,  besides  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  many
others.  Now,  admitting  this,  and  calling  it,  for  the  sake  of
brevity,  imagination,  surely  it  is  obvious,  that  if  the  imagi-
nation be  capable  of  producing  all  these  effects,  it  is  a  matter
worthy  of  the  most  serious  investigation.  On  this  supposi-
tion, we  have  been  hitherto  very  ignorant  of  the  power
of  what  we  call  the  imagination,  and  we  ought  instantly  to
study  it,  in  order  to  discover  the  laws  of  its  action,  and  to
avail  ourselves  of  so  very  powerful  an  agent  as  it  must  ne-
cessarily be.  Still  on  the  same  supposition,  the  facts  exist,
and  they  are  in  no  respect  less  wonderful,  explained  in  this
way,  than  when  accounted  for  by  the  operation  of  an  exter-
nal influence.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  name  given  to  the
exciting  cause,  or  the  theory  of  its  action,  are,  in  this  stage
of  the  matter,  secondary  points.  It  is  the  facts  alone  which
are  in  question,  and  I  am  quite  ready  to  adopt  that  theory
which  ascribes  them  to  the  imagination,  when  it  shall  be
shown  to  be  consistent  with  all  the  facts.

But  in  truth  it  is  not,  when  carefully  examined,  capable
of  explaining  all,  or  nearly  all  the  phenomena.  The  accele-
ration or  retardation  of  the  pulse,  the  fixation  and  insensi-
bility of  the  pupil,  are  things  entirely  beyond  our  control.
The  magnetised  person  is  quite  unable,  however  strongly  his


TO  THE  IMAGINATION.  07

imagination  may  be  excited,  to  produce  these  facts  in  his
own  person,  without  some  process  of  what  is  called  magneti-
sation ;  while  these  and  all  the  other  phenomena  may  be
produced  in  him  by  the  magnetiscr,  without  the  slightest
action  on  his  imagination.  I  can  vouch  for  this  fact,  that
a  magnctiser  can.  strongly  affect  a  person,  who  is  not  only
in  another  room,  or  another  house,  or  many  hundred  yards
off,  but  who  is  utterly  unaware  that  anything  is  to  be  done.
The  subject,  in  such  cases,  while  engaged  in  his  usual  occu-
pation, feels  all  the  sensations,  and  exhibits  all  the  effects  of
magnetism :  and  in  susceptible  cases,  I  have  good  reason  to
know,  that  this  may  be  done  without  the  operator  having
ever  seen  the  subject  Here,  I  maintain,  the  imagination
cannot  act.

Again,  while  the  mind  or  imagination  of  the  subject
dwells  strongly  on  one  point,  he  may  be  made,  unknown  to
himself,  to  exhibit  phenomena  quite  unconnected  with  it.
While  eagerly  talking,  the  word  may  be  arrested,  half  pro-
nounced on  his  lips,  by  the  silent  will  of  the  operator,
standing  behind  or  away  from  him.  And  so  on,  in  a  hun-
dred varied  forms  of  experiment.

From  these  facts,  I  conclude  that  imagination  cannot  ex-
plain all  the  facts;  that  we  must  admit  an  external  influ-
ence ;  and  that,  this  being  admitted,  the  imagination  is  no
longer  required.  But  although  all  the  facts  of  Animal
Magnetism  may  be  produced  by  the  silent  will,  and  in  ab-
sence or  at  a  distance,  yet  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  the
imagination,  as  above  defined,  cannot  also  produce  many
(not  all)  of  these  facts.  On  the  contrary,  I  know  that,  by
influencing  the  imagination,  we  may  often  greatly  hasten
and  extend  the  influence  of  the  magnetic  force.  On  this,
indeed,  depend  in  some  measure  the  effects  produced  by  the
firm  and  strongly  expressed  will  of  the  operator.  But  the
operation  of  the  silent  will  proves  that  this  is  not  essential
to  the  production  of  the  j)henomena.

On  the  whole,  it  appears  that  this  objection  is  often
loosely  made  and  vaguely  understood ;  that,  when  more
precisely  understood  and  defined,  it  is  nothing  more  than
an  attempt  to  explain  the  facts,  without  admitting  an  exter-
nal agency,  by  means  of  a  hypothesis  or  assumption,  which
can  be  shown  not  to  suffice  for  the  explanation  of  all  the
facts,  although  it  may  sometimes  explain  the  production  of


68  NO  NATURAL  FACT

some  phenomena,  or  co-operate  with  the  magnetic  influence
in  producing  them.

But  even  on  this  view,  the  hypothesis  of  imagination,
excluding  external  agency,  has  but  a  weak  foundation.
Granting  that  certain  phenomena  are  produced  directly  by
the  excited  imagination,  how  has  that  imagination  been  ex-
cited ?  How  is  it  that  magnetic  operations,  such  as  passes,
gazing,  or  contact,  excite  this  so-called  imagination  so  pow-
erfully and  in  so  many  various  ways  ?  How  is  it  that  the
subject,  while  perfectly  conscious,  feels,  very  often  indeed,
nothing  but  certain  physical  sensations,  as  of  a  warm  or
cold  aura  from  the  operator's  hand,  or  a  sensation  like  that
of  weak  electrical  shocks,  or  like  that  of  a  powerful  gal-
vanic battery?  Let  us  view  it  as  we  will,  we  shall  find  that
some  external  influence  does  act  on  the  subject;  and  it  is  a
matter  comparatively  of  indifference  whether  it  acts  directly
or  through  the  imagination  in  producing  its  effects.  We
are  only  adding  a  link  to  the  chain  of  causes,  which  we
shall  find  always  to  terminate  at  one  end,  in  an  external
agency,  at  the  other,  in  the  phenomena  produced,  no  matter
how  many  additional  links  we  may  add  or  discover.

Tenthly:  The  next  objection  is,  in  my  opinion,  although
a  very  common  one,  the  most  futile  of  all.  It  is  that  the
phenomena  of  Animal  Magnetism  are  of  no  utility  or  value,
and  that  we  may,  therefore,  neglect  the  study  of  them.
Why,  I  am  often  asked,  do  you  give  any  attention  to  mat-
ters so  purely  of  curiosity  alone  ?  What  is  the  use  of  Ani-
mal Magnetism  ?

Now  this  question  has  been  asked  concerning  all  natural
sciences  whatever.  It  has  been  asked  of  astronomy,  of
geology,  of  chemistry,  of  minute  anatomy  and  physiology,
of  botany,  of  optics,  &c.  &c.  And  if  it  now  appear  absurd
in  these  cases,  it  is  only  because  the  lapse  of  time  has  de-
veloped in  all  of  them  an  infinity  of  useful  applications.

But  even  if  time  had  not  done  this,  it  would  still  be  cer-
tain that  it  is  our  duty  to  study  all  these  and  other  branches
of  science,  for  the  sake  of  truth  and  knowledge.  ~No  natural
fact  can  be  otherwise  than  valuable,  although  its  value  be
still  concealed  from  our  view.  It  may  have,  now  or  hereafter,
a  bearing  on  some  other  branch  of  science ;  and  it  may  at
once,  or  after  centuries,  become  available  for  practical  pur-
poses. These  possible  advantages  we  certainly  throw  away,


CAN  BE  INSIGNIFICANT.  69

if  we  neglect  the  study  of  any  fact  or  class  of  facts.  I  lately
heard  one  of  our  most  distinguished  men  of  science  declare,
when  about  to  mention  some  topographical  facts,  that  al-
though they  might  appear  to  he,  or  might  be,  insignificant
in  the  eyes  of  many,  no  natural  fact  could  be  unimportant.
This  is  strictly  true ;  and  I  cannot  doubt  that  the  distin-
guished gentleman  alluded  to,  will  apply  the  same  remark
to  the  facts  of  Animal  Magnetism.

Moreover,  we  have  examples  in  abundance,  which  prove,
that  facts,  apparently  of  trifling  or  no  interest,  may  suddenly
acquire  very  great  value,  as  our  knowledge  of  nature  ad-
vances. Thus  the  long-known  elasticity  of  steam,  in  the
hands  of  Watt,  led  to  the  modern  Steam  Engine.  The  facts
connected  with  the  temperature  of  ice  and  water,  of  water
and  steam,  led  Dr.  Black  to  his  theory  of  latent  heat,  which
assists  in  explaining,  as  it  probably  assisted  Watt  in  avail-
ing himself  of,  the  properties  of  steam.  The  observation  of
the  eclipses  of  Jupiter's  satellites  is  now  essential  to  naviga-
tion. The  simple  fact,  long  a  mere  curiosity  of  science,  that
a  current  of  electricity,  passing  along  a  wire,  induces,  when
interrupted,  a  secondary  current  in  a  parallel  wire,  or  affects
the  magnetic  needle,  has  lately  given  us  the  Electric  Tele-
graph. The  careful  study  of  the  mode  of  combustion  of
bituminous  coal  has  led  to  the  invention  of  gas  light.  That  of
the  effects  of  oxygen  on  burning  bodies  has  already  yielded  the
Bude  light,  and  will  probably,  ere  long,  do  greater  wonders.
On  the  principle  above  alluded  to,  of  the  action  of  an  electric
current  on  steel  and  on  soft  iron,  we  are  now  able  to  con-
struct permanent  or  temporary  magnets  of  amazing  power.
The  examination  of  the  products  of  the  action  of  chlorine  on
alcohol,  led  to  the  discovery,  among  other  compounds,  of  a
fragrant,  volatile  liquid,  which  for  more  than  twenty  years
figured  as  a  useless  curiosity.  Its  composition,  indeed,  illus-
trated certain  important  laws  of  Chemistry,  but  no  one
thought  of  turning  it  to  a  practical  purpose.  Yet  it  had
valuable  properties,  for,  when  carefully  studied  by  Dr.  Simp-
son, it  became,  as  Chloroform,  in  a  short  time  an  absolute
necessary  to  the  Surgeon  and  Accoucheur.  Had  Liebig  or
Soubeiran,  who  discovered  Chloroform  independently  of  each
other,  but  studied  all  its  properties,  the  discovery  of  the  fact,
that  surgical  operations  may  be  with  certainty  rendered  pain-


70  THERE  IS  A  TIME

less,  would  have  been  made  before  1830 ;  whereas  mankind
has  had  to  wait  fifteen  years  longer  for  this  boon.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out,  that  Animal  Magnet-
ism also  supplies  us  with  the  means  of  preventing  pain  in
surgical  operations.  And  this,  had  medical  men  done  their
duty,  and  attended  to  the  subject,  might  have  been  dis-
covered fifty  years  ago.  It  was  really  practised  for  many
years  before  the  discovery  of  the  use  of  chloroform.  At
the  present  time,  in  India,  Dr.  Esdaile  uses  Animal  Mag-
netism exclusively  for  this  purpose,  and  with  uniform  suc-
cess. Hitherto,  in  this  country,  we  have  not  attained  the
same  degree  of  certainty  in  producing  the  magnetic  state,
but  here  also,  it  is  extensively  used  in  preference  to  chloro-
form.

We  see,  then,  not  only  that  any  natural  fact,  however  ap-
parently insignificant,  is  important  in  itself,  and  may,  at
any  time,  become  practically  useful,  but  that  Animal  Mag-
netism already  admits  of  useful  applications ;  for  it  may  be
employed,  in  many  cases,  to  alleviate  pain,  and  to  cure  dis-
ease. But  even  were  this  not  yet  the  case,  it  would  form
no  argument  against  the  study  ;  for  its  uses  might  be  dis-
covered to-day,  to-morrow,  or  a  year,  or  a  hundred  years
hence.  We  shall  see,  by  and  by,  that  other  useful  applica-
tions of  it  are  already  known  or  in  prospect.

This  objection,  therefore,  must  be  dismissed,  as  in  general
founded  on  a  limited  knowledge  of  natural  facts,  and,  in  the
present  case,  as  quite  inapplicable  even  at  the  present  time.

In  the  Eleventh  and  last-  place  it  is  objected,  that  the
facts  of  Animal  Magnetism  are  at  once  so  obvious,  so
wonderful,  so  important,  and  so  likely  to  yield  useful  results,
that  if  they  really  existed,  they  must  have  long  ago  been
discovered,  and  applied  to  practical  purposes.

This  is  a  most  astounding  objection.  If  carried  out,  it
implies,  that  everything  not  yet  discovered,  or,  if  discovered,
not  yet  used,  must  of  necessity  be  valueless.  But  what
does  history  tell  us  ?  First,  that,  in  all  ages,  discoveries
have  been  made,  astonishing  mankind  by  their  simplicity,
obviousness,  and  utility,  which  yet  had  either  not  been  dis-
covered, or,  as  more  frequently  happened,  had  been  neglect-
ed and  forgotten.  Why  was  it  left  to  Roger  Bacon  to  dis-
cover gunpowder,  or  to  rediscover  it,  in  Europe,  while  it
had  been  known, for perhaps  a thousand years,  to  the


FOB  EVERY  DISCOVERY.  71

Chinese  ?  Why  was  America  not  discovered,  or  not  effectu-
ally discovered,  before  the  time  of  Columbus  ?  Nay,  was
not  Columbus  himself  taunted  with  the  remark,  that  if  there
were  a  western  continent,  it  would  never  have  been  left  to
him,  a  common  seaman,  to  discover  it  ?  Did  electricity  not
exist  before  Franklin,  or  magnetism  before  the  compass  was
used  ?  How  did  it  happen  that  no  man,  before  Newton,
thought  of  applying  the  daily  recurring  fact  of  the  fall  of  an
apple,  &c.  to  the  ground,  to  the  discovery  of  the  law  which
regulates  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  ?  Why  was
the  force  of  steam  not  made  available  long  before  our  day,
when  it  had  even  been  pointed  out  by  the  Marquis  of  Wor-
ccster  ?  Men  saw  coals  burning  every  day  for  more  than  a
thousand  years,  before  Winsor  thought  of  collecting  and
using  the  gaseous  products  of  their  destruction  by  heat.
In  short,  why  was  any  discovery  made  or  appreciated  at  a
certain  time,  and  not  before  ?  Because,  to  receive  any  new
truth,  or  any  discovery,  the  minds  of  men  must  be  pre-
pared both  for  its  investigation  and  for  its  comprehension.
So,  and  not  otherwise,  is  it  with  the  science  of  Animal  Mag-
netism.

The  facts  of  Animal  Magnetism  have  been  observed  from
the  earliest  times.  Nay,  they  have  been  used,  both  for  the
cure  of  disease,  and  for  less  commendable  objects.  But  if
they  were  scientifically  studied,  which  it  is  probable  they
were,  it  was  only  by  a  certain  number  of  adepts  or  illumi-
nati,  as,  for  example,  the  priests  of  Egypt  and  of  India,  who
kept  their  science  secret,  till  it  was  lost  to  the  world.  It
was  necessary  to  rediscover  Animal  Magnetism,  and  this
was  done  by  Mesmer.  Unfortunately,  he  appears,  in  some
respects,  to  have  handled  the  subject  unscientifically,  and
thus  to  have,  if  not  created,  yet  greatly  strengthened  the  pre-
judice with  which,  as  we  have  seen,  new  and  startling  dis-
coveries have  always  been  received,  and  if  we  may  trust
the  lessons  of  history,  always  will  be  received.  The  science
is  yet  in  its  cradle,  but,  I  rejoice  to  say,  it  is  growing  rapidly
and  vigorously.  That  it  has  not  been,  centuries  before  this
time,  fully  developed,  can  be  no  argument  against  it,  more
than  against  the  other  discoveries  above  alluded  to.  That
a  great  part  of  it  has  been  laid  open  to  us  by  persons  not
trained  to  science,  by  laymen,  as  we  may  call  them,  is  be-
cause men  of  science  have,  till  very  recently,  refused  to  ex-


72  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM

amine  it,  and  have  acted  as  their  ancestors  did  to  Columbus,
or  to  the  discoverers  of  the  Antipodes.  They  have  opposed
to  facts,  alleged  on  good  testimony,  arguments  drawn  from
erroneous  interpretation  of  Scripture,  or  that  still  more  ab-
surd argument,  that  so  great  a  discovery  could  not  have
been  reserved  for  instruments  so  humble  and  insignificant.


I  have  now  considered,  as  generally  as  possible,  all  the  ob-
jections which  I  have  heard  brought  against  Animal  Mag-
netism ;  and  it  has,  I  trust,  been  shown  that  they  are  un-
tenable, being  the  very  same  which  have  in  all  ages  been
raised  against  all  new  facts,  new  ideas,  and  progress  in  every
branch  of  human  knowledge,  and  which  are  now  abandoned
in  regard  to  all  those  sciences  which  have  been  studied  in
the  right  spirit  for  a  sufficient  time.  We  cannot  doubt  that
the  same  result  will  ensue  in  the  case  of  Animal  Magnetism,
when  it  shall  have  been  studied  for  a  certain  time  by  per-
sons qualified  for  the  task.  That  it  has,  up  to  this  time,
been,  to  a  considerable  extent,  although  far  from  entirely,
in  the  hands  of  less  qualified  or  unqualified  persons,  is  en-
tirely to  be  ascribed  to  its  having  been  rejected  and  neglected
by  men  of  science.  This  neglect,  however,  can  no  longer
be  continued,  for  if  such  men  persist  in  ignoring  the  subject,
they  will  be  left  far  behind  by  those  who  see  the  necessity
of  attending  to  it.  The  younger  class  of  medical  and
scientific  men  will  also  come  to  the  investigation  of  the  sub-
ject without  old  prejudices;  and  ere  long,  it  will  be  as  dis-
creditable for  an  educated  physician  to  be  ignorant  of  Ani-
mal Magnetism,  as  it  would  now  be  for  him  to  be  ignorant
of  physiology  or  chemistry.*

Having  now  cleared  the  ground,  we  are  prepared  to  enter
on  the  details  of  the  subject ;  and  I  propose  to  do  this,  by
describing  first,  the  usual  processes  of  magnetism ;  then  the
phenomena,  individually  as  they  appear,  beginning  with
what  are  called  the  lower,  and  going  on  to  the  higher  phe-
nomena. In  doing  this,  I  shall  refer,  as  often  as  possible,

*  It  may  possibly  appear  to  the  reader,  that  I  have  omitted  the
consideration  of  certain  objections  which  may  occur  to  him.  If  so,
it  has  only  been  because  I  have  reserved  notice  of  the  more  special
objections  to  individual  facts,  for  a  more  appropriate  place,  confining
myself  here,  to  the  general  objections  so  far  as  known  to  me.


MUST  BE  STUDIED.  73

to  what  I  have  myself  seen  and  been  able  to  do  in  Animal
Magnetism,  while  I  shall  also  adduce  striking  cases  from  the
experience  of  other  observers.  Lastly,  I  shall  endeavor  to
explain  what  is  known  of  the  cause  of  the  phenomena,  and
of  the  laws  which  regulate  them.  Here,  of  course,  I  must
trench  on  hypothetical  ground,  but  this  may  be  safely  done,
if  we  bear  in  mind  that  facts  are  the  most  essential  matters
l^ere,  which  will  continue  to  exist,  whatever  be  our  mode  of
accounting  for  them,  or  whether  we  can  account  for  them
or  not.


LETTER  IV.

We  now  come  to  the  practical  consideration  of  our  sub-
ject ;  that  is,  of  the  effects  produced  on  many  persons  by
various  causes,  whether  external  and  objective,  or  internal
and  subjective,  but  which  must  be  classed  in  the  same  cate-
gory, and  ascribed  to  the  same  ultimate  or  primary  cause.

The  name  given  to  these  phenomena  is  a  matter  of  small
importance;  the  essential  point  being,  that  we  should  know
the  facts.  Mesmer,  who  re-discovered  them  towards  the
end  of  the  last  century,  gave  them  the  name  of  Animal
Magnetism ;  and  although  this  be  not  unobjectionable,  I
shall  adopt  it  here,  as  generally  known,  and  as  indicating  the
affinity  with  ordinary  magnetism,  that  subtle  and  unaccount-
able influence  which  attracts  iron,  and  causes  the  magnetic
needle  to  point  north  and  south.  This  kind  of  Magnetism,
when  I  have  occasion  to  refer  to  it,  I  shall  call  Ferro-mag-
netism,  a  convenient  term,  lately  introduced  by  Dr.  Fara-
day. The  kind  of  magnetism,  (if  it  be  such,  but  at  all
events  it  has  many  analogies  with  Ferro-magnetism,)  which
we  are  now  to  examine,  may  be  called  Vital  or  Animal  Mag-
netism.

I  prefer  this  to  the  term  Mesmerism,  which,  in  the  minds
of  many,  has  acquired  a  limited  meaning.  It  is  always  un-
derstood as  implying  the  action  of  one  person  on  another ;
it  is  often  applied  chiefly  to  the  remedial  process,  and,  by
others  again,  to  the  production  of  the  magnetic  sleep,
7


74  NAMES  GIVEN  TO

whereas  I  use  the  term  Animal  Magnetism,  as  a  familiar
and  established  name  for  all  the  phenomena,  spontaneous  or
artificially  produced,  objective  or  subjective,  which  belong
obviously  to  one  class.

Various  other  names  have  been  proposed ;  such  as  hypnot-
ism, by  Mr.  Braid,  who  confines  it,  however,  to  his  own
method  or  process ;  electro-biology,  by  various  American
experimenters,  for  the  phenomena  which  may  be  produced
in  the  conscious  state,  but  which  are  also  produced  in  the
sleep,  and  even  in  the  conscious  state,  by  the  ordinary
methods,  as  well  as  by  those  of  Dr.  Darling  and  others.
Then  we  have  electro-psychology,  and  other  similar  names,
in  which,  as  in  electro-biology,  the  affinity  to  electric  phe-
nomena, or  the  theory,  that  electricity  is  identical  with  the
vital  force,  is  chiefly  kept  in  view.  Sow,  although  there  is
an  obvious  analogy  with  electricity,  as  well  as  with  magnet-
ism, these  latter  names,  without  being  more  precise,  or
better  founded,  have  the  disadvantage  of  being  new,  while
Animal  Magnetism  is  established.  It  is  always  best  to  use
an  established  name,  where  it  can  be  done  without  leading
to  false  notions ;  and  Animal  Magnetism  is  so  far  appropri-
ate, that  it  is  known ;  and  if  explained  to  be  merely  a  col-
lective name  for  a  class  of  phenomena,  many,  perhaps  all
of  which,  may  be  produced  by  magnets,  as  well  as  by  other
means,  and  not  to  imply  that  the  influence  producing  them
is  identical  with  that  which  produces  the  facts  of  ferro-mag-
netism,  will  not,  I  think,  lead  to  serious  error.  We  shall
see,  hereafter,  that  the  researches  of  Baron  von  Reichen-
bach  have  led  him  to  suggest  a  new  name  for  the  influence,
which  I  consider  to  be  unobjectionable,  but  which,  in  this
stage  of  the  inquiry,  I  shall  not  use,  for  fear  of  causing
confusion.  I  shall  reserve  it  for  the  section  in  which  the
nature  of  the  cause  or  influence  is  to  be  discussed.

Some  persons  suppose,  that  there  is  a  real  distinction
between  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  of  hypnotism,  and
of  electro-biology,  in  reference  to  their  causes.  But  this  is
not  the  case.  We  shall  see,  that  it  is  merely  the  methods
which  differ,  and,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  train  of  pheno-
mena developed  by  these  methods.  But  this  latter  differ-
ence is  merely  one  of  degree,  or  stage.  All  the  phenomena
of  the  conscious  state  in  electro-biology,  and  of  the
unconscious  state  in  hypnotism,  can  be  produced,  in  both


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.  75

states,  by  the  older  mesmeric  or  magnetic  methods.  I
have  often  seen  every  one  of  them  produced  in  each  of
these  ways,  without  any  greater- difference  between  the  hyp-
notic or  biological  phenomena  and  those  of  common  Animal
Magnetism,  than  necessarily  exists  between  different  stages
of  the  latter ;  so  that  while  Animal  Magnetism  includes  all
the  phenomena,  the  other  names  are  confined  to  certain
stages  or  subdivisions  of  them,  produced  by  peculiar  pro-
cesses. I  have  thought  it  necessary  to  premise  this  expla-
nation, because  many  suppose  that  all  these  phenomena  are
essentially  distinct,  an  error  arising  entirely  from  the  use
of  new  names.

I  may  add,  that  another  good  reason  for  preferring  the
term  Animal  Magnetism  is,  that  it  is  the  term  used  in
France,  and  in  other  parts  of  the  Continent.

The  first  fact  which  we  shall  notice,  is  that  of  the  sensa-
tions produced  when  one  individual  acts  on  another,  describ-
ing the  process  usually  employed.

If  you  will  try  the  experiment  of  drawing  the  points  of
the  fingers  of  your  right  hand,  without  contact,  but  very
near,  over  the  hands  of  several  persons,  downwards  from
the  wrist,  the  hands  being  held  with  the  palms  upwards,
and  your  fingers  either  all  abreast,  or  one  following  the
other,  and  repeat  this,  slowly,  several  times,  you  will  most
probably  find  one  or  more  who  distinctly  perceive  a  peculiar
sensation,  which  is  not  always  the  same  in  different  persons.
Some  will  feel  a  slight  warmth,  others  a  slight  coolness,
others  a  pricking;  some,  a  tingling;  others  a  numbness.
Such  as  perceive  these  sensations  most  distinctly  may  then
be  tested,  and  will  be  found,  probably,  very  clear  and  con-
sistent with  themselves,  even  if  blindfolded.  But  sometimes,
blindfolding  produces  at  once  a  state  of  nervous  disturbance,
most  unfavorable  to  clear  perception.  All  this  I  have  often
tried  and  seen,  and  Reichenbach,  as  well  as  many  others,
has  minutely  described  it.

You  may  now,  having  found  a  person  susceptible  to  a  cer-
tain extent,  proceed  to  try  the  effect  of  passes,  made  slowly
with  both  your  hands,  downwards  from  the  crown  of  the
patient's  head,  over  the  face,  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  or
even  down  to  the  feet,  always  avoiding  contact,  but  keeping
as  near  as  possible  without  contact.  Or  you  may  make  the
passes  laterally,  and  so  downwards  over  the  arms. It  is


76  MODES  OF  OPERATING.

necessary  to  act  with  a  cool,  collected  mind,  and  a  firm  will,
while  the  patient  is  perfectly  passive  and  undisturbed  by
noise  or  otherwise.  He  ought  to  look  steadily  at  the  eyes
of  the  operator,  who,  in  his  turn,  ought  to  gaze  firmly  on
his  subject.  The  passes  should  be  continued,  patiently,  for
some  time,  and  will  generally  excite  the  sensations  above
mentioned,  warmth,  coolness,  pricking,  tingling,  creeping
of  the  skin,  or  numbness,  according  to  the  individual  ope-
rated on.  When  these  sensations  are  very  marked,  the
subject  will,  in  all  probability,  turn  out  a  good  one.  It  is
probable  that,  with  patience  and  perseverance,  a  vigorous,
healthy  operator,  would  finally  succeed  in  affecting  all  per-
sons ;  but  in  some  cases,  which  have  afterwards  become
very  susceptible,  the  subjects  have  been  only  affected  with
great  difficulty,  and  only  after  much  perseverance,  or  even
have  not  been  at  all  affected  on  the  first  trial,  nay,  even  for
many  successive  trials.  The  operator  must  not  be  dis-
couraged. If  he  perseveres,  the  chances  of  success  are
much  increased,  while  he  will  often  meet  with  cases,  in  which
a  few  minutes  suffice  to  produce  strong  effects.

Another,  and  in  some  cases  a  more  successful  method,  is
to  sit  clown?  close  before  the  patient,  to  take  hold  of  his
thumbs  in  your  thumbs  and  fingers,  and,  gently  pressing
them,  to  gaze  fixedly  in  his  eyes,  concentrating  your  mind
upon  him,  while  he  does  the  same.  This  is,  at  least  in  the
beginnging,  less  fatiguing  than  making  the  unaccustomed
motions  of  passes,  although,  with  a  little  practice,  it  is  easy
to  make  several  hundreds  of  passes  uninterruptedly.  I
cannot  give  decided  preference  to  either  method.  Both
will  occasionally  fail,  and  both  are  often  successful.  They
may  be  combined,  that  is,  alternated,  and  often  with  advan-

ta2e"

Two  things  are  desirable. First,  a  passive  and  willing

state  of  mind  in  the  patient,  although  faith  in  magnetism  is
not  at  all  indispensable;  but  a  bond  fide  passivity,  or  willing-
ness to  be  acted  on.  This,  however,  signifies  little  in  sus-
ceptible cases.  Secondly,  intense  concentration  on  the  part
of  the  operator.  It  is  self-evident  that,  to  attain  this,  per-
fect silence  is  essential.  Even  the  noises  in  the  street  will
often  distract  both  parties  from  the  necessary  attention,  and
still  more,  whispering  among  the  •  company,  moving  about,
the  rustling  of  a  lady's  dress,  &c.  &c. The  time  required


EFFECTS  PRODUCED. THE  SLEEP.  77

varies  from  a' minute  or  two  to  an  hour  or  more,  but  usually
diminishes  on  repetition.

Intent  gazing  alone,  especially  if  practised  by  both  par-
ties, will  often  produce  the  sensations  above  described,
without  close  proximity.  I  have  often  seen  Mr.  Lewis,  who
likes  this  mode  of  operating,  namely,  gazing  at  a  certain
distance,  with  intensity  and  a  firm  volition,  produce  these
sensations,  and  even  stronger  effects,  in  the  space  of  five
minutes,  on  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  company,
varying  perhaps  from  5  to  20  or  25  per  cent.,  according  to
circumstances.  But  his  power  of  concentration  is  truly
astonishing,  and  is  strongly  indicated  in  his  whole  gesture,
and  in  the  expression  of  his  countenance,  while  operating.

Lastly,  these  sensations  may  be  produced  by  gazing,  on
the  part  of  the  patient  alone,  either  at  a  small  object  in  his
hand,  as  practised  by  Dr.  Darling  with  great  success,  or  at
an  object  placed  above  and  before  the  eyes,  as  is  done  with
equal  success  by  Mr.  Braid  in  producing  hypnotism.  In-
deed, one  difficulty  in  these  cases  is,  to  prevent  the  subject
from  going  further,  and  becoming  unconscious.

Such  is  a  general  account  of  the  phenomena  which  first
present  themselves,  which  are  not  very  striking,  and  of  the
processes  usually  followed.  Indeed  many  are  ready  to  say,
that  these  phenomena  are  due  only  to  the  silence  and  con-
straint of  the  experiment,  and,  therefore,  prove  nothing.
But  such  a  remark  only  applies  to  the  faintest  sensations.
When  strongly  marked,  they  are  quite  unmistakable,  and
cannot,  by  any  possibility,  be  ascribed  to  anything  but  a
real  influence;  which,  according  to  the  form  of  experiment,
may  be  either  external  or  internal.

Now,  the  same  processes,  when  continued  longer,  give
rise  to  phenomena  still  more  striking ;  and  I  shall  now  pro-
ceed to  these,  while  it  will  be  unnecessary  to  repeat  the
detail  of  the  processes,  which,  as  already  described,  suffice
to  produce  the  whole  train  of  magnetic  phenomena.

The  first  is,  a  twitching  of  the  eyelids,  which  begin  to
droop,  while,  even  when  the  eyelids  remain  open,  there  is
in  many  cases,  a  veil,  as  it  were,  drawn  before  the  eyes,
concealing  the  operator's  face  and  other  objects.  Now  also
comes  on  a  drowsiness,  and,  after  a  time,  consciousness  is
suddenly  lost,  and  on  awaking  the  patient  has  no  idea
whatever  how  long  it  is  since  he  fell  asleep,  nor  what  has

7*


78  ARTIFICIAL  AND  NATURAL

occurred  during  his  sleep.  The  whole  is  a  olank,  but  he
generally  wakes,  with  a  deep  sigh,  rather  suddenly,  and
says  he  has  had  a  very  pleasant  sleep-,  without  the  least
idea  whether  for  five  minutes  or  for  five  hours.  He  has  been,
more  or  less  deeply,  in  the  magnetic  or  mesmeric  sleep,
which  I  shall  now  describe  more  particularly.  I  do  so
because,  in  many  cases  of  ordinary  magnetism,  by  passes  or
by  gazing,  it  is  the  first  marked  result  obtained,  and  in
most  of  tliem  it  occurs  immediately  after  the  sensations
formerly  described.

I  am  aware  that  many  very  beautiful  phenomena  occur  in
the  conscious  state,  but,  to  produce  them  in  that  state,  we
must  operate  in  a  peculiar  way;  whereas,  by  operating  as
above  described,  we  generally  produce  the  sleep,  in  which
all  the  same  phenomena  may  be  observed,  and  indeed  we
may  produce  them  all  in  the  conscious  state,  in  this  way
also,  by  stopping  short  of  the  sleep.  I  shall  consider  their
production  in  the  conscious  state,  after  I  have  described  the
sleep  and  its  phenomena.

I  have  just  said,  that  the  sleeper  wakes,  without  a  recol-
lection of  what  may  have  passed  in  his  sleep.  But  we  are
not  to  suppose,  because  it  now  appears  a  blank  to  him,  that
it  has  really  been  a  mere  torpid,  insensible,  unconscious,
slumber.  It  is  only  an  unconscious  state,  in  reference  to
the  ordinary  waking  condition ;  for  the  sleeper  may  have
been  actively  engaged  in  thinking,  observing,  and  speaking,
during  the  whole  period  of  sleep.  This  it  is  which  renders
the  sleep  so  interesting  a  phenomenon.  Let  us  now  con-
sider its  characteristics  a  little  more  fully.

1.  It  is  a  state  of  somnambulism,  sleep-walking,  or  more
correctly  sleep-waking.  It  is  a  sound,  calm,  undisturbed
sleep ;  that  is,  it  is  not  broken  by  gleams  of  ordinary  con-
sciousness. But  the  sleeper  answers  when  spoken  to  by  the
operator,  and  answers  rationally  and  sensibly.  He  fre-
quently doubts,  and  therefore  frequently  uses  the  words  "  I
don't  know,"  and  appears  most  anxious  not  to  affirm  or
deny  any  thing  of  which  he  is  not  quite  sure.  If  desired,
he  will  rise  and  walk,  and,  according  to  the  particular  stage
in  which  he  may  be,  he  walks  with  more  or  less  confidence
and  security,  his  eyes  being  always  closed,  or,  if  found  open,
either  turned  up,  or  insensible  to  light.  In  short,  he  is  a
somnambulist,  and  possesses  some  means,  not  possessed  in


SOMNAMBULISM  COMPARED.  79

the  ordinary  state,  of  becoming  aware  of  the  presence  of
objects.  Whether  this  depend  on  a  preternatural  acuteness
of  the  senses  of  touch,  hearing,  and  smell,  or  on  a  more
occult  perceptive  power,  or  on  both,  is  a  question  which
shall  be  discussed  hereafter.  I  shall  here  only  remark,
that  the  variety  in  the  phenomena,  in  different  cases,  and
in  different  phases  of  the  same  case,  is  so  great,  that  I  am
inclined  to  believe  that  both  causes  maybe  in  operation;
but  that,  sometimes,  we  have  positive  evidence  that  the
external  senses  are  entirely  closed;  while  the  numerous  ac-
counts given  of  spontaneous  somnambulism  would  lead  us
to  conclude  that  such  is  generally  the  case  in  that  state.
No  one  has  ever  seen  a  case  of  natural  sleep-walking,  and
who  subsequently  examines  one  of  artificially  excited  som-
nambulism, ever  hesitates  a  moment  in  recognising  the
essential  and  complete  identity  of  the  two  phenomena.  I
have  not,  myself,  as  yet  had  the  good  fortune  to  see  a  natu-
ral sleep-walker ;  but  I  have  heard  such  cases  often  described
by  those  who  had  seen  and  studied  them,  and  who  inva-
riably, when  allowed  to  see  a  case  of  magnetic  somnam-
bulism, acknowledged  that  the  phenomena  were  the  same.

Here  I  would  stop,  to  remark,  that  natural  or  spontaneous
somnambulism  is  a  very  frequent  occurrence,  so  very  fre-
quent, indeed,  that  most  persons  have  seen  it.  This  proves
that  it  depends  on  a  natural  cause  very  widely,  if  not  uni-
versally, diffused  among  mankind,  which  would  seem  only
to  produce  these  marked  effects  when  the  system  is  in  a
peculiar  condition,  possibly  an  essentially  morbid  or  excitable
state  of  the  nervous  system.  It  is  generally  observed  to
occur  during  the  hours  of  sleep,  but  this  is  not  a  universal
rule,  for  persons  subject  to  it  have  been  known  to  fall  into
somnambulism  during  the  day.  .Sleep,  however,  is  favor-
able to  its  occurrence.  Supposing  that  artificial  somnam-
bulism had  been  first  observed,  before  the  natural  was
known,  then,  since  the  artificial  phenomenon  must  depend
on  some  power  residing  in  the  system,  and  judging  from
analogy,  we  should  certainly  have  been  justified  in  expect-
ing that  it  would  some  day  occur  as  a  spontaneous  natural
fact.  In  like  manner,  the  natural  fact  having  been  ob-
served from  the  earliest  times,  analogy  would  lead  us  to
expect,  that  this  might  be  imitated  by  artificial  means,  just


80  INCREASED  ACUTENESS  OF  SENSES.

as  ordinary  sleep  may  be  produced  by  narcotics,  and  sneez-
ing or  vomiting  by  appropriate  drugs.

In  short,  one  is  quite  at  a  loss  to  explain  how  persons,  of
excellent  abilities,  who  have  seen,  or  who  readily  admit,  the
occurrence  of  spontaneous  somnambulism,  should  have  any
difficulty  in  admitting  the  possibility,  nay,  the  high  proba-
bility, d  priori,  of  its  artificial  production.  My  theory  of
this  strange  disinclination  is,  that  these  persons  have  alarmed
themselves  by  attributing  to  the  magnetic  sleep,  characters
and  consequences  injurious  to  morality  or  religion,  or  incon-
sistent with  their  own  preconceived  notions  of  nature  and  of
science,  and  that  by  the  strong  feelings  thus  excited,  their
intellect  is  so  far  blinded,  that  they  cannot,  for  the  time,
either  appreciate  duly  the  evidence  of  the  fact,  or  enquire
calmly  whether,  if  admitted,  it  really  has  those  characters,
and  necessarily  entails  those  consequences  which  they  attri-
bute to  it.

2.  The  sleeper  sometimes,  but  not  always,  nor  in  all  stages
of  the  sleep,  hears  with  increased  acuteness,  and  that  to  an
extent  apparently  marvellous.  It  is  possible  that  this  may
depend,  as  in  the  blind,  at  all  events  in  part,  on  the  fact,
that  the  eye  being  no  longer  active,  nor  indeed  sensible  to
light,  while  the  senses  of  touch,  taste,  and  smell,  are  proba-
bly quiescent  till  objects  are  presented  to  them,  the  whole
attention  of  the  sleeper  is  concentrated  on  the  sense  of  hear-
ing. I  have  no  knowledge,  at  present,  of  whether  this  sense
is  thus  affected  in  natural  sleep-walking,  but  I  should  expect
that  it  will  sometimes  be  found  more  acute,  and  at  other
times  closed,  as  certainly  occurs  in  the  magnetic  sleep.
Many  cases  of  sleep-walking  are  recorded,  in  which  no  sound,
however  loud,  was  heard  by  the  somnambulist,  and  some,  in
which  very  loud  noises  suddenly  and  dangerously  awoke  him,
whereas  less  loud  sounds  had  not  been  noticed.  The  state  of
utter  deafness  to  all  sounds,  however  loud,  such  as  shouting
or  firing  a  pistol,  or  ringing  a  large  bell,  close  to  the  ear,  is
very  common  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  may,  I  believe,  be
produced  in  every  case  at  some  stage  of  it,  or,  by  the  will  of
the  operator,  at  almost  any  stage.

3.  When  the  sleeper  has  become  fully  asleep,  so  as  to
answer  questions  readily  without  waking,  there  is  almost
always  observed  a  remarkable  change  in  the  countenance,
the  manner,  and  the  voice. On  falling  asleep  at  first,  he


EXPRESSIONS  OF  THE  FACE. THE  VOICE.  81

looks,  perhaps,  drowsy  and  heavy,  like  a  person  dozing  in
church,  or  at  table,  "when  overcome  by  fatigue,  or  stupefied
by  excess  in  wine,  or  by  the  foul  air  of  a  crowded  apartment.
Eut  when  spoken  to,  he  usually  brightens  up,  and,  although
the  eyes  be  closed,  yet  the  expression  becomes  highly  intel-
ligent, quite  as  much  so  as  if  he  saw.  His  whole  manner
seems  to  undergo  a  refinement,  which,  in  the  higher  stages,
reaches  a  most  striking  point,  insomuch  that  we  see,  as  it
were,  before  us,  a  person  of  a  much  more  elevated  character
than  the  same  sleeper  seems  to  be  when  awake.  It  would
seem  as  if  the  lower  or  animal  propensities  were  laid  to  rest,
while  the  intellect  and  higher  sentiments  shone  forth  with  a
lustre  that  is  undiminished  by  ought  that  is  mean  or  common.
This  is  particularly  seen  in  women  of  natural  refinement  and
high  sentiments,  but  it  is  also  observed  in  men  of  the  same
stamp,  and  more  or  less  in  all.  In  the  highest  stages  of
the  magnetic  sleep,  the  countenance  often  acquires  the
most  lovely  expression,  surpassing  all  that  the  greatest
artists  have  given  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  or  to  Angels,  and
which  may  fitly  be  called  heavenly,  for  it  involuntarily  sug-
gests to  our  minds  the  moral  and  intellectual  beauty  which
alone  seems  consistent  with  our  views  of  heaven.  As  to  the
voice,  I  have  never  seen  one  person  in  the  true  magnetic
sleep,  who  did  not  speak  in  a  tone  quite  distinct  from  the
ordinary  voice  of  the  sleeper.  It  is  invariably,  so  far  as  I
have  observed,  softer  and  more  gentle,  well  corresponding
to  the  elevated  and  mild  expression  of  the  face.  It  has  often
a  plaintive  and  touching  character,  especially  when  the
sleeper  speaks  of  departed  friends  or  relations.  In  the  highest
stages,  it  has  a  character  quite  new,  and  in  pesfect  accord-
ance with  the  pure  and  lovely  smile  of  the  countenance,  which
beams  on  the  observer,  in  spite  of  the  closed  eyes,  like  a  ray
of  heaven's  own  light  and  beauty.  I  speak  here  of  that
which  I  have  often  seen,  and  I  would  say,  that,  as  a  general
rule,  the  sleeper,  when  in  his  ordinary  state,  and  when  in
the  deep  magnetic  sleep,  appears  not  like  the  same,  but  like
two  different  individuals.

4.  And  it  is  not  wonderful  that  it  should  be  so.  For  the
sleeper,  in  the  magnetic  state,  has  a  consciousness  quite  se-
parate and  distinct  from  his  ordinary  consciousness.  He  is,
in  fact,  if  not  a  different  individual,  yet  the  same  individual


82  DIVIDED  CONSCIOUSNESS.

in  a  different  and  distinct  phase  of  his  being  ;  and  that  phase,
a  higher  one.

As  a  general  rule,  but  not  a  rule  without  some  exceptions,
the  sleeper  does  not  remember,  after  waking,  what  he  may
have  seen,  felt,  tasted,  smelled,  heard,  spoken,  or  done,
during  his  sleep ;  but  when  next  put  to  sleep,  he  recollects
perfectly  all  that  has  occurred,  not  only  in  the  last  sleep,
but  in  all  former  sleeps,  and,  as  in  the  ordinary  state,  with
greater  or  less  accuracy,  although  usually  very  accurately
indeed.  He  lives,  in  fact,  a  distinct  life  in  the  sleep,  and
has,  what  is  called,  a  double  or  divided  consciousness  :  of
course,  sleepers  differ  in  their  powers  of  memory  in  the  mag-
netic state,  as  they  do  in  their  ordinary  state,  if  not  to  the
same  extent.

But,  when  in  the  magnetic  state,  the  sleeper  is  not  always
entirely  cut  off  from  his  usual  state,  even  in  those  cases  in
which  he  has  no  trace,  on  waking,  left  in  his  mind,  of  the
actions  or  sensations  of  the  sleep.  On  the  contrary,  he
often  speaks  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  with  accuracy,  of  things
known  to  him  in  his  usual  state.  It  is  remarkable,  that  he
finds,  in  general,  a  great  difficulty,  or  even  an  impossibility,
in  naming  persons  or  things  in  this  way.  He  will  define
and  describe  them,  but  very  often  either  cannot,  or  will  not
name  them.  If  you  name  them,  he  will  assent,  but  would
rather  not  do  it  himself.

He  often  loses,  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  his  sense  of  identity,
so  that  he  cannot  tell  his  own  name,  or  gives  himself  another,
frequently  that  of  the  operator  ;  while  yet  he  will  speak
sensibly  and  accurately  on  all  other  points.  He  very  often
gives  to  his  .operator,  and  to  other  persons,  wrong  names,
but  always,  so  far  as  I  have  seen,  the  same  name  to  the
same  person.

The  phenomenon  of  double  or  divided  consciousness  has
frequently  been  described  as  a  spontaneous  one,  and  per-
sons have  lived,  for  years,  in  an  alternation  of  two  conscious-
nesses, in  the  one  of  which  they  forget  all  they  had  ever
learned  in  the  other,  and  have  had,  therefore,  to  be  educated,
like  a  child,  in  the  former.

The  same  thing  occasionally  happens  in  Animal  Magnet-
ism. The  sleeper  has  often  to  learn,  as  a  child,  things  with
which,  in  his  usual  state,  he  is  quite  familiar,  such  as  read-


FIRST  DAWN  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE.  83

ing  or  writing ;  but  this  is  by  no  means  always  observed;
possibly,  it  is  seldom  looked  for.

The  phenomenon  of  which  we  have  spoken,  divided  or
double  consciousness,  more  or  less  perfect,  is  one  of  the
most  surprising  and  beautiful  in  the  whole  series  of  mag-
netic phenomena.  As  it  is  very  easily  observed,  that  is,
if  we  have  confidence,  in  the  sleeper,  (and,  without  confi-
dence in  his  veracity,  nothing  can  be  ascertained  even  in
regard  to  his  Ordinary  consciousness,)  it  ought  to  be  among
the  first  to  be  verified  by  the  sceptical  but  truth-loving  in-
quirer, who  desires  to  ascertain  the  reality  of  the  magnetic
sleep,  as  well  as  its  peculiar  characters.

5.  The  sleeper,  with  closed  eyes,  yet  often  speaks  as  if
he  saw  certain  objects,  when  his  attention  is  directed  to
them.  He  even  makes  an  apparent  effort  to  see,  or  to  look
at  them,  while  his  eyes  are  only  more  firmly  closed.  But
he  very  often  feels  them  in  his  hand,  and  whether  by  the
acuteness  of  his  touch  or  by  some  other  means,  describes
them  as  if  he  saw  them.  Or  he  places  them  on  his  forehead,
on  the  summit  of  his  head,  or  on  the  occiput,  or  on  the  epi-
gastrium, and  then  describes  them,  which  perhaps  he  could
not  do  when  they  were  held  by  the  operator  before  his  closed
eyes.  He  talks  of  seeing  them,  and  evidently  makes  an  ex-
ertion to  apply  his  internal  or  cerebral  vision  to  their  exam-
ination. In  this  he  often  succeeds,  but  often  also  finds
great  difficulty,  especially  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  sleep.
In  fact,  we  have  here  the  dawning  of  clairvoyance,  which
only  reaches  its  noon-day  brightness  in  the  highest  stage  of
the  sleep.  In  the  stage  to  which,  at  present,  our  remarks
are  confined,  the  object  must  be,  in  some  way,  in  contact
with,  or  at  least  very  close  to  the  sleeper ;  he  is  incapable,
otherwise,  of  describing  it.  The  subject  of  clairvoyance,  in
its  multitudinous  forms,  is  one  of  so  great  interest,  and  of
so  great  extent,  that  it  must  be  considered  separately  ;  in
fact,  as  belonging  to  a  different,  or  higher  stage  of  the
sleep.  I  find  it  quite  impossible  to  draw  any  definite  line
between  the  various  degrees  or  stages  of  the  sleep,  save  only
between  those  in  which  clairvoyance,  or  else  a  very  high
degree  of  sympathy,  is  present,  which  we  may  call  the  higher
or  later  stages  of  the  sleep,  and  those  which  we  may  call
the  lower  or  earlier  stages,  in  which  these  powers  are  absent.
The  state  or  stage  of  perfect  trance  or  extasis,  may  be  re-


84  THE  MAGNETISER  ALONE  HEARD.

garded  as  the  third  and  highest ;  but  of  this  I  am  not  yet
qualified  to  speak  from  personal  observation.  In  many
cases,  the  sleeper  passes  at  once  into  the  higher,  the  lucid,
or  clairvoyant  stage,  without  arresting  himself  in  the  lower
or  non-lucid  state,  which  yet  he  may  formerly,  at  an  earlier
period  of  the  investigations,  have  exhibited  distinctly.
Most  of  the  facts  observed  in  that  earlier  stage,  continue  to
appear  in  the  later,  but  naturally  attract  less  attention  when
we  are  occupied  with  the  astounding  facts  of  sympathy  or
of  clairvoyance.  As  I  have  already  stated,  these  will  be
afterwards  separately  considered.  In  the  mean  time,  hav-
ing noticed  the  first  glimmerings  of  an  unusual  mode  of
vision,  we  shall  go  on  to  describe  other  phenomena,  which
appear  without  clairvoyance,  while  they  often  continue  also
in  the  lucid  state.

6.  The  sleeper  is  very  often  deaf  to  every  sound,  save
the  voice  of  the  operator.  That  is  not,  however,  always  the
case.  I  have  seen  subjects,  who  readily  heard  and  answer-
ed every  question  addressed  to  them  by  any  of  the  persons
present,  without  being  in  contact  with  them,  or  being  pur-
posely placed  en  rapport  with  them.  In  some  of  these
cases,  the  subjects,  either  spontaneously,  or  at  the  will  of
the  operator,  or  by  passes,  &c.  made"  by  him,  pass  into
a  higher  state,  and  then  instantly  become  deaf  to  all  sounds
except  his  voice.  Nay,  I  have  seen  and  examined  one  very
remarkable  case,  in  which  the  sleeper,  when  she  had  passed
spontaneously  into  a  higher  state  of  lucidity,  became  deaf
even  to  the  operator's  voice,  unless  he  spoke  to  her  through
the  tips  of  her  fingers,  holding  his  mouth,  while  speaking,
so  as  to  touch  them.  When  this  was  done,  she  started,  and
after  a  moment,  answered  questions  thus  put,  as  readily  as
before.  You  might  bellow  in  her  ear,  or  fire  off  a  pistol,
without  her  countenance  indicating  the  slightest  change,  or
without  her  ceasing  for  an  instant  to  dwell  on  and  describe
what  she  was  engaged  in  looking  at,  which  she  readily  did
without  questions  being  asked  at  all.  Any  one  else  could
converse  with  this  subject  in  the  same  way,  and  I  did  so  for
an  hour  or  two.  In  some  similar  cases,  any  person,  besides
the  operator,  must  be  placed  en  rapport  with  the  subject, -
physically  or  mentally,  by  the  operator,  before  they  are
heard  or  answered. In  others,  again,  we  must  address  our


INSENSIBILITY  TO  PAIN.  85

words  to  the  epigastrium,  or  to  the  head.  There  is  here,
as  in  all  these  phenomena,  an  endless  variety  in  the  details.

In  many  cases  where  the  sleeper  hears  and  answers  any
one,  he  may  be  instantly  and  completely  deprived  of  this
power,  by  the  will,  whether  silent  or  expressed,  of  the  ope-
rator. Hence,  when  we  are  endeavoring  to  produce  the
sleep  in  a  new  subject,  who  happens  to  be  much  disturbed
by  the  noise  in  the  room  or  in  the  street,  we  may  often,  by
commanding  him  not  to  hear  those  noises,  greatly  accelerate
the  arrival  of  the  true  sleep.  This  can  only  be  done  when
the  operator,  as  often  happens,  acquires,  in  the  earliest
stages,  the  power  of  controlling  the  sensations  of  the  sub-
ject. This  control,  as  we  shall  see,  may  be  acquired  over
subjects  in  the  conscious  state.

7.  The  sleeper  often  becomes  entirely  insensible  to  pain ;
that  is,  he  is  rendered  insensible  to  impressions  of  touch
and  other  forms  of  feeling,  as  he  was  before  to  sounds.  In
many  cases,  where  this  does  not  spontaneously  happen,  but
not  in  all,  it  may  be  effected  by  the  will,  expressed  or  silent,
of  the  operator.  Many  persons  who  produce  the  sleep  are
not  aware  of  this,  and  hence  imagine,  that  their  subjects
cannot  be  rendered  insensible  to  pain.

It  must,  I  think,  be  admitted,,  that  of  all  the  methods
now  known  and  used  to  produce  insensibility  to  pain,  this  is
the  safest,  and,  ceteris  paribus,  the  best.  The  magnetic
insensibility  is  never,  so  far  as  I  have  seen,  followed  by  any
unpleasant  symptoms.  On  the  contrary,  every  sleeper
whom  I  have  seen,  feels  better  after  the  sleep  than  before.
If,  in  a  few  cases,  the  production  of  the  magnetic  sleep  has
either  been  followed  by  any  discomfort,  or  if  it  has  been
found  difficult  to  awake  a  person  from  the  sleep,  this  has
arisen  solely  from  the  inexperience  of  the  operator,  who
has  rashly  produced  a  state  which  he  knows  not  how  to
control.  It  happens  only  when  inexperienced  persons,  out
of  curiosity,  or  for  amusement,  cause  the  magnetic  sleep.
They  are  at  first  astonished  and  a  little  alarmed  at  their
success.  But  when,  on  trying  to  rouse  the  sleeper,  they
find  him  deaf,  and  obstinate  in  sleeping,  they  become  agi-
tated and  nervous.  Their  state  of  mind  is  communicated,
by  sympathy,  to  the  patient,  who  appears  to  suffer,  and
may  even  be  seized  with  spasms  or  convulsions.  This  ter-
rifies the  operators  still  more.  Matters  become  worse  and
8


86  INSENSIBILITY  TO  PAIN.

worse,  and  at  last  a  doctor  is  sent  for,  who  is  equally  inex-
perienced, and  only  does  harm  by  his  attempts  to  rouse  the
poor  sleeper.

There  are  two  rules  which  should  be  borne  in  mind  when
any  such  case  occurs,  although  the  best  rule  of  all  is  not  to
attempt  magnetism  without  at  least  the  presence  of  an  ex-
perienced magnetiser.  The  first  is,  that  the  sleep  in  itself
is  salutary,  and  that  when  the  proper  mode  of  ending  it,
namely,  by  upward  or  reversed  passes,  or  by  wafting,  is  not
known,  hurried  and  nervous  proceedings  will  almost  infalli-
bly do  harm.  The  operator  ought  to  become  cool,  and  then
employ  reversed  passes.  No  one  else  should  interfere  with
the  patient,  for  cross  magnetism  is  generally  hurtful.
Secondly,  if  the  operator  cannot  become  collected  and  cool,
so  as  to  make  the  upward  passes  calmly,  let  the  patient  sleep
it  out.  This  is  always  safe,  if  he  be  not  interfered  with.
The  sleep  may  last  an  hour,  or  two,  three,  four,  or  twelve
hours,  or  twenty-four,  or  even  forty-eight  hours,  but  it
rarely  lasts,  if  left  entirely,  to  take  its  own  course,  more
than  an  hour  or  two.  In  the  cases  where  it  has  lasted
longest,  there  has  always  been  improper  interference  and
cross  magnetism.  In  all  cases,  if  no  interference  have
taken  place,  the  state  of  the  pulse  and  of  the  respiration
may  satisfy  us  that  nothing  is  wrong,  and  we  shall  find  the
magnetic  sleep  no  more  dangerous,  and  no  more  likely  to
be  of  indefinite  duration,  than  our  usual  nightly  sleep.

But  to  return  to  the  use  of  magnetism  to  produce  Anaes-
thesia, or  insensibility  to  pain.  I  have  said  that  I  regard
it,  ceteris  paribus,  as  the  best  known  method  for  doing  this.
It  is  the  safest,  and  the  sleep  may  last  as  long  as  the  ope-
rator requires,  without  the  necessity  of  renewing  the  opera-
tion. I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that,  in  proper  and  experi-
enced hands,  it  is  free  from  all  danger.

There  is,  however,  one  objection,  or  rather  difficulty,
which  applies  to  it.  We  cannot,  in  all  cases,  be  sure  of
producing  the  sleep,  and  when  an  accident  happens,  we
have  no  time  to  try  long  experiments.  JSTow  this  is  true  to
a  certain  extent.  But  if  we  had  practised  and  powerful
magnetisers,  and  if  magnetism  were  generally  tried,  it
would  be  found,  even  among  ourselves,  to  succeed  far  more
frequently  than  is  supposed,  and  in  persons  under  the  effects
of  disease  or  accident,  often  at  the  first  attempt. Still  it


YOUTHS  MOKE  SUSCEPTIBLE  THAN  ADULTS.  87

appears  to  be  certain,  that  the  natives  of  this  country  are
not  so  easily  and  certainly  magnetised  as  those  of  others,
for  example,  of  Bengal.  At  Calcutta,  Dr.  Esdaile,  who
has  now  performed  hundreds  of  painless  operations,  never
fails  to  magnetise  the  natives,  while  he  has  sometimes  failed
with  Europeans.  Nay  more,  Dr.  Esdaile  is  not  only  him-
self successful,  but  has  numbers  of  native  assistants  who
magnetise  for  him  with  perfect  ease  and  success.  We  can-
not at  present  expect  the  same  measure  of  success  in  Eng-
land, but  we  can  at  all  events  use  magnetism  where  it  is
efficacious ;  we  can  try  it  in  all  cases ;  we  can,  in  chronic
diseases,  and  in  the  period  preceding  accouchement,  endea-
vor to  acquire  the  necessary  influence  over  our  patients,  so
as  to  be  prepared  for  the  hour  of  the  operation  or  the  de-
livery ;  we  can  persuade  healthy  persons  to  have  themselves
brought  under  the  influence  ,of  magnetism,  that  accident  or
disease  may  not  find  them  unprepared;  and  finally,  we  can,
by  investigating  the  subject  scientifically  and  experiment-
ally, endeavor  to  discover  some  means  of  increasing  mag-
netic power,  some  magnetic  battery,  which  shall  enable  us
to  magnetise  any  one  at  pleasure.  The  researches  of
Reichenbach  tend  to  show  that  such  an  expectation  is  far
from  chimerical.

With  the  same  view,  it  would  perhaps  be  advisable  to
begin  early,  and  to  magnetise  young  persons,  who  are  in
general  more  susceptible  than  adults,  just  as  we  teach  them
to  swim,  that  they  may  be  able,  if  necessary,  to  save  their
own  lives  or  those  of  others.  If  once  magnetised,  the  effect
would  be  easily  kept  up.  Were  this  done  generally,  not
only  should  we  gain  our  object  in  regard  to  the  persons
magnetised,  but  we  should  acquire  so  vast  a  mass  of  interest-
ing observations,  that  the  progress  of  magnetic  science
would  be  greatly  promoted  and  accelerated.  I  shall  con-
tinue the  description  of  the  phenomena  in  my  next  Letter.


88  CONTROL  EXERCISED  BY  THE  OPERATOR


LETTER  V.

8.  The  sleeper  is  usually  very  much  under  the  control  of
the  operator  in  reference  to  the  duration  of  the  sleep.  The
operator  may  fix  any  time,  long  or  short,  and  if  the  sleeper
promise  to  sleep  for  that  period,  he  will  do  so  to  a  second.
He  then  wakes  up,  and  is  instantly  quite  free  from  all
effect,  without  any  further  process.  The  utility  of  this
power  is  very  obvious,  especially  in  cases  of  pain  or  surgi-
cal operations.

But  if  no  time  be  fixed  by  the  operator,  the  sleeper
awakes  spontaneously,  after  a  longer  or  shorter  interval,
generally  from  half  an  hour  to  two  hours,  at  least  in  the
cases  I  have  seen.  Sometimes,  and  especially  if  urged  with
many  questions,  requiring  exertion  to  answer,  the  sleeper
declares  that  he  is  fatigued,  and  begs  to  be  awakened.  It
is  always  best  to  yield  to  this  wish,  and  to  avoid  fatiguing
the  subject,  since  over-exertion  has  a  most  unfavorable  in-
fluence on  his  powers.

9.  Whether  the  time  of  sleeping  be  fixed  by  the  operator
or  left  to  nature,  the  sleeper,  in  a  large  number  of  cases,
can  tell,  when  asked,  and  generally  very  readily,  precisely
how  long  he  has  to  sleep ;  and  if  he  be  repeatedly  asked  at
different  times,  he  will  always  be  found  correct  as  to  the
time  still  remaining.  This  is  a  truly  remarkable  phenome-
non; for,  in  the  power  of  telling  how  long  he  is  to  sleep,
we  may  see,  and  especially  where  no  time  has  been  fixed,
the  first  glimmering  of  the  power  of  prevision,  and  it  is
sometimes  the  only  indication  of  this  power.  Different
subjects  give  different  accounts  of  how  they  become  aware
of  the  point  of  time  at  which  their  sleep  is  to  terminate.
But  many  of  them  declare  that  they  see  the  figures  indicat-
ing the  number  of  minutes,  or  divisions  which  they  can
count,  by  which  means  they  can  give  the  desired  informa-
tion. I  shall  mention,  under  the  head  of  clairvoyance,
.some  remarkable  details,  which  I  noted  down  as  they  occur-
red, in  a  case  of  much  interest,  under  my  own  management.

10.  The  sleeper,  -often  when  he  is  first  put  to  sleep,  and
still  oftener  after  several  times,  will  answer  a  variety  of


ON  THE  PATIENT.  89

questions  as  to  the  best  and  most  effectual  method  of  mag-
netising him,  whether  by  passes  or  otherwise;  as  to  the
powers  which  he  will  hereafter  possess ;  and  as  to  the  time
when  he  shall  acquire  those  powers,  or  exhibit  certain  phe-
nomena. He  will  often  fix  with  precision,  and,  as  it  after-
wards appears,  with  exactness,  the  number  of  times  that  he
must  be  magnetised  or  put  to  sleep  in  order  to  produce  cer-
tain effects,  and  whether  this  should  be  done  once  a-day  or
twice  a-day,  or  less  frequently.  Here  again  we  have  a
dawning  of  prevision,  which,  in  a  higher  stage,  as  we  shall
see,  enables  him  to  predict  certain  occurrences  in  reference
to  his  own  state  of  health,  for  example.  But  this  also  must
be  reserved  for  the  section  on  clairvoyance.

11.  Although  the  sleeper,  in  general,  has  no  recollection
when  awake  of  what  has  passed  in  the  sleep,  this  is  far
from  being  an  uniform  occurrence.  Some  remember  a  part,
others  the  whole,  of  what  has  taken  place.  But  even  in
many  of  those  cases,  in  which  there  is  naturally  no  remem-
brance of  it,  the  operator,  if  he  choose,  may  command  his
subject,  during  the  sleep,  to  remember  a  part  or  the  whole
of  what  has  occurred,  which  will  then  be  remembered  ac-
cordingly. I  have  already  alluded  to  this  under  divided
consciousness.  I  do  so  again  here  as  a  proof  of  the  influ-
ence of  the  magnetiser  on  the  sleeper.  In  these  experi-
ments, it  is  often  desirable  to  enable  the  subject  to  remem-
ber, when  awake,  certain  things ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the
magnetiser  will  find  that  he  has  equally  the  power,  when  he
tries  it,  of  causing  the  sleeper  to  forget  all  or  part  of  what
has  occurred  in  the  sleep,  in  those  cases  in  which  he  natu-
rally remembers  it.  This  also  is  often  very  desirable.  It
has  already  been  mentioned  that  when  asleep,  the  subject
is  in  connection  with  the  previous  sleeps  he  may  have  had,
and  remembers  them  more  or  less  perfectly,  according  to
his  natural  powers  of  memory.

It  is  exceedingly  probable,  although  it  has  not,  so  far  as
I  know,  been  ascertained,  that  in  ordinary  spontaneous  som-
nambulism, the  sleep-walker  remembers  his  previous  acts  of
somnambulism.

We  must  not  confound  this  forgetting  what  occurs  in  the
sleep,  after  waking,  or  remembering  in  the  sleep  what  has
occurred  in  previous  sleeps,  which  are  the  results  of  divided
or  double  consciousness,  with  the  loss  of  memory  which  may

8*


90  THE  OPERATOR  CONTROLS  HIS

be  produced  for  the  time,  in  either  state,  by  the  will  of  the
operator.  We  shall  see  when  we  come  to  the  effects  produ-
cible in  the  conscious  state,  that  the  memory  may  become
entirely  subject  to  the  will  of  the  magnetiser.  Here  we  pro-
ceed to  notice : —

12.  That  the  subject,  while  asleep,  may  be  made  to  forget
anything  that  he  would  otherwise  remember,  by  the  will  of
the  operator.  He  may  be  made  to  forget,  not  only  what
has  happened  in  the  former  sleeps,  but  even  that  he  has  ever
slept,  or  been  magnetised  before.  He  often  forgets  spon-
taneously his  own  name,  and  if  not,  can  be  made  to  do  so.
This  is  another  proof  of  the  control  exercised  by  the  mag-
netiser on  his  subject.

13.  This  control  is  further  shown  by  the  power  which  the
operator  has  of  producing  in  the  sleeper,  inability  to  move
the  arm  or  leg,  to  sj)eak,  to  rise  up  or  sit  down,  by  his  will.
It  is  shown  in  the  production  of  partial  or  general  cataleptic
rigidity  and  its  removal.  It  is  shown,  in  short,  in  the  com-
plete command  of  all  the  voluntary  muscles  of  the  subject
acquired  by  the  operator.

14.  It  further  appears  in  the  power  of  causing  the  sleeper
instantaneously  to  imitate,  with  the  most  perfect  and  admi-
rable mimicry,  every  gesture  of  the  operator,  and  every  tone
of  his  voice.  If  the  magnetiser  speaks  German  or  Italian,
languages  perhaps  quite  unknown  to  the  subject,  and  with
the  greatest  rapidity,  the  sleeper  will  speak  after  him  so
exactly,  that  it  is  often  impossible,  when  his  ear  is  acute  in
catching  the  minute  shades  of  sound,  to  perceive  the  slightest
difference.  If  the  magnetiser  laughs,  he  instantly  laughs ;
if  the  former  make  any  gesture,  however  ridiculous,  the  latter
imitates  it  exactly,  and  all  this  with  closed  eyes,  and  when
the  operator  is  behind  him,  so  that  he  cannot  be  seen.  The
same  subject  when  awake,  will  often,  indeed  generally,  be
found  to  fail  miserably  in  his  attempts  at  this  instantaneous
mimicry,  and  indeed  to  fail  even  when  he  takes  more  time
to  it.

15.  The  sleeper,  if  naturally  insensible  to  the  voice  or  to
the  actions  of  all  but  his  magnetiser,  may  be  put  en  rapport
with  any  other  person.  This  may  be  done  by  simply  giv-
ing him  the  person's  hand,  in  many  cases.  In  others,  the
sleeper  requires  to  be  told  to  communicate  with  that  person,
and  this  having  been  done,  he  becomes  as  completely  and


PATIENT  IN  VARIOUS  WAYS.  91

exclusively  en  rapport  with  him  as  ho  before  was  with  the
magnetiser.  It  often  happens,  that  the  stranger  fhus  placed
en  rapport  with  the  subject,  must  again  retransfer  him  to
the  magnetiser,  before  the  latter  can  communicate  with  him.
The  transference  from  one  to  another,  in  such  cases,  is
usually  attended  with  a  start  on  the  part  of  the  sleeper,  but
he  does  not  awake.

16.  All  the  feelings,  propensities,  and  talents  of  the
sleeper,  may  be  excited  to  action  by  the  magnetiser,  and  that
in  various  ways,  either  by  merely  touching  the  correspond-
ing parts  of  the  head,  as  in  what  is  called  Phreno-mesmer-
ism,  to  be  hereafter  considered,  or,  as  comes  naturally  to
be  considered  in  this  place,  by  the  expressed  will  of  the
operator.

The  subject  may  be  rendered  happy  and  gay,  or  sad  and
dejected;  angry,  or  pleased;  liberal,  or  stingy;  proud,  or
vain  ;  pugnacious,  or  pacific  ;  bold,  or  timid  ;  hopeful,  or
despondent ;  insolent,  or  respectful ;  &c.  &c.  He  may  be
made  to  sing,  to  spout,  to  laugh,  to  weep,  to  act,  to  dance,
to  shoot,  to  fish,  to  preach,  to  pray,  to  deliver  an  eloquent
oration,  or  to  excogitate  a  profound  argument.  All  this  the
magnetiser,  in  many  cases,  can  cause  him  to  do,  and  indeed
a  great  deal  more,  by  commanding  him  to  do  it,  as  I  have
often  seen,  nay,  as  I  have  myself  done.  I  have  heard  a
sleeper  give  a  lecture  on  temperance,  or  on  Animal  Magnet-
ism ;  I  have  heard  the  most  beautiful  prayers,  and  most
poetic  imagery,  from  the  mouths  of  persons  who,  in  their  or-
dinary state,  were  quite  unequal  to  such  things.  And  as  we
shall  see  hereafter,  all  this  can  also  be  done  when  the  sub-
ject is  in  the  conscious  state.

17.  In  all  such  experiments  I  have  observed,  and  it  has
been  observed  and  recorded  by  others,  that  the  gestures  and
voice,  the  manner  and  expression,  in  short,  the  whole  phy-
siognomical and  natural  language,  is  extremely  perfect.  The
attitudes  of  pride,  humility,  anger,  fear,  kindness,  pugnacity,
devotion,  or  meditation,  and  all  others,  are,  with  peculiarities
in  each-  case,  depending  on  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the  indivi-
dual, beautiful  studies  for  the  artist.  The  most  accomplished
actor  or  mimic,  a  Garrick,  or  a  Mathews,  falls  short  of  the
wonderful  truth  and  nature  of  these  attitudes  and  gestures,
as  I  have  seen  them  in  numerous  cases,  and  most  frequently


92  EFFECTS  OF  MUSIC  ON  PERSONS

in  persons  of  limited  intellectual  cultivation,  who,  in  their
waking  state,  showed  no  peculiar  talent  for  pantomime.

I  have  already  stated,  and  may  here  repeat,  that  subjects
of  a  superior  refinement  of  character,  exhibit,  as  all  do  more
or  less,  an  exaltation  of  refinement  when  in  the  magnetic
sleep  ;  I  now  add,  that  they  further,  when  the  higher  senti-
ments are  intentionally  excited,  exhibit  a  purity,  beauty,  and
sublimity  of  gesture,  attitude,  and  expression  of  countenance,
equalling,  nay,  far  surpassing,  all  that  the  greatest  artist
has  ever  conceived  or  executed.  Did  all  artists  know,  as
some  do,  how  precious  a  fountain  of  inspiration  exists  in
these  magnetic  phenomena,  they  would  spend  hours  in  study-
ing them.  It  is  not  improbable  that  some  of  the  great
masters  did  so,  and,  at  all  events,  the  appearance  of  magnet-
ised persons  constantly  recalls  to  us,  as  an  imperfect  imi-
tation of  what  we  see,  the  saints,  angels,  and  virgins  of  Ra-
phael, Guido,  Corregio,  Murillo,  &c.  I  am  convinced,  that
ere  long,  artists  will  have  recourse  to  magnetism  for  expres-
sion, as  they  now  have  to  the  nude  subject  for  forms.

A  most  beautiful  case  of  this  kind  lately  occurred  to  a
magnetiser  of  my  acquaintance,  when  a  gentleman,  highly
distinguished  as  an  artist  and  a  man  of  taste,  was  so  en-
chanted with  what  he  saw,  that  it  was  arranged  that  the
magnetiser  should  produce  the  effects  at  a  subsequent  time,
to  be  studied  and  copied  by  an  artist  of  great  talent.  This
has  not,  I  believe,  yet  been  possible,  owing  to  the  absence
of  some  of  the  parties  from  the  somewhat  remote  scene  of
the  experiments.

I  have  myself  seen  one  case,  of  a  young  and  pretty  girl,
thirteen  or  fourteen  years  of  age,  belonging  to  a  family  in
a  humble  station,  whose  countenance  became,  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  and  especially  when  devout  feelings  were  excited,
and  when  music  was  performed,  lovely  and  heavenly  in  ex-
pression, to  a  degree  beyond  my  power  to  describe.  Her
face  beamed  with  a  spiritual  etherial  beauty,  such  as  I
had  previously  never  even  conceived.  In  that  case,  the
organisation  of  the  brain  was,  in  the  coronal  region,  the
seat  of  the  organs  of  the  higher  sentiments,  particularly  fine.
The  organs  of  the  intellectual  faculties  were  well  developed,
while  those  of  the  lower  propensities  were  much  below  the
average  proportion.

In  short  the  characteristic  of  the  phenomena  thus  obtained


IN  THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  93

is  their  entire  truthfulness  ;  and  this,  strange  to  say,  is  often
the  cause  of  doubts  as  to  their  genuineness,  in  the  minds  of
those  who  see  them  for  the  first  time.  If  the  subject  be
uneducated,  there  will  always  remain,  even  while  he  be-
comes improved  and  refined  in  manners  to  a  considerable
extent  in  the  sleep,  a  certain  something,  which  marks  the
uncultivated  mind.  Hence  his  performance,  although  true
to  nature,  is  not  perfect,  and  looks  very  like  acting,  pre-
cisely because  the  best  acting  is  that  which  approaches
nearest  to  nature,  and  yet  can  never  reach  it.  When  ex-
periments are  made  with  a  person  of  fine  natural  disposition
and  highly  cultivated  mind,  the  results  are  so  beautiful  as
to  delight  all  spectators.

18.  I  must  here  mention  a  circumstance,  which  I  have
remarked  in  every  case  in  which  I  have  tried  the  experiment,
or  seen  it  tried.  It  is,  that  the  sleeper  is  invariably  much
more  strongly  affected  by  music  than  when  in  his  ordinary
state.  All  the  subjects  on  whom  I  have  seen  it  tried,  have
been  agreeably  influenced  by  it.  Their  faces  brighten,  and
they  usually  assume  attitudes  and  gestures  corresponding
to  the  character  of  the  music.  Thus,  a  reel  or  a  quadrille
will  set  them  dancing,  and  those  of  fine  temperament  do  so
with  singular  grace,  while  the  clownish  sftimp  about  with
much  vigor,  but  little  elegance.  I  have  seen  this  occur  in
persons  of  both  kinds,  who  had  never  learned  to  dance,  ex-
cept from  nature.  A  solemn  strain,  again,  will  readily
cause  them  to  kneel  and  pray,  or  to  join. in  the  devotional
music.  A  warlike  march  or  quickstep  will  cause  them  to
march  and  strut  about,  and  often  to  exhibit  a  very  pugna-
cious pantomime.  All  this  will  take  place,  more  or  less,  in
persons  who  have  in  their  ordinary  state  no  love  for  music,
or  care,  at  all  events,  little  for  it.  It  would  appear  also,
from  the  observations  of  Mr.  H.  E.  Lewis,  that  a  strain  of
soft  music  often  assists  in  inducing  the  sleep  in  new  sub-
jects. This  agrees  with  the  recorded  fact,  that  music  has
always  formed  a  part  of  the  magician's  arrangements.
When  a  sorcerer  wished  to  cause  those  who  consulted  him
to  see  visions,  that  is,  to  become  somnambulists,  he  always
used  soft  music  and  fumigations.

19.  Not  only  are  the  attitudes  and  gesture,  the  tone  of
voice  and  the  expression  of  the  face,  true  to  nature,  in  the
expression  of  every  feeling  that  is  excited,  but  this  truthful-


94  TRUTHFULNESS  OF  SOMNAMBULISM.

ness  extends  to  all  that  is  said  by  the  sleeper.  As  a  general,
perhaps  invariable  rule,  he  refuses,  whatever  questions  may
be  asked,  or  suggestions  made,  to  go  beyond  what  he  feels
sure  of,  in  describing  his  ow*i  sensations,  or  his  visions,  if
we  may  call  them  so.  The  spectator  often  unconsciously
does  his  best  to  mislead  him  by  leading  questions,  and  also,
by  such  as  arise  from  a  misconception  of  his  meaning.  Yet
of  all  things  observed  in  the  sleep,  that  which  constantly
recurs,  and  most  forcibly  strikes  us,  is  the  frequent  repeti-
tion of  the  words,  "  I  don't  know  exactly  ;"  "  I  cannot  say
for  certain;"  "  I  cannot  see  whether  it  is  so  or  not ;"  "I  must
not  say  what  I  do  not  see,  or  feel,  or  know,"  and  the  like ;
while,  when  the  sleeper  once  sees,  feels,  or  knows  a  thing,
he  adheres  firmly  to  it.  This  truthfulness  gives  great  value
to  experiments  properly  made.

I  have  always  admitted  the  possibility  of  deceit  in  Animal
Magnetism,  when  practised  for  the  sake  of  money.  And  I
believe  that  cases  have  occurred  of  genuine  somnambulists,
who,  under  certain  circumstances,  have  been  guilty  of  im-
posture. Let  us  suppose  a  person  who  is  really  possessed
of  certain  powers,  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  but  who  is  greedy
of  gain,  and  vain  of  his  powers.  If,  as  I  have  shown  to  be
probable,  he  shofdd,  on  some  public  occasion,  find  his  power
much  less  than  usual,  or  should  be  deprived  of  it  by  over-
exertion in  previous  experiments,  which  have  succeeded,
not  only  is  his  vanity  hurt,  but  his  prospects  of  gain  are
diminished,  and  if,  as  may  happen,  he  does  not  possess  the
highest  sense  of  truth  and  honor,  he  may  try  to  make  up
for  deficient  power  by  deceit.  I  have  some  reason  to  believe
that  individuals,  of  whose  power  at  times  no  doubt  can  rea-
sonably be  entertained,  have,  when  over-fatigued,  or  by
some  chance,  less  lucid  than  usual,  endeavored  to  cover
failure  by  deceit.  Of  course,  although  I  might  believe  such
persons  to  possess  great  lucidity  at  certain  times,  and  to
have  acted  thus  dishonestly  simply  from  the  desire  to  escape
the  confession  of  failure  and  the  loss  of  expected  gain,  yet
I  should  not  use  the  evidence  derived  from  such  cases.  It
is  best  to  reject  all  evidence  to  which  any  suspicion  can
attach.  There  is  abundance  of  unexceptionable  evidence,
if  we  only  look  for  it,  and  I  would  look  with  suspicion  on
the  evidence  derived  from  the  public  exhibitions  of  those
who  make  a  trade  of  such  exhibitions,  and  use  paid  subjects.


TRUTHFULNESS  OF  SOMNAMBULISM.  &8

These  remarks  apply  more  particularly  to  clairvoyance,
but  I  have  alluded  to  the  subject  here,  because  they  apply
also  to  the  lower  phenomena.  I  shall  have  to  refer  to  the
matter  again,  briefly,  when  treating  of  the  higher  pheno-
mena.

20.  I  have  not  yet  fully  noticed  another  fact,  namely,  that
the  operator  finds  much  greater  difficulty  in  producing  the
sleep  at  first,  than  he  does  after  it  has  been  produced  several
times.  It  often  happens,  and  has  several  times  occurred  to
myself,  that  in  a  subject,  in  whom  the  sleep  could  not  at  first
be  induced  in  less  than  from  half-an-hour  to  an  hour  or  more,
with  constant  and  laborious  exertion  in  making  passes,  or
gazing  with  an  intent  volition  and  the  most  complete  concen-
tration of  the  mind  on  the  subject,  the  same  person  may,  in
a  day  or  two,  or  a  week,  or  a  month,  be  put  to  sleep,  and
that  far  more  deeply  than  at  first,  in  five  minutes,  or  one
minute,  or  half  a  minute,  or  quarter  of  a  minute.  Nay,  some
subjects  are  entranced  by  a  single  rapid  pass,  or  by  a  look.
Many  subjects,  however,  never  reach  this  degree  of  suscep-
tibility; but  in  all,  it  becomes  easier,  after  some  practice,  to
induce  the  sleep,  than  it  was  at  first.

It  is  often  observed,  that  those  who  are  slowly  and  gradu-
ally brought  up  to  a  high  degree  of  susceptibility  make  the
best  subjects.'  At  all  events,  we  should  never  be  discouraged
by  want  of  complete  success,  or  even  by  failure,  in  our  first
trials.

Cases  have  been  recorded,  in  which  the  sleep  never  oc-
curred till  after  hundreds  of  operations,  and  yet  became  very
deep,  and  exhibited  beautiful  phenomena.  I  believe,  from
what  I  have  seen,  that  every  one  possesses  the  power  to  mag- ,
netise  others,  though  in  variable  degrees  ;  and  further,  that
every  one  may  be  himself  magnetised,  with  patience  and
perseverance  on  the  part  of  the  operator.  It  must  be  borne
in  mind,  too,  that  the  sleep  is  not  essential,  either  to  the
relief  of  suffering,  the  cure  of  disease,  or  the  production  of
many  beautiful  results,  which,  we  have  seen,  occur  in  the
conscious  state,  as  will  be  more  particularly  described  here-
after. Patience  and  perseverance,  with  a  strong  resolution
to  succeed,  should  be  the  magnetiser's  motto.  They  are  the
most  powerful  aids  to  magnetism.

It  would  appear,  that  persons  of  a  very  marked  tempera-
ment, most  readily  affect  those  of  the  opposite  temperament.


96  GREAT  VARIETY  IN  THE

Thus,  a  person  of  a  strongly  marked,  nervous  bilious  tem-
perament, will  succeed  best  with  subjects  who  are  sanguine
lymphatic.  A  large  brain  or  active  temperament  are*  favour-
able to  magnetic  power.  A  powerful  and  very  active  intel-
lect, in  the  subject,  is  not  exactly  opposed  to  his  being  mag-
netised, but  renders  it  often  more  difficult,  because  the  con-
stant activity  of  the  mind  opposes  the  concentration  of  the
thoughts  on  the  object  of  being  magnetised,  which  is  so
desirable,  and  also  counteracts  the  attempt  to  attain  that
passive  state  which  may  be  called  essential  to  the  result.
In  experiments  made  in  public,  on  parties  never  before  mag-
netised, this  passive  state  of  mind  is  almost  unattainable  by
them.  They  are  excited  by  the  desire  of  seeing  and  per-
haps of  explaining  strange  facts  ;  they  are  also  nervous  be-
fore so  many  people ;  they  are  afraid  of  being  made  ridicu-
lous, or  of  having  secrets  extracted  from  them  ;  and,  finally,
they  often  resist  the  influence  to  the  utmost  of  their  power;
that  is,  they  keep  up  an  active  state,  not  aware,  that  to  be
acted  on,  they  must  be  passive.  This  is  one  reason  why
experiments  made  in  strict  privacy  succeed  in  a  proportion
of  cases  so  much  larger.

One  reason  why  so  many  susceptible  subjects  are  found,
especially  in  public  exhibitions,  among  the  less  educated
classes,  is,  that  their  intellectual  powers  are  not  in  so  con-
stant activity  as  is  the  case  with  men,  for  example,  engaged
in  business  or  in  professional  and  scientific  or  literary  pur-
suits. They  become,  therefore,  more  readily  passive.

I  have  already  observed  that  the  Hindoos,  and  the  natives
of  India  generally,  are  more  uniformly  susceptible,  even
to  men  of  their  own  nation,  than  Europeans.  This  depends
on  the  temperament.  It  would  appear,  that  negroes  also
are  both  highly  susceptible  subjects,  and  very  powerful  mag-
netisers.  The  obi  of  the  West  Indies  and  of  Africa,  depends
for  its  influence  on  their  susceptibility;  and  the  distinguished
negro  magnetiser,  Mr.  H.  E.  Lewis,  possesses  in  a  very  rare
degree,  the  power  of  magnetising  others.  I  embrace  with
pleasure  this  opportunity  of  testifying,  not  only  to  that  gen-
tleman's qualifications  as  a  magnetiser,  but  to  his  great
abilities,  his  pure  and  disinterested  love  of  science,  his  gen-
tlemanlike manners  and  amiable  character,  his  great  readi-
ness to  assist,  in  every  possible  way,  those  who  desire  to
investigate  the  subject  with  the  single  object  of  discovering


SUSCEPTIBILITY  OP  SUBJECTS.  97

truth,  and  his  intimate  practical  knowledge  of  the  subject
in  every  department.

21.  After  the  operator  has  succeeded  in  producing  the
sleep  easily  and  in  a  short  time,  he  can,  in  many  cases,  pro-
duce it  by  the  silent  exertion  of  the  will,  without  any  passes,
or  other  process  of  any  kind.  This  I  have  myself  done,
and  in  one  case,  where  the  subject  was  deeply  engaged  in
conversation  without  any  idea  that  I  intended  anything  of
the  kind,  as  I  had  taken,  up  to  that  moment,  an  active  share
in  the  conversation,  I  put  him  into  a  sound  magnetic  sleep
in  25  seconds,  (his  eyes  having  been  directed  to  other  per-
sons present,)  by  the  silent  power  of  the  will.  I  sat  about
four  or  five  feet  from  him,  to  one  side.

In  doing  this,  it  is  therefore,  at  least  in  some  cases,  quite
immaterial,  whether  the  subject  be  aware  of  the  intention  of
the  operator  or  not.  In  this  case,  after  sleeping  an  hour
exactly,  as  I  commanded  him  to  do,  he  woke  suddenly  at
the  appointed  time,  and  his  first  remark  was,  when  I  asked
if  he  had  had  a  pleasant  sleep,  "  Oh  yes  !  but  you  did  not
tell  me  you  were  going  to  magnetise  me."  Similar  facts
are  of  daily  occurrence.

22.  In  such  instances  as  that  just  mentioned,  the  subject
is  put  to  sleep  by  the  operator,  when  the  latter  is  in  the
same  room,  or  near  him.  But  this  also  may  be  dispensed
with.  I  have  often  seen  persons  put  to  sleep,  both  when
aware  of  the  intention,  and  when  that  has  been  concealed,
by  the  operator  from  the  next  room,  or  the  floor  below  or
above.  The  fact  is,  that  with  a  susceptible  subject,  distance
is  a  matter  of  little  or  no  moment.  The  influence,  whatever
it  be,  seems  to  travel  to  any  distance,  like  light.  Many  facts
of  this  kind,  at  distances  much  greater  than  I  have  now
mentioned,  have  been  recorded.  I  shall  here  give  an  in-
stance, the  details  of  which  I  can  testify  to,  as  having  oc-
curred in  my  own  family.

Mr.  Lewis  met  a  party  of  fifty  ladies  and  gentlemen  in
my  house,  one  evening  in  the  end  of  November  or  begin-
ning of  December  1850.  He  acted  on  the  company  en  masse,
and  affected  several,  among  them  a  lady,  a  member  of  my
family,  who  was  susceptible,  and  had  frequently  been  mag-
netised by  others.  This  lady,  when  magnetised,  loses  the
power  of  her  arms,  her  eyes  are  closed,  and  the  sensations
she  experiences  are  very  marked  and  well  known  to  her.
9


98  SLEEP  PRODUCED  AT  A  DISTANCE.

Mr.  Lewis,  not  being  told  how  strongly  she  had  been  affected
by  him,  did  not  do  anything  to  remove  the  effect,  and  the
consequence  was  a  headache,  to  which  she  is  naturally  very
subject.  This  she  ascribed  to  her  not.  having  been  demag-
netised, and  it  continued  next  morning.  When  I  saw  Mr.
Lewis,  after  my  lecture,  at  11  a.m.,  he  asked  me  how  the
lady  was.  I  mentioned  the  headache,  as  well  as  her  idea
of  the  cause  of  it.  Mr.  Lewis  then  said,  "  Oh  !  never  mind
the  headache.  I  shall  think  of  her  sometime  during  the
day,  and  dismiss  her  headache."  This  I  begged  him  to  do,
as  I  knew  that  such  things  could  be  clone.  He  then  left
me.  When  I  returned  home,  at  5  p.m.,  I  had  quite  forgot-
ten this  conversation,  when  the  lady  in  question  recalled  it
by  saying,  as  I  entered  the  room,  "  What  do  you  think  of
this  ?  I  have  been  magnetised  in  your  absence."  "  Indeed  ?
by  whom?"  "By  nobody.  I  was  sitting  at  the  piano-forte,
playing,  at  half-past  three,  when  I  felt  as  if  strongly  mag-
netised ;  my  arms  lost  their  power ;  I  could  no  longer  play,
and  had  all  the  usual  sensations.  In  a  few  minutes  I  was
compelled  to  lie  down  on  the  sofa,  and  fell  into  a  short
magnetic  sleep.  When  I  woke,  my  headache  was  quite
gone.''  "Did  you  mention  this  to  any  one  at  the  time?"
"  I  was  alone,  but,  just  as  I  woke,  a  lady,  who  was  here
last  night,  called,  and  I  told  her  of  it,  adding,  that  I  felt
sure  that  Mr.  Lewis  was  magnetising  me."  I  then  said
that  he  had  undertaken  to  do  so,  but  that  I  did  not  know
whether  he  had  done  it  or  not.  In  the  evening  I  saw  Mr.
Lewis  again,  at  a  large  party,  and,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.
W.  F.  Cumming,  who  felt  much  interested  in  the  case,  I
asked  him  whether  he  had  kept  his  promise  about  the  lady's
headache.  He  said  he  had.  Dr.  Cumming  then  asked  him
at  what  time,  when  he  at  once  answered,  "at  half-past  three,
when  I  returned  to  my  lodgings.  I  could  not  do  it  sooner."
It  appears  to  me  that  every  thing  was  here  combined  to
make  the  case  a  good  one.  It  was  accidental.  The  subject
had  no  idea  either  that  she  was  to  be  magnetised,  nor  of
the  time ;  and  a  lady  came  opportunely  to  attest  the  fact
before  my  return,  while  a  gentleman  heard  Mr.  Lewis'
answers  to  my  questions  and  his  own.  I  may  add,  that  the
lodgings  of  Mr.  Lewis  are  in  South  St.  Andrew  Street,
while  my  house  is  at  114  Prince's  Street,  a  distance  of
nearly  four  divisions  of  Prince's  Street,  or,  I  should  suppose,


ATTRACTION  TO  THE  OPERATOR.  99

500  or  600  yards.  I  may  further  state,  that  on  two  other
occasions,  Mr.  Lewis  affected  the  same  lady,  at  the  same
and  at  a  greater  distance,  without  her  knowing  that  he  was
to  do  so.

It  appears,  from  this,  and  other  facts  of  the  same  kind,
that,  in  susceptible  subjects,  distance  forms  no  obstacle  to
the  action  of  the  magnetic  influence  of  the  operator,
although  it  may  possibly  retard  or  weaken  it  to  a  certain
extent.  When  we  first  hear  of  such  a  thing,  we  are  natu-
rally incredulous,  but  when  we  have  seen  it,  or  produced  it,
several  times,  we  are  not  only  compelled  to  accept  the  fact,
but  to  feel  that  it  must  depend  on  a  natural  cause,  which  it
is  our  business  to  investigate.

23.  Not  only  may  the  subject  be  put  to  sleep  by  the  silent
will,  but  he  may  be  made,  also  by  the  silent  will,  to  exhibit
all  the  phenomena  already  described  as  producible  by  the
expressed  volition  of  the  operator.

He  may  be  made,  in  this  way,  to  come  to  the  operator,
or  to  sit  down  in  any  place,  or  to  perform  any  act,  which
the  magnetiser  may  will  him  to  do.  It  is  unnecessary  here
to  repeat  details ;  it  suffices  to  say,  that,  in  many  cases,  every
thing  that  can  be  done  by  the  expressed  will,  may  be  done
also  by  the  silent  will,  of  the  latter.  This,  too,  occurs  also
in  the  conscious  state.

24.  Another  remarkable  fact,  is  a  kind  of  attraction  felt
towards  the  magnetiser,  and  which  he,  by  willing,  can  exert
in  many  cases.  The  subject  then  feels  an  irresistible  desire
to  approach  him,  and  if  prevented,  will  exert  great  force  to
overcome  the  obstacle.  He  cannot  explain  it  farther  than
by  saying,  that  he  is  drawn  somehow  towards  him  ;  some,
however,  speak  of  fine  filament  or  threads,  often  luminous,
by  which  they  are  gently  drawn  to  him.

This  strange  attraction  may  also  be  exhibited  at  a  distance.
I  have  been  informed,  on  the  best  authority,  of  a  case  where
it  was  exerted  at  the  distance  of  100  yards  or  more,  and
where  the  subject  moved  towards  the  operator,  till  stopped
by  .the  wall  of  the  house  in  which  she  was,  in  spite  of  the
resistance  offered  by  a  strong  man.  This  may  also  be  shown
in  the  conscious  state.

25.  In  some  cases,  there  is  observed  a  permanent  liking
for  the  magnetiser,  in  the  ordinary  waking  state  of  the  sub-
ject. I  have  not  had  opportunities  of  seeing  this,  but  it  is,
I  believe,  a  well  authenticated  fact.


100  COMMANDS  GIVEN  IN  THE  SLEEP

26.  This  leads  me  to  another  very  curious  phenomenon,
namely,  that  the  sleeper,  if  commanded,  in  the  sleep,  to  do
a  certain  thing,  after  waking,  and  at  a  certain  hour,  -will  do
so,  and  however  absurd  or  ridiculous  the  act,  he  cannot,  in
many  cases,  refrain  from  doing  it,  if  he  has  promised  it  in
the  sleep.

He  may  have  been  ordered  to  go  to  a  certain  person's
house,  at  a  certain  hour,  and  ask  some  trifling  or  useless
question.  As  the  time  approaches,  he  is  seen  to  be  restless,
till  he  sets  out  for  his  destination.  He  pays  no  attention  to
the  people  he  may  meet,  and  if  they  purposely  arrest  him,
he  forces  his  way  onwards,  asks  his  question,  and  can  only
say,  that  he  felt  that  he  must  do  so.  He  is  often  much  hurt
at  the  ridicule  excited  by  his  action,  and,  therefore,  should
not  be  made  to  do  anything  that  may  excite  ridicule,  as,  if
that  be  persevered  in,  he  will  refuse  compliance  with  the  order
or  request,  when  made. This,  at  least,  often  happens.

This  power,  of  influencing  the  waking  actions  by  a  promise
made  in  the  sleep,  may  be  most  usefully  applied.  I  lately
saw  a  person,  who  had  been  induced  by  Mr.  Lewis  to  promise,
while  in  the  sleep,  to  abstain  from  fermented  liquors,  and
had,  in  his  ordinary  state,  steadily  adhered  to  that  promise,
ever  since  it  was  made,  three  or  four  months  before ;  nor
had  he  the  slightest  desire  to  break  it.  I  do  not  know
whether  he  was  aware  of  having  made  the  promise,  but  that
is  not  at  all  essential.  The  desire  is  extinguished,  even
when  the  subject  has  no  recollection  of  the  promise,  and  has
not  been  told  of  it  in  his  waking  state.  Mr.  Lewis  informs
me,  that  he  has  broken  many  persons  off  the  habit  of  drink-
ing, as  well  as  of  other  bad  habits  in  this  way.  Erom  what
I  have  seen,  I  am  satisfied,  that  a  pledge  given  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  will  be  found  more  binding  than  one  given  in  the
ordinary  waking  state.

I  have  now  described,  briefly,  the  most  obvious  and  remark-
able of  what  are  called  the  lower  phenomena,  although  it
will  be  seen  that  they  pass,  insensibly,  into  the  higher.

Proceeding  further,  we  shall  find  that  the  higher  pheno-
mena develope  themselves.  The  subject,  in  many  cases,
after  a  time,  exhibits  the  highest  degree  of  sympathy  with
the  operator,  or  with  those  placed  en  rapport  with  himself ;
or  he  acquires  the  power  of  clairvoyance  in  some  one  or  more
of  its  varied  forms.


INFLUENCE  THE  WAKING  ACTIONS.  101

These  subjects  we  shall  go  on  to  investigate  in  the  next
Letter.  Meantime,  let  me  remark,  that  the  occurrence  of
these  phenomena  rests  on  the  very  same  testimony  as  that
of  those  already  described ;  that  this  testimony  is  frequently
of  the  highest  possible  character  ;  and  that,  in  truth,  the  so-
called  lower  phenomena,  which  we  have  seen  to  shade  into
the  higher,  are  not  in  the  least  more  easily  explained  or
understood  than  the  latter.

It  appears  to  me  certain,  that  both  classes  of  phenomena
depend  essentially  on  the  same  cause,  and  that,  a  natural
cause.  There  is  nothing  supernatural  or  miraculous  about
sympathy  or  clairvoyance,  if  we  will  only  examine  them.
They  occur,  as  we  shall  see,  spontaneously,  and  have  been
observed  from  the  earliest  ages.  It  is  probable  that  the
ancients  were  well  acquainted  with  them,  that  this  know-
ledge, being  kept  secret,  and  perhaps  used  for  bad,  certainly
for  interested  objects,  by  those  who  had  the  exclusive  posses-
sion of  it,  had  been  lost,  and  that  it  was  necessary  to  recover
it,  which  was  first  effectually  done,  in  great  part  at  least,  by
Mesmer,  although  Van  Helmont,  and  many  others  before
Mesmer,  had  obtained  glimpses  of  the  truth.


LETTER  VI.

We  now  come  to  what  are  called  the  higher  pheno-
mena, namely,  Sympathy  and  Clairvoyance.  It  has  been
shown  that  these  are  connected,  by  insensible  gradations,
with  the  lower  or  more  usual  phenomena,  and  that,  as  both
classes  of  facts  depend,  so  far  as  we  know,  on  the  same
cause,  and  both  are  equally  inexplicable  on  ordinary  prin-
ciples, or  rather  equally  explicable,  the  one  class  cannot,
with  strict  propriety,  be  called  higher  or  lower  than  the
other.  Nevertheless,  as  the  effects  of  Sympathy  and  Clair-
voyance have  a  peculiar  character,  which  would  partake  of
the  supernatural,  were  we  not  convinced  that  they  depend
on  natural  causes,  and  have  nothing  miraculous  about  them,
it  may  be  convenient  to  use  the  term  Higher  Phenomena,
on  the  understanding  that  this  does  not  imply  a  difference

9*


102  SYMPATHY. COMMUNITY  OF  TASTE.

in  nature,  but  only  in  degree,  for  those  to  which  we  now
proceed,  in  contradistinction  to  those  already  treated  of.

And  first,  of  Sympathy.  This  power,  as  we  have,  seen,
begins  to  appear  in  the  earlier  stages,  and  is  shown  in  the
form  of  an  attraction  towards  the  magnetiser,  or  in  that  of
obedience  to  his  silent  will.  But  as  we  advance,  it  is  fur-
ther developed,  so  as  to  become  the  chief  characteristic  of
a  certain  stage  of  the  magnetic  sleep.  The  sleeper  acquires
the  power  of  perceiving  every  sensation,  bodily  and  mental,
of  his  magnetiser.  Nay,  he  often  exhibits  a  like  power  in
reference  to  all  with  whom  he  is  placed  en  rappoi%  espe-
cially when  this  is  done  by  contact.  These  sensations  are
so  vividly  felt  by  the  sleeper,  that  he  cannot  distinguish
them  from  the  same  sensations  produced  by  direct  external
impressions  on  his  own  frame.  Indeed,  there  appears  to  be
no  difference  whatever  between  the  two.  He  feels  what  is
felt  by  the  person  en  rapport  with  him,  as  truly  as  if  the
original  impressions  were  made  upon  himself.  He  forms,
for  the  time,  a  part  of  the  person  on  whom  the  direct  im-
pressions are  made,  and  all  sensations,  or  many  sensations,
are  common  to  both  parties.

1.  There  is  Community  of  Taste.  If  the  operator,  or
other  person,  en  rapport  with  the  subject,  takes  any  kind
of  food  or  drink  into  his  mouth,  the  sleeper,  in  many  cases,
instantly  begins  going  through  the  pantomime  of  eating  or
drinking;  and,  if  asked,  he  declares  he  is  eating  bread,  or
an  orange,  or  sweetmeats,  or  drinking  water,  wine,  milk,
beer,  syrup,  or  lemonade,  or  infusion  of  wormwood,  or
brandy,  or  whisky,  according  as  the  operator  takes  each  of
them,  or  any  other  substance.  When  the  thing  taken  is
bitter  or  disagreeable,  the  countenance  of  the  sleeper  at
once  indicates  this,  while  his  eyes,  as  usual,  are  closed,  and
the  magnetiser  or  friend  may  stand  behind  him,  so  that  he
cannot  see  what  is  taken.  Minute  details  would  be  tedious.
Suffice  it  to  say,  that  I  have  seen  and  tested  the  fact  in  so
many  cases,  that  I  regard  it  as  firmly  established.  More-
over, no  one  who  has  had  opportunities  of  observing  this
beautiful  phenomenon,  can  long  hesitate  as  to  its  entire  truth,
such  is  the  expression  of  genuine  sensation  on  the  face  and
gesture,  besides  the  distinct  statements  made  by  the  sleeper.
Like  all  the  other  phenomena,  this  one  varies  in  extent  and


COMMUNITY  OF  SENSES.  103

intensity  in  different  cases. But  it  is  very  frequent  with
advanced  subjects.

2.  The  same  thing  occurs  with  regard  to  Smell.  If  the
person  en  rapport  with  the  sleeper,  smell  a  rose,  the  latter
at  once  begins  to  inhale  the  delightful  perfume.  If  he  smell
assafctida,  the  sleeper  expresses  disgust;  and  if  he  place
strong  hartshorn  under  his  own  nostrils,  the  sleeper  starts
back,  complaining  of  its  pungency.  The  Community  of
smelling  is  just  as  perfect  as  that  of  taste,  in  many  cases  ;
but  I  cannot  affirm,  that  where  one  is  present,  the  other
always  occurs.  This  is  probable,  but  I  have  not  strictly
examined  it.  Of  course,  as  before  explained,  the  sleeper
may  be  rendered  dead  to  either  or  to  both,  by  the  will  of
the  magnetiser,  in  many  instances.

3.  There  is  Community  of  Touch.  Whatever  touches
the  person  en  rapport,  is  felt  by  the  sleeper,  in  precisely
the  same  part.  If  the  former  shake  hands  with  any  one,
the  latter  instantly  grasps  a  visionary  hand.  If  a  pin  be
driven  into  the  back  of  the  magnetiser's  hand,  the  sleeper
hastily  withdraws  his  hand,  rubs  the  part,  and  complains
loudly  of  the  injury.  This  may  be  tried  in  all  forms  with
perfect  success  in  very  many  subjects.  These  are  never
deceived.  Many  most  interesting  experiments  may  thus
be  made,  and  I  have,  as  in  the  preceding  facts,  often  seen
and  minutely  tested  the  phenomenon.

4.  I  cannot  with  certainty  state  whether  the  same  com-
munity extends  to  the  Sight.  Possibly,  the  fact  that  the
eyes  are  closed,  and  usually  turned  up,  as  well  as  insensible
to  light,  which,  in  fact,  constitutes  a  leading  feature  of  the
sleep,  may  serve  to  explain  why  this  is  not  in  general  tried.
The  sleeper's  eye  may  be  quite  dead  to  all  external  impres-
sions, even  where  he  possesses  internal  vision;  and  the
sensations  above  treated  of  are  the  results  of  external  im-
pressions, conveyed  to  him  by  sympathy.  The  question  is,
can  he,  internally,  see  what  the  magnetiser  sees  externally,
as  he  tastes,  smells,  and  feels  ?  If  in  a  state  of  clairvoy-
ance, no  doubt  he  can,  for  he  then  sees  all  surrounding
objects,  with  his  eyes  closed.  But  that  state  is  not  neces-
sary to  the  above  mentioned  community  of  sensations,  and
we  must  distinguish  true  clairvoyance,  as  we  shall  soon  see,
from  that  which  depends  on  sympathy. On  the  whole,  I


104  COMMUNITY  OF  EMOTIONS.

am*  inclined  to  think,  that  the  state  of  the  eye  is  opposed  to
the  making  of  such  experiments  in  a  satisfactory  manner.

5.  In  regard  to  Hearing,  I  have  not  seen  experiments
tried  in  this  way.  I  have  already  said,  that  the  sleeper  is
usually  deaf  to  all  but  the  voice  of  the  magnetiser,  or  of  the
person  en  rapport  with  him.  Does  he  hear  what  is  said  to
that  person  by  others  ?  I  have  no  doubt  that,  in  many
cases,  he  does ;  and  that  in  this  way,  he  often  becomes  ac-
quainted with  matters  intended  to  be  kept  secret  from  him.
This  should  be  carefully  attended  to  in  making  experi-
ments.

6.  There  is  often,  but  perhaps  less  so  than  in  regard  to
the  senses,  a  Community  of  Emotion.  In  these  cases,  what-
ever mental  emotion  occurs  in  the  magnetiser,  or  in  others
placed  en  rapport  with  the  sleeper,  is  also  experienced  by
him.  I  have  not  yet  examined  this  phenomenon  so  minutely
or  fully  as  the  others,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  calling
up  at  pleasure,  a  genuine  and  marked  emotion.  On  this
account,  the  observations  are  commonly  accidental.  Thus,
I  have  seen  some  patients  smile  and  laugh  when  their  mag-
netiser happened  to  do  so ;  and  I  have  also  seen,  what  has
been  very  often  described  by  other  observers,  the  sleeper
painfully  affected  by  nervousness  and  alarm  on  the  part  of
the  operator.

This,  indeed,  as  formerly  hinted,  is  the  cheif  cause  of  all
the  unpleasant  results  which  occasionally  arise  when  persons,
who  have  no  experience  or  knowledge  of  Animal  Magnetism,
try,  for  amusement,  or  out  of  curiosity,  to  produce  magnetic
effects.  They  succeed  better  than  they  had  supposed  pos-
sible, merely  by  imitating  the  gestures  of  some  magnetiser
whom  they  have  seen  operate,  without,  perhaps  having
attended  minutely  either  to  his  operations  or  to  the  cautions
and  directions  he  may  have  given.  The  subject  operated
on,  probably  a  young  person,  or  even  a  young  lady,  falls
into  a  deep  sleep,  and  hears  nothing  that  is  addressed  to
her,  perhaps  by  her  father,  mother,  or  other  near  relations.
These  persons  become  alarmed,  never  having  before  seen
anything  of  the  kind,  and  not  being  aware  that  this  deaf-
ness is  a  common  character  of  the  sleep,  and  that  the  sleep  is
not  only  harmless,  but  beneficial.  They  ask  the  luckless
operator,  with  much  agitation,  perhaps  with  some  anger,  to
relieve  her,  and  while  he  hesitates  and  becomes  infected  with


DANGER  OF  RASH  EXPERIMENTS.  105

their  fears,  not  knowing  how  to  proceed,  they  seize  her
hands,  and  their  own  influence,  unknown  to  them,  cro:
his,  producing  uneasiness,  which  appears  in  the  countenance
of  the  sufferer,  and  almost  invariably  out  of  all  proportion
more  intensely  pictured  there,  than  truly  corresponds,  by
the  patient's  own  subsequent  statement,  to  the  actual  suf-
fering. This  again  frightens  them  still  more ;  they  call  on
her,  they  weep,  they  rage  against  the  magnetiser,  and  over-
whelm him  with  reproaches.  At  last,  goaded  almost  to
madness,  he  tries  to  undo  the  charm.  He  takes  the  patient's
hand,  perhaps  while  several  other  persons  are  in  contact
with  her,  or  acting  on  her,  and  by  sympathy  with  him,  she
becomes  instantly  and  seriously  worse.  This  continues  for
a  time,  varied  only  by  every  sort  of  useless  and  hurtful  in-
terference on  the  part  of  the  bystanders,  not  one  of  whom,
perhaps,  knows  what  ought  to  be  done,  and  the  unhappy
victim  of  ignorance  and  temerity  falls  into  a  fainting  fit,
and  possibly  into  severe  convulsions.  I  need  not  pursue  the
unpleasant  picture  further,  but  I  may  suggest  that  it  is  only
aggravated  by  the  proceedings  of  the  medical  man  finally
summoned,  if,  as  is  too  often  the  case,  he  have  either  ac-
cidentally, or  acting  on  a  firm  resolution,  declined  making
himself  familiar  with  these  phenomena,  or  the  laws  which
regulate  them.  Then,  when  it  is  too  late,  he  regrets  that
carelessness  or  prejudice  have  led  him  to  neglect  facts,  often
presented  to  his  notice ;  then  the  parents  discover  that  ar-
able and  estimable  physician  has  been  induced  to  commit  a
grievous  error,  namely,  to  shut  his  eyes  to  some  of  the  most
wonderful  and  practically  important  phenomena.  But  there
is  an  end  of  their  scepticism,  if  they  had  any ;  possibly  of
the  doctor's  too.  Yet  even  in  such  circumstances,  where  it
has  been  quite  evident  that  the  slightest  acquaintance  with
the  matter  would  have  enabled  us  to  avoid  all  that  suffering
and  danger,  I  have  heard  of  physicians  who  drew  no  other
moral  from  the  occurrence  than  this,  that  Animal  Magnet-
ism was  dangerous ;  and  they  then  shut  their  eyes  to  it  as
resolutely  and  as  closely  as  before.

True.  Animal  Magnetism  is  dangerous.  But  it  is  not
the  study  of  it,  nor  the  knowledge  of  it,  but  ignorance  of  it,
and  the  rash  experiments  of  those  who  are  ignorant  of  it,
that  are  dangerous.

In  the  hands of  qualified  experimenters,  I  have never


106  MAGNETISM  SAFE  Iff  GOOD  HANDS.

seen  one  unpleasant  accident.  I  have  heard  of  several  in
the  circumstances  above  sketched,  and  on  the  authority  of
both  the  operators  and  of  their  subjects.  But  I  can  go
farther.  For  I  have  never  yet  seen  a  case  in  which  the
magnetic  sleep  was  produced  in  the  proper  way,  in  which
the  sleeper  did  not  declare,  not  only  that  he  sustained  no
injury,  but  also,  that  he  always  felt  better,  stronger,  and
more  fit  for  work  of  any  kind  after  the  sleep  than  before  it.
And,  in  very  many  cases,  the  general  health,  if  in  any  way
bad,  has  been  improved,  or  a  complete  cure  effected,  by  a
course  of  Animal  Magnetism.  I  do  not  mean  to  say,  that
it  never  can  prove  injurious  to  any  one ;  because  I  have  not
sufficient  experience  to  justify  me  in  drawing  such  a  con-
clusion. But  this  I  can  say,  that  in  all  the  cases  I  have
seen  in  the  hands  of  others,  and  in  all  that  have  been  in  my
own  hands,  including,  in  both  categories  many  nervous  per-
sons, affected  with  various  maladies,  some  of  them  precisely
of  that  kind,  such  as  heart  complaints,  which  would  appear
the  most  likely  to  suffer  from  any  undue  excitement,  the
effect  of  the  magnetic  process  in  general,  and  of  the  sleep
in  particular,  has  always  been  soothing,  and  never,  in  any
one  instance,  unpleasant  to  the  patient,  besides,  as  I  have
said,  acting  beneficially  on  the  health.  I  regard  it  as
equally  safe  and  more  beneficial  to  impaired  health  than
ordinary  sleep  ;  that  is,  as  far  as  my  experience  goes.

Of  course,  I  do  not  here  speak  of  exciting  exhibitions  of
striking  phenomena ;  of  causing  excessive  laughter,  or  rous-
ing violent  passions  or  emotions.  That  is  a  kind  of  experi-
ment of  which  I  entirely  disapprove,  as  I  do  likewise  of  all
those  in  which  strong  and  false  impressions,  especially  of  a
disagreeable  nature,  are  made  in  the  mind;  as  when  a  man
is  made  to  believe  he  is  ruined,  or  that  he  is  a  wild  beast.
Not  that  these  are  always  hurtful,  but  that  they  may,  in
very  susceptible  temperaments,  become  so.  Such  experi-
ments, especially  in  the  form  of  exhibition,  are  not  justifi-
able, and  are  at  most  permissible  in  private,  with  a  view  to
the  ascertaining  a  fact,  necessary  to  complete  our  knowledge
of  the  phenomena,  and  to  enable  us  usefully  to  apply  it.

Public  exhibitions  of  the  phenomena  of  Animal  Magnet-
ism are  not,  in  my  humble  opinion,  good  things.  I  have
already  given  some  reasons  against  them,  and  I  would  here
add,  that  to  employ  these  wonderful  and  beautiful  facts


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  BYSTANDERS.  107

merely  to  excite  wonder  and  produce  amusement,  is  a  great
abuse  of  our  powers.  Animal  Magnetism  is  not  a  play-
thing; it  is  a  serious,  I  would  say,  a  sacred  thing,  Whicfl
ought  to  be  studied  with  reverence,  and  not  degraded  to
minister  to  the  idle  curiosity  of  those  who  regard  it  merely
as  an  exhibition,  to  be  forgotten  the  hour  after  it  has  served
to  gratify  our  love  of  novelty,  or  to  raise  a  laugh. — In  pri-
vate alone  can  it  be  properly  studied.  No  one  in  a  public
hall,  save,  perhaps,  one  or  two  close  to  the  subject,  can  see
the  phenomena  as  they  ought  to  be  seen,  or  judge  aright  of
their  truth,  and  of  the  beautiful  evidence  of  that  truth
afforded  by  the  countenance  and  manner  of  the  sleeper.  I
have  seen  many  persons  who  came  from  a  public  lecture
quite  unsatisfied,  convinced  in  five  minutes  in  a  private
room,  where  they  could  really  see  what  was  done  and  hear
what  was  said.

I  have  been  led  into  this  digression  by  considering  the
effects  of  sympathy  in  sometimes  giving  rise  to  unpleasant
accidents,  when  magnetism  is  tried  by  the  ignorant  and  inex-
perienced. I  would  here  repeat,  what  I  have  formerly  stated,
that,  when  such  accidents  unfortunately  occur,  the  safest
plan  is  to  let  the  patient  sleep  out  his  sleep.  The  magnetiser,
if  he  can  recover  his  own  composure,  may,  in  general,  easily
awake  him  by  upward  or  reversed  passes.  But  it  ought  to
be  an  invariable  rule,  never  to  try  such  experiments  without
the  presence  of  one  experienced  magnetiser.

7.  Returning  to  the  topic  of  sympathy,  in  the  form  of
community  of  emotion,  I  would  further  point  out  the  strong
effects  often  produced  on  the  sleeper  by  the  bystanders.
Many  sleepers  do  not  require  to  be  placed  en  rapport  with
others,  in  order  to  be  very  strongly  affected  by  their  emo-
tions. Thus  sceptical,  unreasonable,  prejudiced,  uncandid
persons  often  excite,  by  their  approach,  the  most  unpleasant,
often  distressing  sensations ;  while  the  approach  of  the  ra-
tional and  kind  may  easily,  in  many  cases,  be  traced  in  the
expression  of  the  sleeper.  But,  above  all,  the  approach  of
many  different  persons,  all  probably  much  excited,  produces,
in  very  susceptible  cases,  a  great  confusion  of  feelings,  aris-
ing, in  part,  from  sympathy  with  their  mind,  in  part  from
the  crossing  of  so  many  streams  of  magnetic  influence.

This  is  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  failure  in  public  exhibi-
tions of  the  more  delicate  phenomena,  as  I  have  already  ex-


108  THOUGHT-READING

plained.  It  ought  always  to  be  avoided,  as  far  as  possible.
Fortunately  for  exhibitors,  there  are  cases  which  are  not
much  affected  by  this  source  of  error  and  confusion.  But
some  are  so  quick,  that  they  will  detect,  by  sympathy  alone,
the  presence  of  one  individual,  and  even  discover  his  state
of  mind.

8.  This  brings  us  to  that  peculiar  form  of  sympathy  which
consists  in  reading  the  thoughts  of  others,  especially  of  those
en  rapport  with,  the  sleeper.  This  is  quite  a  distinct  pheno-
menon from  feeling  their  emotions ;  it  extends  to  tracing  all
the  intellectual  processes  or  images  in  their  minds,  and  it
thus  constitutes  a  kind  of  clairvoyance,  which  may  be  called
sympathetic  clairvoyance  or  thought-reading.  It  is,  as  we
shall  see,  a  very  beautiful  and  interesting  phenomenon.  But
before  describing  it,  I  would  remark,  that  many  persons,
who  are  extremely  averse  to  admit  the  existence  of  clairvoy-
ance at  all,  are  apt  to  suppose  that  they  get  rid  of  it,  when
the  facts  are  forced  on  their  attention  so  that  they  can  no
longer  be  denied,  by  ascribing  them  to  thought-reading,  as
if  thought-reading,  the  power  of  seeing  into  another  man's
soul  (and  through  his  body  too),  were  at  all  less  wonderful
than  the  power  of  seeing  through  a  stone  wall,  or  a  floor.

To  my  apprehension,  thought-reading  is  still  more  won-
derful and  incomprehensible  than  that  kind  of  clairvoy-
ance, which  takes  note  of  material  things  at  a  distance.  In
the  latter  case,  we  can  imagine  some  subtle,  rare  medium
by  which  impressions  may  be  conveyed  to  us,  as  light  or
sound  are.  But  how  do  we  perceive  thoughts,  not  yet  ex-
pressed, in  the  mind  of  another  ?

It  would  appear,  then,  that  those  wTho  would  explain  all
clairvoyance  by  thought-reading,  only  fall  from  the  frying-
pan  into  the  fire.  They  account  for  an  apparently  unac-
countable phenomenon,  by  one  still  more  incomprehensible.

Yet  both  the  phenomena  are  true ;  and,  as  far  as  we
know,  both  depend,  essentially,  on  the  same  cause.  After
the  discussion  of  thought-reading,  we  shall  be  prepared  to
enter  on  that  of  true,  that  is,  direct  clairvoyance.

Thought  reading  presents  itself  in  every  possible  variety
of  form.  The  sleeper,  being  placed  en  rapport  with  any
person,  can  often  describe,  with  the  greatest  accuracy,  the
subject  that  occupies  the  thoughts  of  that  person.  It  may
be  an  absent  friend,  or  his  own  house,  or  that  of  another,


IN  ITS  DIFFERENT  FORMS.  109

or  his  drawing-room,  bed-room,  study,  &c.  &c.  All  these
things  tho  sleeper  perceives,  as  they  pass  through  the  mind
of  the  experimenter,  and  describes  with  great  minuteness
and  accuracy,  so  as  to  excite  our  astonishment.

Or  he  goes  further ;  he  not  only  perceives  the  present,
but  the  past  thoughts  of  the  person  en  rapport  with  him ;
he  shares  his  memory.  Thus  he  will  mention  facts,  no
longer  so  existing,  but  remembered  by  the  experimenter.

Na^,  he  goes  still  further  even  than  this ;  for  he  perceives
things  once  known  to,  and  now  forgotten  by,  the  experi-
menter, who  very  often  contradicts  the  sleeper,  and  persists
in  maintaining  his  own  opinion,  until,  on  further  enquiry,  he
not  only  finds  him  to  be  right,  but  himself  is  enabled  to  re-
cal  the  fact,  which  had,  as  we  say,  escaped  his  memory.

We  all  know  that  we  are  apt,  at  times,  to  forget  facts,
which  subsequently  recur  to  the  memory.  But  here,  it
would  seem  that  the  sleeper  sympathises  with  our  past
thoughts,  as  to  read  what  we  ourselves  are  for  the  moment
blind  to.  At  least,  this  must  be  admitted  by  those  who
ascribe  all  clairvoyance  to  sympathy ;  but  it  is  difficult,  in
many  cases,  to  distinguish  between  sympathetic  and  direct
clairvoyance,  if  we  admit  the  possibility  of  the  latter.

For  example,  the  sleeper  describes  a  room  at  the  request
of  the  experimenter.  He  details  the  form,  size,  doors,
windows,  book-cases,  tables,  carpet,  fire-place,  sofas,  chairs,
piano-forte,  &c.  &c,  and,  as  he  goes  on,  every  statement  is
confirmed  by  the  proprietor,  who  sees  the  whole  in  his  mind's
eye,  as  when  he  left  it.  But  all  at  once,  perhaps,  the
sleeper  speaks  of  the  hangings,  or  pictures,  and  says  he
sees  the  picture  of  a  dog,  a  horse,  or  a  man,  in  such  or  such
a  position,  with  reference  to  another  object.  This  is  denied;
but  the  sleeper  is  firm.  So  is  the  other,  and  after  a  long
dispute,  each  retains  his  opinion.  But  on  returing  home,
the  experimenter  finds  that  he  has  been  mistaken,  and  the
sleeper  right.  He  now  remembers,  that  up  to  a  certain
period,  the  picture  hung  where  he  had  said,  but  that  he
himself,  or  some  one  else,  had  changed  its  position  to  that
described  by  the  sleeper,  as  he  himself  formerly  knew,  but
had  forgotten.  Similar  occurrences  are  very  common.  But
they  admit  of  two  explanations.

In  the  first  place,  the  sleeper,  in  many  cases,  declares
that  he  reads  the  thought  of  the  other  party,  and  certainly
10


110  THOUGHT-READING.

does  so  in  some  cases,  even  where  he  is  not  aware  of  doing
so,  but  thinks  he  is  looking  directly  at  the  objects  described.
Now,  it  may  be,  and  this  is  the  phenomenon  properly  under
consideration,  that  he  reads  the  past  thought  of  the  experi-
menter, and,  in  some  obscure  manner,  discovers  that  it  is
true,  while  the  present  thought  is  erroneous.

Or  it  may  be,  that  when  asked  to  describe  the  room,  the
sleeper,  finding  the  trace  in  the  questioner's  mind,  follows
it  up  until  he  comes  into  direct  communication  with  the  ob-
ject, by  direct  clairvoyance.  That  this  often  happens,  I
think  cannot  be  doubted,  and  we  shall  see  further  on,  that
the  experiment  may  be  so  made  as  to  prove  it ;  but  I  am
also  inclined  to  believe,  that  the  former  explanation  applies
in  some  cases,  and  that,  in  some  instances,  the  mediate  and
immediate  modes  of  perception  of  distant  objects  are  mixed
or  combined.

One  frequent  form  of  thought-reading  is  that  of  perceiv-
ing the  contents  of  a  closed  letter,  or  of  a  sealed  packet,  or
of  a  sealed  box.  Some  sleepers  can  do  this  readily,  if  en
rajiport  with  a  person  who  knows  these  contents,  but  not
otherwise.  But  here  it  must  be  noted,  that,  in  some  cases,
the  rapport  is  established  without  contact,  so  that  it  suffices
for  the  sleeper,  that  one  person  who  knows  the  contents  of
the  closed  objects  should  be  present.  And  lastly,  it  appears
that  some  subjects,  who  at  one  time  possess  the  power  of
direct  or  immediate  clairvoyance,  at  other  times  are  desti-
tute of  this,  and  have  only  that  of  thought-reading.

Of  course,  when  it  is  done  by  thought-reading,  failure
will  take  place,  when  no  one  who  knows  the  object  to  be  de-
scribed is  present,  while,  on  the  entrance  of  such  a  person,
the  sleeper  succeeds.  All  these  things  must  be  carefully
attended  to  in  our  experiments,  otherwise  our  results  have
no  value  whatever,  and  only  lead  to  confusion.  When  a
sleeper,  of  the  sympathetic  class,  fails  at  one  moment,  and
succeeds  in  the  next,  after  a  person  at  first  absent  has
arrived,  the  idea  of  collusion  arises  in  many  minds  ;  whereas,'
if  we  were  well  acquainted  with  all  the  facts,  and  with  their
infinite  variety,  we  should  see,  in  that  result,  a  new  proof
of  the  truth  of  the  fact,  and  the  integrity  of  the  sleeper.

Those  who  meet  with  cases,  in  which  thought-reading  is
found  to  be  the  true  explanation  of  the  phenomena,  should
reflect,  that  thought-reading  is,  in  itself,  a  beautiful  and


SOURCES  OF  ERROR.  Ill

most  wonderful  fact;  and  should  beware,  also,  of  drawing
the  conclusion,  that,  because  it  applies  to  one  case,  or  to
many  cases,  of  apparent  vision  at  a  distance,  it  is  therefore
sufficient  to  explain  all  cases,  or  the  only  explanation,  if  it
can  be  called  such,  that  is  admissible.

It  often  happens,  as  I  have  explained,  that  the  sleeper  or
thought-reader  is  found  right  as  to  present  facts,  where  he
has  been  supposed  to  be  wrong.  But  it  also  often  happens,
that  he  is  supposed  to  be  wrong,  and  is  not  afterwards
shown  to  have  been  right.  There  are,  in  fact,  many  sources
of  error  on  both  sides,  which  are  often  difficult  of  detection.

Thus,  the  thought-reader  may  be  dwelling  on  some  past
event,  and  be  persuaded  that  it  is  present.  The  impressions
of  past  and  of  present  events  are  of  equal  vividness  in  his
mind,  being,  in  both  cases,  internal  and  indirect  impressions.
Hence  he  cannot  readily  distinguish  between  them,  and  may
be  quite  correct,  if  we  could  discover  the  precise  time  to
which  his  sensations  refer.  This  must  be  carefully  attended
to,  and  our  experiments  regulated  accordingly.

Or  he  may  receive  erroneous  impressions  from  suggested
ideas.  So  powerful  is  his  sympathy  with  other  minds,  that
an  idea,  directly  suggested,  or  indirectly  introduced,  as,  for
example,  by  a  leading  question,  may  often  produce  on  his
mind  an  impression  as  vivid  as  that  caused  by  the  thoughts
or  memory  of  his  questioner,  and  all  three  may  become  mixed
together.

For  this  reason,  all  suggestions  and  leading  questions
should  be  carefully  avoided,  and  the  sleeper  encouraged  -to
tell  his  own  story.  Nor  is  the  danger  of  error  equally  great
in  all  cases.  Many  can  readily  distinguish  the  different
kinds  of  impression,  and  steadily  reject  suggested  ideas,  even
while  some  of  them  have  a  difficulty  in  distinguishing  present
from  past  events.  Some,  again,  can  do  the  latter  also,  and
these,  of  course,  are  the  best  subjects.

It  often  happens,  that  in  early  experiments,  the  operator
is  so  excited  by  the  novelty  and  interest  of  the  facts,  that  he
does  not  calmly  examine,  and  involuntarily  suggests,  by  silent
sympathy,  his  own  ideas  to  his  subject.  But  after  a  few  sit-
tings he  becomes  more  collected;  he  has  only  the  pure  de-
sire to  hear  what  the  sleeper  says;  the  sleeper  is  not  disturbed
by  involuntary  suggestions,  and  his  sensations  come  out  more
pure  and  less  confused. Besides,  his  powers  improve,  and,


112 SYMPATHY  WITH  BODILY  STATE  OF  OTHERS.

by  practice,  a  sleeper,  at  first  confused  and  often  mistaken,
may  become,  if  properly  treated,  a  very  valuable  one.

Under  the  head  of  direct  or  immediate  clairvoyance,  I
shall  have  to  return  more  fully  to  these  considerations.

9.  Sympathy  extends  often  to  the  bodily  state  of  the  ope-
rator, or  other  person  en  rapport  with  the  sleeper.  The
latter  will  feel  and  describe  every  pain  or  ache  felt  by  the
former,  and  will  even  in  some  cases  feel,  or  intuitively  per-
ceive, the  morbid  state  of  certain  parts.  He  will  say,  that
the  other  has  a  headache,  or  a  pain  in  the  side,  or  difficulty
in  breathing ;  he  will  declare  that  the  brain,  or  lungs,  or
liver,  or  stomach,  or  heart,  &c.  &c,  are  deranged  in  such  or
such  a  manner.  And  in  many  cases  he  will  be  right.  I  do
not  speak  here  of  his  seeing  the  state  of  these  organs,  which
shall  be  hereafter  considered.  But  the  intuitive  perception
of  health  and  disease,  here  alluded  to,  is  very  often  found.

10.  This  sympathetic  intuitive  sense  of  the  state  of  body
of  another,  may  he  exerted  in  the  absence  of  the  individual,
provided  a  communication  be  established.  For  this  purpose,
a  lock  of  hair,  or  any  object  that  has  been  in  contact  with
the  person,  even  a  recent  specimen  of  handwriting,  will  suf-
fice. The  sleeper,  aided  by  this,  will  enter  into  sympathy
with  the  absent  person,  as  if  he  were  present,  and  will  often
be  found  quite  accurate.  This  I  have  seen  and  tested  re-
peatedly.

11.  It  has  been  said,  that  subjects,  having  this  degree  of
sympathy,  often  also  possess  the  power  of  indicating  the
appropriate  remedy.  I  am  always  averse  to  speak  decided-
ly on  that  which  I  have  not  thoroughly  examined.  I  shall
not,  therefore,  say,  that  such  power  is  impossible,  nor  that
it  has  never  occurred.  But  I  can  state,  that  in  all  such
cases  as  I  have  seen,  the  sleeper  uses  or  recommends  the  class
of  remedies,  or  the  plan  of  treatment,  which  he  has  picked
up,  from  having  been  treated  himself,  or  from  having  been
taught  by  some  practitioner.  Thus,  one  prescribes  hydro-
pathy, another  homoeopathic  remedies,  a  third  mesmeric
treatment,  and  so  on.  There  are  some  cases,  however,  in  which
a  peculiar  sympathy  would  seem  to  exist,  inasmuch  as  the
sleeper,  being  shown  certain  remedies,  of  the  name  or  nature
of  which  he  is  ignorant,  after  feeling  them,  will  often  select
that  which  is  really  most  appropriate  to  the  case.  But  I  have
not  yet  had  sufficient  opportunity  of  enquiring  into  this
matter,  which  may,  possibly,  depend  on  sympathy  with  the


SYMPATHETIC  WARNINGS.  113

person  who  exhibits  the  drugs  to  the  sleeper,  and  who  has
probably  an  opinion  as  to  that  which  is  best  adapted  for
the  disease  in  question.


It  will  be  seen  that  thought-reading  includes  many  very
curious  and  beautiful  phenomena,  which  have  often  been
called  clairvoyance,  and  which  really  are  so,  but  are  not  the
only  phenomena  of  clairvoyance.  They  are  sympathetic,
indirect,  or  mediate  clairvoyance,  the  perceptions  being  de-
rived, not  from  the  objects  themselves,  but  from  their  images
in  the  mind  or  thought  of  others.  Some  observers,  having
only  met  with  this  form  of  clairvoyance,  have  rashly  con-
cluded that  there  is  no  other  ;  but  we  shall  see,  that  sym-
pathy and  thought-reading  cannot  explain  all  the  pheno-
mena of  clairvoyance,  and  that  we  must  admit  another  form
of  it.  We  shall  find,  that  it  may  be  possible,  to  trace  both
forms  to  one  common  source,  and  that  a  kind  of  sympathy  ;
but  in  the  mean  time,  there  are  two  distinct  classes  of  phe-
nomena, which  must  not  be  confounded  together.

12.  Sympathy  is  widely  diffused,  as  a  natural,  sponta-
neous occurrence.  There  are  few  people  who  have  not  ex-
perienced something  of  it,  and  none  who  are  not,  by  nature,
susceptible  to  it,  although  their  susceptibility  may  be  masked
under  ordinary  circumstances.

How  often  does  an  inexplicable  something  warn  certain
persons  that  an  absent  and  dearly  beloved  friend  or  relation
is  in  danger,  or  dying  !  This  is  an  effect  of  sympathy.
Every  one  has  heard,  in  his  own  circle,  of  numerous  in-
stances of  it.  I  am  informed,  for  example,  by  a  lady  near-
ly related  to  me,  that  her  mother  always  had  such  a  warn-
ing at  the  time  when  any  near  and  dear  friend  died.  This
occurred  so  often  as  to  leave  no  doubt  whatever  of  the  fact.
It  happened,  that  this  lady  more  than  once  made  the  voy-
age to  and  from  India,  and  that  during  the  voyage  she,  on
several  occasions,  said  to  her  daughter  and  to  others,  "  I
feel  certain  that  such  a  person  is  dead."  On  reaching  port,
these  perceptions  were  always  found  to  be  true.

It  often  happens,  that  this  spontaneous  sympathy  goes  so
far  as  to  produce  the  vision  or  appearance  of  the  dying  per-
son. But  this  phenomenon  belongs  more  properly  to  direct
clairvoyance.

10*


114  NATURAL  SYMPATHIES  AND  ANTIPATPIIES.

The  remarkable  case  of  Zschokke,  the  Swiss  romance-
writer,  who  possessed,  at  times,  and  quite  spontaneously,
the  power  of  reading,  in  the  minds  of  others,  the  whole  of
their  past  history,  is  a  proof  of  the  spontaneous  occurrence
of  thought-reading,  in  reference  to  past  events.

1 3.  Sympathy  often  produces  a  strong  attraction  between
two  persons,  who  see  each  other  for  the  first  time.  Neither
of  them  can  explain  it,  but  both  feel  it,  and  thus,  love  at  first
sight  is  no  fancy,  but  a  reality.  It  arises,  in  part,  from  a
pleasing  correspondence  between  the  magnetic  influences  of
the  parties,  and,  when  this  is  the  case,  it  is  as  durable  as
strong.  Nay,  it  is  well  known,  that  there  are  many  persons
who  frequently  quarrel  after  being  long  together,  yet  are
quite  wretched  if  separated,  and  infallibly  come  together,
till  a  new  quarrel  again  forces  them  asunder,  again  to  feel
miserable  apart.

14.  Not  only  do  such  sympathies  exist,  but  there  are
antipathies  equally  strong.  Every  one  must  have  seen  or
felt  the  repulsion  exercised  on  himself  or  others  by  certain
individuals,  which,  even  in  spite  of  reason,  often  continues
for  life.  But  Antipathy  is  still  more  atrongly  exhibited  by
persons  in  the  magnetic  sleep.  In  some  instances,  they  can-
not bear  the  approach  of  persons,  who,  in  their  ordinary  state,
produce  no  such  effect  upon  them.

Antipathy  is  frequently  very  strikingly  seen  in  regard  to
animals  or  inanimate  objects.  Thus,  many  waking  persons
cannot  endure  the  presence  of  a  cat,  others  of  a  dog,  or  of
a  mouse,  or  of  a  spider,  or  of  a  toad.  Many  such  persons
will  detect  the  presence  of  their  bete  d' antipathie  or  bete
noire,  when  it  has  been  carefully  concealed  from  them,  and
if  it  be  not  removed,  will  be  affected  with  sickness,  fainting,
or  even  convulsions-.

Again,  many  persons  are  thus  painfully  and  disagreeably
affected  by  inanimate  objects,  even  by  such  as  are  pleasing,
or  indifferent,  to  people  in  general.  Some  cannot  endure  a
rose,  others  an  apple,  pear,  melon,  or  strawberry.  Some
object  to  sealing-wax,  others  to  resin,  some  to  salt,  some  to
bread,  many  to  less  common  articles  of  food,  or  to  objects
apparently  the  most  innocent.  All  these  antipathies  are  so
strong,  that  the  mere  presence  of  the  objects  is  sufficient,  and
cannot  be  reasoned  away,  nor  overpowered  by  any  volition.
The  smell  of  the  objects  is  sometimes  considered  offensive,


EXISTENCE  OF  A  PECULIAR  INFLUENCE.  115

but  frequently  it  is  not  regarded,  it  is  the  object  itself,  from
which  an  influence  felt  by  the  victim  of  antipathy  proceeds.
Rcichcnbach  has  observed  a  connection  between  Antipathy
and  Animal  Magnetism,  inasmuch  as  those  who  have  marked
and  strange  antipathies  arc  usually  very  sensitive  to  magnet-
ic influence.  A  careful  study  of  the  phenomena  would  soon
enable  us  to  discover  the  laws  which  regulate  them.

We  must  conclude,  therefore,  that  there  resides  in  bodies,
animate  and  inanimate,  a  certain  force  or  influence  which  is
felt  by  certain  individuals,  who,  again,  are  more  or  loss
strongly,  and  in  different  ways,  affected  by  it.  That  this
force  or  influence  is  the  same  which,  in  a  peculiar  form,  gives
rise  to  the  magnetic  phenomena,  to  the  magnetic  sleep,  and
to  magnetic  sympathy,  as  well  as  antipathy,  is  in  the  highest
degree  probable.  But  I  shall  not  here  enter  on  theoretical
questions  ;  I  wish  merely  to  point  out  and  establish  the  facts.


Having  now  briefly  considered  the  subject  of  Sympathy,
of  sympathetic  or  mediate  clairvoyance,  or  thought-read-
ing, I  shall,  in  my  next  Letter,  go  on  to  that  of  immediate
or  direct  clairvoyance,  as  distinguished  from  that  which  has
been  described.

I  have  already  stated  that  this  phenomenon,  whatever
may  be  its  essential  nature  or  true  explanation,  presents  it-
self to  the  student  of  Animal  Magnetism,  and  very  often
does  so,  quite  unexpectedly,  while  he  is  engaged  in  studying
some  other  phenomenon.

I  believe,  further,  that  it  has  often  occurred,  just  as  sym-
pathy has  done,  as  a  spontaneous,  natural  fact,  which  has
been  ascribed  to  Imagination,  or  accounted  for  by  mere  co-
incidence. Whatever  be  the  explanation — and,  as  I  have
before  observed,  to  ascribe  it  to  Imagination  is  not  to  ex-
plain it,  but  rather  to  complicate  the  phenomenon  by  adding
a  link  to  the  chain  of  causes — whatever  be  the  explanation,
the  fact,  whether  occurring  spontaneously  in  the  ordinary
state,  or  presenting  itself  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  is  worthy
of  our  most  earnest  and  careful  enquiry.

And,  as  I  have  also  before  remarked,  it  is  a  mere  fallacy
to  suppose  that,  if  it  could  be  referred  to  Sympathy  or  to
Imagination,  (using  the  latter  word  in  its  ordinary  accepta-
tion, but,  of  course,  not  implying  that  the  fact  is  imaginary


116

or  unreal,)  it  would  be  more  easily  understood  or  explained
than  before.

Let  us,  therefore,  calmly  enquire  into  the  facts,  and  hav-
ing ascertained  what  we  can  about  them,  we  shall  then  be
in  a  better  position  for  enquiring  into  their  causes,  and  for
giving  such  an  explanation  as  may  be  found  attainable.

Many  persons,  on  hearing  of  Animal  Magnetism,  or  of  a
case  in  which  its  phenomena  are  said  to  occur,  at  once  sup-
pose that  clairvoyance  is  meant ;  and  it  is  often  difficult  to
persuade  those  who  have  not  examined  the  matter  for  them-
selves, that  clairvoyance  is  merely  one  of  a  long  series  of
phenomena,  and  that  many  cases  occur,  in  which  many
beautiful  phenomena  may  be  observed,  without  any  thing
that  can  properly  be  called  clairvoyance.  Others,  again,
by  clairvoyance,  understand  the  foreseeing  or  prediction  of
future  events,  which  is  said  to  occur  in  a  still  smaller  num-
ber of  cases.  But  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  that,  even  if
clairvoyant  prevision  had  never  occurred,  nor  ever  should
occur,  yet  the  existence  of  clairvoyance,  that  is,  the  direct
perception,  without  the  use  of  the  eyes,  of  absent  or  distant
objects,  may  be  perfectly  true.

To  this  point,  therefore,  I  shall  proceed  in  the  next
Letter.


LETTER  VII.

Clairvoyance,  or  what  I  have  denned  as  direct  or  imme-
diate clairvoyance,  or  the  direct  and  immediate  perception
of  absent  or  distant  objects,  without  the  use  of  the  eyes,
has  been  noticed  by  the  earliest  authors  on  Animal  Magnet-
ism in  modern  times.  But  I  shall  not  here  dwell  on  its
history ;  I  shall  proceed  at  once  to  describe  it,  in  the  vari-
ous forms  in  which  it  occurs,  as  described  by  those  who
have  seen  it,  and  as  I  have  had  opportunities  of  observing
it.

1.  The  first  form  in  which  the  power  of  clairvoyance,  or
direct  perception,  called,  by  the  sleeper,  seeing,  but  without
the  use  of  the  external  eye,  occurs,  is  usually  that  of  no-


WITHOUT  TIIE  USE  OF  TIIE  EYES.  117

ticing  the  hand  of  the  operator,  while  the  eyes  arc  firmly
closed.  This  is  often  observed  in  the  very  beginning,  when
the  magnetic  sleep  is  first  induced,  and  is  commonly  pointed
out  by  the  sleeper,  who,  without  questions  being  asked,  calls
out,  that  he  sees  the  hand,  and  very  frequently  describes
light  as  flowing  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  He  sees  the
hand  either  when  held  before  his  firmly  closed  eyes,  or,  in
many  cases,  when  held  to  the  side  of  his  head,  or  above  it,
or  behind  it ;  and  it  is  quite  easy  to  assure  ourselves  that
he  does  not,  and  cannot,  use  his  eyes,  without  the  clumsy
expedient  of  blindfolding  him,  which,  to  judge  by  the  mani-
pulations sometimes  resorted  to,  would  seem  to  be  a  very
difficult  matter,  and  often  causes  great  annoyance  and  loss
of  power  to  the  clairvoyant.  The  truth  is,  nature  adopts  a
far  more  effectual,  and  indeed  a  double  process  of  blindfold-
ing ;  since,  as  in  those  cases  of  spontaneous  sleep-walking
in  which  the  eyes  are  open,  the  pupil  is  usually  found  to  be
fixed,  and  insensible  to  light,  when  by  forcing  open  the  eye-
lids, we  can  see  it ;  while,  in  a  large  proportion  of  cases,
the  pupil  is  not  only  fixed  and  insensible,  but  is  also  turned
upwards,  so  that  it  cannot  be  seen  at  all,  when  the  eyelids
are  forcibly  opened.  In  addition  to  all  this,  we  can  place
the  hand  above  or  behind  the  head,  positions  in  which  the
most  sensitive  and  moveable  eye  cannot  possibly  see  any
thing.

The  sleeper  makes,  at  first,  great  efforts  to  look  at  the
hand,  and  instinctively  exhibits  the  pantomime  of  intent
looking,  but  with  closed  eyes.  He  has  the  appearance  of
looking  (if  his  eyes  were  open)  before  him,  in  all  cases,  even
when  the  hand"  is  above  or  behind.  It  is  evidently  the
"  mind's  eye,''  the  internal  vision,  which  is  strained  to  catch
the  image  of  the  hand;  and  it  is  often  described,  especially
at  first,  as  dim,  enveloped  in  a  thick  mist,  or  faintly  visible.
By  degrees  the  mist  clears  off,  that  is,  when  a  deeper  or
higher  stage  of  sleep  is  reached,  and  the  hand  is  seen,  with-
out an  effort,  plain  and  distinct,  in  its  natural  color.  At
first,  it  is  often  grey,  or  devoid  of  color.

2.  When  the  sleeper  has  reached  a  certain  stage,  he  will
often  notice  the  objects  which  happen  to  be  placed  behind
him,  and  in  such  positions  that,  were  his  eyes  open,  he  could
not  see  them  without  turning  round ;  and  he  will  describe
them,  without  ceasing  for  a  moment  to  look  straight  for-


118

ward,  or  downward,  towards  his  knees,  as  he  very  often
does,  his  eyes  being  firmly  closed.  If  anything  be  done,
however  quietly,  in  any  part  of  the  room,  he  will,  if  not
absorbed  in  internal  contemplation,  detect  it.  This  fact,  as
well  as  those  concerning  the  hand  of  the  operator,  or  of  others,
I  have  very  often  seen. They  are  of  daily  occurrence.

Now  we  have  here,  distinctly,  the  fact  of  perception,  in
the  shape  of  vision,  without  the  use  of  the  external  organs
of  vision.  This  is  the  essential  fact,  and  it  is  as  difficult  to
understand  or  explain,  as  any. other  form  of  clairvoyance
whatever.  The  question  is,  by  what  means  is  the  image  of
the  object  conveyed  to  the  internal  organ  of  vision,  and  to
the  sensorium  ?  That  the  brain  is  vitally  concerned  in  this
species  of  vision,  no  one  can  doubt ;  but,  by  what  kind  of
influence  or  emanation  is  it  affected  ?  Common  vision,  by
ordinary  light,  it  cannot  be,  for  the  eyes  are  closed,  and  the
rays  from  the  object  do  not,  in  most  cases,  fall  even  on  the
closed  eyelids,  while,  as  before  stated,  the  pupil  is,  or  may
be  insensible  to  light.

We  must,  therefore,  admit  the  existence  of  some  other
force  or  influence,  exerted  by  bodies,  and  capable  of  reach-
ing the  brain  without  passing  through  the  eye.  When  the
sleeper  finds  his  vision  not  clear,  or  misty,  as  he  calls  it,  he
will  very  often,  in  order  to  see  better  an  object  which  is
shown  to  him,  apply  it  to  his  forehead,  to  the  coronal  region,
or,  in  some  rare  cases  to  the  occiput,  and  forthwith  perceive
it  more  distinctly.  It  would  appear,  then,  that  this  influ-
ence, like  heat,  can  traverse  the  cranium  and  its  membranes,
and  reach  the  brain.  And  it  is  probable  that,  when  the
sleeper  perceives  objects  not  in  contact  with  his  head,  their
emanations  still  fall  on,  and  pass  through,  his  cranium.

Some  who  admit,  as  all  who  examine  the  matter  for  them-
selves must  do,  that  the  eyes  are  not  used,  have  endeavored
to  account  for  this  kind  of  perception  by  assuming  an  ex-
treme degree  of  acuteness  of  all  the  other  senses;  and  re-
fer to  the  case  of  the  blind,  who,  they  tell  us,  perceive  and
avoid  objects  by  means  of  an  extreme  degree  of  acuteness
of  hearing,  touch,  and  smell.  They  point  also  to  sleep-
walkers, who  are  supposed  to  be  warned  of  the  presence  or
proximity  of  solid  bodies  by  the  action  of  these  on  the  air,
perceived  by  their  sense  of  touch,  morbidly  acute  as  it  is  said
to  be.


WITHOUT  THE  USE  OF  THE  BYES.  119

But  the  latter  is  not  only  an  assumption,  but  a  complete
petitio  principii ;  since  it  is  much  more  probable,  and  at  all
events  possible,  that  sleep-walkers  are  awake  to  impressions
which  are  so  far  new,  that  they  are  not  usually  noticed  in
the  waking  state ;  and  the  assumed  acuteness  of  touch  has
never  been  proved.  As  to  hearing,  it  is  enough  to  say,  that
clairvoyants  are  far  more  frequently  deaf  to  the  loudest
sounds,  save  the  voice  of  the  operator,  or  of  those  with
whom  they  sympathise,  than  they  are  possessed  of  extreme
acuteness  of  hearing.  And  in  regard  to  smell,  not  only
have  the  objects  frequently  no  smell,  but  their  color,  form,
transparency,  &c,  as  well  as,  in  most  cases,  luminous  ema-
nations from  them,  are  minutely  described;  matters  which
are  surely  out  of  the  province  of  the  olfactory  nerves  ;  or,
at  least,  if  they  have  come  within  it,  this  amounts  to  a
transference  of  a  sense,  one  of  the  most  striking  phenomena
of  Animal  Magnetism.

As  to  the  precise  nature  of  the  influence,  or  force,  or
emanation,  by  which  this  kind  of  interior  visual  perception
is  caused,  this  is  not  the  place  for  the  discussion  of  that
question.  But  I  may  here  point  to  the  very  frequent,  in
some  cases  universal,  occurrence  of  luminous  emanations
from  all  objects  thus  seen  by  the  sleeper,  nay,  often  seen
by  him  while  awake,  (as  in  the  case  of  the  light  from  the
tips  of  the  fingers  of  the  operator,  or  of  other  parties  pre-
sent,) first,  as  indicating  that  an  emanation  of  some  kind,
whether  it  be  called  a  force,  a  motion  among  the  particles
of  air.  or  of  a  supposed  ether,  or  a  fluid,  as  we  speak,
vaguely,  of  the  electric  or  magnetic  fluids,  really  does  pro-
ceed from  bodies  in  general  ;  and,  secondly,  as  confirming
the  results  of  the  researches  of  Baron  von  Reichenbach,  who
has  proved,  independently  of  all  experiments  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  the  existence  of  a  peculiar  influence  (force,  fluid,
or  imponderable  agent,)  in  all  forms  of  matter,  and  pervad-
ing the  universe,  the  action  of  which  is  perceived,  in  various
forms,  by  a  large  proportion  of  mankind,  and  always  very
distinctly  by  spontaneous  somnambulists.  It  is  in  this  di-
rection, that  we  shall  most  probably  find  the  explanation  so
eagerly  sought  after.

When  we  have  seen,  in  several  independent  cases,  these
first  manifestations  of  the  power  of  clairvoyance,  which
embrace  the  essential  parts  of  the  phenomenon,  and  compel
us  to  admit  some  new  mode  of  access  to  the  interior  vision.,


120  VISION  THROUGH  OPAQUE  BODIES.

we  are  no  longer  astounded  at  the  further  manifestations  of
the  same  power.  We  feel,  that  he  who  can  see  an  object
behind  him,  while  his  eyes  are  closed,  and  who  sees  it  best
when  applied  to  his  head,  has  some  means  of  perceiving
objects,  which  is  either  not  possessed  in  the  ordinary  wak-
ing state,  or,  if  possessed,  is  not  attended  to,  but  its  impres-
sions are  overpowered  by  the  stronger  impressions  of  the
ordinary  senses.  We  easily  conceive  that,  in  highly  sus-
ceptible cases,  distance  may  be  a  matter  of  no  moment ;  that
our  new  force  or  influence  may,  like  light,  traverse  the  uni-
verse without  difficulty,  while,  like  heat,  it  may  be  able  to
penetrate  through  all  objects,  even  through  walls  of  brick
or  stone.  And  such,  precisely,  is  the  character  of  Baron
von  Reichenbach's  Odyle,  save  that  it  moves  with  less
volocity  than  light,  and  passes  through  solid  bodies  much
more  easily  than  heat,  as  we  shall  explain  hereafter.

3.  The  next  observation  is,  that  the  clairvoyant  can  often
perceive  objects,  which  are  wrapped  up  in  paper,  or  enclosed
in  boxes  or  other  opaque  receptacles.  Thus,  I  have  seen
objects  described,  as  to  form,  color,  surface,  markings,  down
to  minute  flaws  and  chipped  edges,  when  enclosed  in  paper,
cotton,  pasteboard  boxes,  wooden  boxes,  boxes  of  papier
mache,  and  of  metal.  I  have  further  known  letters  minute-
ly described,  the  address,  post  marks,  seal,  and  even  the
contents,  read  off  when  the  letters  were  enclosed  in  thick
envelopes  or  boxes.  ISTo  fact  is  better  attested  than  this  ;
Major  Buckley,  who  would  seem  to  possess,  in  an  unusual
degree,  the  power  of  producing  in  his  subjects  this  peculiar
form  of  clairvoyance,  has  brought,  I  believe,  upwards  of  140
persons,  many  of  them  of  high  character  and  education,  and
89  of  these  even  in  the  conscious  state,  to  the  point  of  read-
ing, with  almost  invariable  accuracy,  although  with  occa-
sional mistakes,  printed  mottoes,  enclosed  in  boxes  or  in
nutshells.  He  causes  some  friends,  who  wish  to  see  and  test
the  fact,  to  purchase  a  number  of  these  nuts,  in  different
shops,  and  to  seal  them  up  in  a  bag,  from  whence  they  are
taken  by  the  clairvoyant  by  chance,  read,  noted,  and
opened.  It  is  physically  impossible  for  any  of  the  parties
concerned  to  know  the  contents  of  any  one  nut ;  at  the
utmost,  a  clairvoyant,  who  has  had  much  practice,  may,
after  reading  the  first  few  words,  guess  the  remainder  of  a
motto  previously  deciphered.  But  out  of  a  certain  number,
the  majority, sometimes  all, have  been  found  new, and


MAJOR  BUCKLEY'S  CASES.  121

besides,  new  clairvoyants  constantly  succeed  in this  well-
devised  experiment.

In  regard  to  this  particular  form  of  clairvoyance,  I  would
observe,  first ;  that  only  a  certain  proportion  of  sleepers
possess  this  power,  so  that  any  one  may  very  probably  not
have  it.  Secondly ;  that  the  same  clairvoyant  may  succeed
at  one  time,  and  fail  at  another,  from  causes  explained  in
the  first  section.  Thirdly;  that  it  occurs  more  frequently
in  the  experience  of  some  magnetisers  than  in  that  of  others.
Major  Buckley,  for  example,  is  very  successful,  while  there
are  some  magnetisers  who  never  produce  it  at  all,  but  who
call  forth,  perhaps,  other  equally  wonderful  phenomena.
No  one,  therefore,  is  entitled  to  deny  the  fact,  because  he
does  not  meet  with  it  in  his  own  cases,  or  in  any  given  case,
or  on  any  one  given  occasion.

I  have  already  mentioned  that  there  are  some  clairvoyants
who  cannot  thus  read  or  see,  unless  some  one  be  present
who  knows  that  which  is  to  be  read  and  seen,  and  that  in
these  cases,  it  is  performed  by  sympathetic  clairvoyance,  or
thought-reading.  I  would  here  add,  that  it  would  appear
that  some  clairvoyants  can  thus  read  at  one  time  directly,
at  another  only  sympathetically,  and  at  a  third,  perhaps
not  at  all.  This  is  an  additional  reason,  why  a  failure,  or
even  a  few  failures,  do  not  entitle  us  to  reject  the  fact,  save
as  a  speciality  in  the  individual  cases  in  which  the  failure
occurs.

I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  say  more  than  I  have  al-
ready said  on  the  subject  of  attempted  imposture  in  such
cases.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  render  all  deceit  impossi-
ble ;  and  I  regard  Major  Buckley's  method  as  entirely
satisfactory ;  but  we  must  never  forget  that  even  a  genuine
and  good  clairvoyant,  if  exposed  to  the  close  proximity  and
the  involuntary  magnetic  influence  of  a  vigorous  person,  or
of  several  such  persons,  more  vigorous,  perhaps,  than  his
magnetiser,  penetrated  with  the  conviction  that  deceit  is
practised  by  him,  and  eagerly  bent  on  detecting  it,  may
easily  be  deprived  of  all,  or  the  greater  part  of  his  power.

4.  Proceeding  onwards,  we  next  find  our  sleeper  perceiv-
ing objects  in  the  next  room,  or  in  that  overhead,  or  in  that
below.  This  is  a  frequent  phenomenon,  requiring  no  special
preparation,  and  usually  brought  to  light  by  the  sleeper,  of
his  own  accord,  remarking  what  takes  place  there.  It  can-
11


122  VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.

not  be  referred  to  ordinary  sympathy  with  the  operator,
for  the  latter  often  does  not  know  the  room  described  ;  and
when  he  does,  changes  or  events  in  it,  taking  place  at  the
moment,  and  unknown  to  the  operator,  are  noticed.  I  have
myself  seen  it  frequently.

It  often  happens,  that  when  the  operator  knows  the  room
described,  he  and  the  clairvoyant  will  dispute  about  some
trifling  matter,  in  which  he  declares  the  clairvoyant  to  be
wrong,  just  as  I  have  explained  under  the  head  of  sympathy.
But  it  also  frequently  occurs,  that  the  clairvoyant  proves
to  be  right,  some  change  having  been  made  since  the  ques-
tioner last  saw  it,  or  even  during  the  experiment.  It  is
needless  to  quote  cases,  for  this  is  one  of  the  very  commonest
phenomena,  and  there  is  none  which  more  forcibly  impresses
us  with  the  fact,  that  the  clairvoyant  really  sees  that  which
he  describes.  But  again  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  that
only  some  clairvoyants  exhibit  this  power,  and  that  those
who  possess  it,  do  not  possess  it  at  all  times,  nor,  when
they  do,  at  all  times  in  the  same  degree.

5.  The  next  step  is,  that  the  sleeper  can  see  into  another
house,  as  it  were,  mentally,  and  describe  it  in  every  part,
just  as  he  does  in  the  case  of  the  house  in  which  he  is.
This  I  have  often  seen,  and  have  had  opportunities  of  satis-
fying myself,  that  his  vision,  at  least  in  some  cases,  is  not
determined  by  sympathy  with  the  operator's  mind.

In  the  first  place,  his  description  is  that  of  a  person  seeing
and  examining,  for  the  first  time,  what  he  describes.  He
attends  to  the  minutest  details  of  the  objects  he  looks  at,
but  often  omits,  till  his  attention  is  called  to  them,  objects
on  which  the  mind  of  the  operator  is  dwelling  at  the  time.
Secondly,  he  observes  the  persons  who  may  be  in  the  room,
and  what  they  are  doing,  the  whole  of  which  may  be,  and
often  is,  unknown  to  his  questioner,  but  is  afterwards  ascer-
tained to  be  correct.  Thus,  in  one  case  which  I  exam-
ined, the  clairvoyant  found  my  house,  which  he  had  never
seen  nor  heard  of,  and  the  situation  of  which  he  was  not  told.
He  first  noticed  the  number  of  steps  at  the  door,  (which  I
could  only  have  guessed  at,)  correctly  ;  he  then  entered,
described  the  lobby-table  and  the  piece  of  furniture  beyond
it,  on  which  coats  and  hats  are  hung ;  but  omitted  to  notice,
till  I  urged  him  to  look,  a  pillar  in  the  middle  of  the  lobby.
He  then  described  the  situation,  direction,  and  shape  of  the


VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  123

stair,  but  stopped  to  scrutinize  the  stair-carpet  and  "queer
brass  fenders"  (carpet  rods)  which  were  new  to  him,  but  of

which  I  never  thought  for  a  moment  ;  then  entered  the
drawing-room,  minutely  and  accurately  described  the  furni-
ture and  ornaments,  as  far  as  time  was  given  him  to  do  so  ;
noticed  various  striking  peculiarities  ;  saw,  at  one  time,  a
man  sitting  in  the  room,  (the  man-servant  at  the  hour  of
prayers,)  and,  at  a  later  time,  only  a  lady,  in  a  particular
arm-chair,  engaged  in  reading  a  new  book,  (which  turned
out  quite  correct.)  I  give  this  as  a  recent  specimen  of  a
fact  often  observed.

In  another  recent  case,  a  lady,  who  became  clairvoyant
at  the  first  sitting,  having  been  magnetised  by  Mr.  Lewis,
described  the  same  house,  and  also  saw,  in  another  room,  a
certain  lady  and  gentleman,  quite  unknown  to  her,  as  was
the  house  also ;  the  lady,  in  a  particular  dress  and  head-
dress, sitting  on  a  sofa  with  other  persons,  the  gentleman
standing  at  a  large  round  table,  on  which  he  leaned  his  hand  ;
on  the  little  finger  of  the  hand  was  a  ring,  and  he  was  con-
versing with  a  short  dark-haired  gentleman.  All  of  which
was  correct  at  that  moment,  save  that  she  called  the  hand
on  which  she  saw  the  ring  the  right,  instead  of  the  left.
This  is  a  frequent,  but  by  no  means  an  uniform  blunder  of
clairvoyants.  Some  of  them  always  put  right  for  left,  south
for  north,  east  for  west,  and,  in  the  sleep,  adhere  immoveably
to  this  error,  which  is  an  additional  proof  that  they  do  not,
in  those  cases,  sympathise  with  the  mind  of  the  operator,
who  of  course  knows  the  truth.  Thus,  in  a  third  clairvoy-
ant, magnetised  b}'  myself,  I  was  at  first  much  puzzled  by
his  apparent  blunders  of  this  kind  ;  but  on  comparing  my
notes,  and  asking  a  few  questions,  I  discovered  that  the
error,  in  his  case,  was  invariable.  He  told  me,  for  example,
that  the  houses  in  Prince's  Street,  which  he  saw,  looked
north  ;  that  the  Castle  was  to  the  north  of  Prince's  Street ;
that  the  fire-place  in  my  drawing-room  was  on  the  east,  and
the  door  on  the  wTest  side,  whereas  the  former  is  on  the
west,  the  latter  on  the  east,  side  of  the  room;  and  he  dis-
dainfully rejected  all  suggestions  to  the  contrary,  declaring
that  he  saw  it  quite  plain,  and  that  I  must  surely  be  making
a  fool  of  him.  I  cannot  pretend  to  explain  this,  which,  as
I  have  said,  is  only  an  occasional,  although,  I  am  told  by
experienced  magnetisers,  a  tolerably  frequent  phenomenon.


124  VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.

6.  The  next  fact  is,  that  the  sleeper,  at  the  request  of  the
operator,  and  frequently  of  his  own  accord,  visits  distant
places  and  countries,  and  describes  them,  as  well  as  the
persons  in  them.  This  may,  as  I  have  already  said,  be
done,  in  some  cases,  by  sympathy,  but  there  are  many  cases
in  which  ordinary  sympathy  will  not  explain  it.

Thus,  the  clairvoyant  will  often  see  and  describe  accu-
rately, as  is  subsequently  ascertained,  places,  objects,  and
people,  totally  unknown  to  the  operator,  or  to  any  one  pre-
sent :  and  he  will  likewise,  in  describing  such  as  are  known
to  the  operator,  notice  details  and  changes  which  could  not
be  known  to  him.

The  clairvoyant  appears,  as  it  were,  mentally  to  go  to  the
place  named.  He  often  finds  himself,  first,  in  no  place,  but
floating,  as  it  wTere,  on  air,  or  in  space,  and  in  a  very  short
time  exclaims,  "Now,  I  am  there."  The  place  named  is
the  first,  as  a  general  rule,  that  presents  itself  to  him.  But
whether  it  be  so,  or  whether  he  see,  first,  some  other  place,
a  certain  internal  feeling  tells  him  when  he  is  right.  If  it
be  a  distant  town,  and  no  house  be  specified  to  him,  he
will  either  see  a  general  panoramic  view  of  it,  as  from  a
neighboring  hill,  or  from  a  height  in  the  air,  and  describe
this  as  he  would  a  map  or  bird's-eye  view,  or  he  will  find
himself  in  some  street,  place,  square,  or  promenade,  which,
although  not  specified  to  him,  is  at  once  recognised  from  his
account  of  it.  He  sees  and  describes  the  trees,  roads,
streets,  houses,  churches,  fountains,  and  walks,  and  the
people  moving  in  them,  and  his  expressions  of  delight  and
surprise  are  unceasing.  If  sent  thither,  to  use  his  almost
invariable  phrase,  a  second  or  a  third  time,  the  sleeper  will
see  the  same  objects,  but  remarks  the  change  on  the  living
part  of  the  picture.

For  example,  Mr.  D.,  a  clairvoyant,  magnetised  by  my-
self, when  in  an  early  and  imperfect  stage  of  lucidity,  was
asked  by  me  to  go  to  Aix-la-Chapelle,  he  never  having  left
Scotland.  He  agreed,  and  after  a  very  short,  apparently
an  aerial  voyage,  said  he  was  there.  He  was  in  a  beautiful
walk,  bordered  with  trees,  saw  green  turf,  and  the  walk
stretched  on  both  sides,  till  lost,  at  either  end,  by  a  turn-
ing, not  sharp,  but  gradual.  This  was  evidently  the  boule-
vard. Another  time,  I  specified  the  Friedrich  Wilhelm-
splatz,  where  he  saw  houses  on  one  side,  and  at  both  ends,


VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  12b

some  much  higher  than  others,  the  place  itself  of  irregular
oblong  form,  wider  at  one  end  than  the  other,  and  partly
shrouded  in  a  mist,  of  which  he  long  complained  ;  on  the
other  side  a  long  building,  not  a  house.  In  the  middle,  a
road,  with  small  trees,  having  no  branches  till  the  stem  rose
rather  higher  than  a  man,  and  then  a  number,  but  the  top
obscured  by  mist.  Another  time,  he  saw  the  door  of
Nuellen's  Hotel,  large  enough,  he  thought,  to  allow  a  car-
riage to  enter,  but  not  more,  if  that ;  people  were  going  in
and  out ;  and  a  man  stood  at  the  door,  with  a  white  neck-
cloth and  vest,  and  no  hat ;  as  he  thought,  a  waiter.  In
the  saloon,  he  saw  tables,  all  brown,  no  one  there.  Another
time,  some  tables  were  white,  and  people  sat  at  them  eat-
ing, while  others  moved  about.  According  to  the  hours  of
experiment,  he  was  most  likely  right  both  times,  although
their  dinner  hour  differs  so  much  from  ours.  One  day,  I
sent  him  to  Cologne.  There  he  noticed,  from  a  bird's-eye
position,  a  large  building,  seen  rather  misty,  but  much
higher  than  the  houses.  He  got  into  a  street  near  it,  and
described  its  long  pointed  windows,  showing  with  his  fingers
their  form,  and  its  buttresses,  which  he  described,  but  could
not  name.  In  the  street,  he  saw  people,  indistinctly,
moving;  but  he  saw,  pretty  clearly,  one  "old  boy,''  as  he
called  him,  fat  and  comfortable,  standing  in  his  shop-door,
and  idling.  He  had  no  hat,  and  wore  an  apron.  Mr.  D.
was  much  surprised,  without  any  question  being  asked,  at
the  fact  that  about  half  of  the  men  he  saw,  both  in  Aix
and  Cologne,  wore  beards,  and  he  described  different
fashions  of  beards  and  moustaches.  One  time,  when  I  sent
him  to  Bonn,  he  gave  a  beautiful  account  of  the  view  from
the  hills  to  the  west  of  it,  of  the  town,  and  the  Rhine,
stretching  out  and  winding  through  the  plain,  with  the
rising  grounds  on  the  other  side,  such  as  the  Ennertz.  But
it  was  remarkable  that  he  stoutly  maintained,  that  the  hill
on  which  he  stood  was  to  the  east  of  the  town,  the  town  to
the  east  of  the  Rhine,  between  the  hill  and  the  river,  and
the  Rhine  running  towards  the  south  ;  whereas  I  knew
every  one  of  these  directions  to  be  reversed.

The  same  subject  has  often  spontaneously  visited  other
places,  unknown  to  me,  but  has  given  such  minute  and
graphic  accounts  of  the  localities,  the  people,  houses,  dress,
occupations,  and  topography  of  these  places,  that  I  should

11*


126  VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.

recognise  them  at  once,  were  I  to  see  them.  I  intend  to
give,  in  Part  II.,  some  instances  of  this.

It  often  happens,  that  a  clairvoyant,  who. can  see  and  de-
scribe very  well  all  that  is  in  the  same  room,  or  the  next
room,  or  even  in  the  same  house,  cannot  thus  travel  to  a
distance,  without  passing  into  a  new  stage.  This  generally
occurs  spontaneously,  but  may  sometimes  be  effected  by
passes,  or  by  the  will  of  the  operator.

The  new  or  travelling  stage,  in  such  cases,  is  marked  by
peculiar  characters.  Thus,  in  one  very  fine  case,  which  I
had  the  opportunity  of  studying,  the  clairvoyante,  in  her
first  lucid  state,  could  tell  all  that  passed  behind  her,  or  in
the  next  room,  and  could,  by  contact,  perceive,  and  accu-
rately describe,  the  state  of  body  of  other  persons.  She
could  hear,  and  she  very  readily  answered,  every  question
put  to  her  by  any  one  present,  but  could  not  go  to  a  distant
place.  Yet,  as  I  saw,  she  would  often  spontaneously  pass
from  that  state  or  stage  into  another,  in  which  she  was  deaf
to  all  sounds,  even  to  the  voice  of  her  magnetiser,  unless  he
spoke  with  his  mouth  touching  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  her
right  hand.  Any  one  else  might  also  converse  with  her  in
this  way,  but  when  first  addressed,  she  invariably  started.
And  now,  not  only  could  she  go  to  a  distance,  and  see  very
plainly  what  passed,  but  she  was  already  in  some  distant
place,  and  much  cccupied  with  it.  She  called  this  going
away,  or,  when  it  was  done  by  her  magnetiser,  being  taken
away,  and  when  tired,  would  ask  him  to  bring  her  back,
which  he  did  by  some  trifling  manipulations.  She  then  re-
membered (in  her  first  state,  to  which  she  came  back,)  what
she  had  seen  on  her  travels.  I  shall  have  to  return  to  this
case  hereafter,  and  some  of  her  visions  will  also  be  given  in
Part  II.,  in  order  not  to  interrupt  the  current  of  the  de-
scription of  the  phenomena. I  shall  designate  her  as  E.

7.  Allied  to  the  preceding  manifestation,  is  that  of  seeing
any  person  asked  for,  by  the  operator  or  others.  The
sleeper,  in  certain  stages,  sees  the  person  asked  for,  not  in
any  locality,  but,  like  himself,  floating  in  air,  or  in  space.
He  describes  the  figure,  face,  hair,  complexion,  eyes,  gesture,
dress,  &c.  with  great  accuracy,  and  that  when  the  operator
has  never  seen  the  individual  described.  In  other  stages,
the  sleeper  sees  the  person  in  his  house,  or  in  the  street,  or
in  a  road  or  walk,  or  at  his  occupation,  whatever  that  may  be.


SYMPATHY  AND  CLAIRVOYANCE.  127

It  may  happen,  that  he  is  seen,  either  as  he  is  at  the  moment
.or  as  he  has  been  at  some  former  period.  The  clairvoyant
generally  expresses  a  decided  liking  or  dislike  for  the  person
seen.  If  the  person  be  at  a  great  distance,  and  his  actual
locality  not  known  to  the  enquirer,  it  may  often  be  ascer-
tained by  the  clairvoyant's  description ;  and  it  is  a  very
general  remark,  that  clairvoyants  have  a  great  difficulty  in
naming  persons  or  places  known  to  them,  and  are  often  very
averse  to  doing  so,  while  they  willingly  describe  them,  and
of  course,  in  regard  to  unknown  persons,  places,  and  objects,
we  must  be  confined  to  description  alone.

Experiments  of  this  kind  are  among  the  most  beautiful
and  interesting  in  Animal  Magnetism.  They  may  be  varied
in  a  thousand  ways,  and  admit,  very  frequently,  of  the
easiest  and  most  complete  verification.  Some  instances  will
be  given  in  Part  II.

8.  •  Some  clairvoyants  possess  the  power  of  sympathizing
with  the  absent  or  unknown  persons  seen  and  described  by
them,  so  as  to  read  their  thoughts,  to  know  their  past  actions,
at  least  in  part,  and  even  to  perceive  their  intentions.  E.
often  exhibits  this  power,  and  I  shall  have  occasion  to  men-
tion several  instances  of  it,  both  in  some  of  the  subsequent
sections,  and  in  Part  II.

9.  The  powers  mentioned  in  the  two  preceding  sections,
are  not  only  exercised  when  the  person  asked  for  is  named
by  the  operator  or  other  enquirer,  but  also,  when  some  ob-
ject, formerly  in  contact  with  the  person,  such  as  a  ring,
a  piece  of  dress,  a  lock  of  hair,  or  even  a  letter,  or  piece  of
writing  without  the  name,  all  information  being  withheld.
This  power  is  very  highly  developed  in  E.,  and  I  have  very
frequently  tested  it.  A  lock  of  hair,  or  the  hand-writing  of
the  person,  the  more  recent  the  better,  seem  to  answer  best,
and  are,  at  least,  the  most  convenient  means  for  doing  so.
I  shall  give  several  instances  in  Part  II.,  and  I  shall  here
describe  her  mode  of  proceeding,  and  the  results,  in  a
general  form.  She  crushes  the  letter  or  envelope,  or  hair,
in  her  hands,  and  if  the  person  do  not  at  once  appear,  she
will  often  lay  it  on  her  head,  on  the  upper  part  or  coronal
surface,  and  this  she  calls  putting  it  straight  before  her
eyes,  which  are  closed.  She  then  describes  the  person,  and
his  occupation,  which  is  often,  not  always,  that  of  the  mo-
ment of  the  experiment,  sometimes  that  of  the  time  when


128  SYMPATHY  AND  CLAIRVOYANCE

the  letter  was  written,  or  of  some  former  time. This  must
be  attended  to,  or  else  E.  may  be  supposed  to  fail,  when,  in
truth,  she  succeeds  perfectly  ;  and  she  is  one  of  those  who
cannot  at  all  times  distinguish  the  past  from  the  present,
in  the  images  which  present  themselves,  although she  is
often  quite  clear  on  this  point. E.  will  often  trace  the  his-
tory of  the  person  for  a  considerable  period,  down  to  the
present  moment. This  she  did,  for  example,  in  the  case  of
Mr.  Willey,  and  of  another  gentleman  who  had  gone  from
Liverpool  to  California,  and  were  then  in  San  Francisco,
most  correctly,  as  attested 'by  Mr.  Willey,  publicly,  on  his
return  to  England. She  has  often  done  the  same  thing  in
other  cases. (See  Part  II.) E.  sympathizes  to  a  remark-
able extent  with  persons thus  seen, so as  to  read  their
thoughts. But  what  is  most  remarkable,  is  this,  that  she
holds  conversations  with them,  asking questions,  and  re-
ceiving (of  course  inaudible)  answers,  as  appears  from  her
remarks,  which  are  chiefly  addressed,  in  an easy,  familiar
tone,  to  the  individuals. She  will  often  scold  them,  for  ex-
ample, because  they  have  not  written  to  their  friends,  and
will listen to, and admit or  reject their excuses. She
maintains  that  she  speaks  to  them,  and  that  she  can  suggest
thoughts  or  even  dreams  to  their  minds. Nay,  she  told  one
person,  seen  from his  hand- writing,  that  at  a certain  pe-
riod, when  confined  to  bed  from  illness,  he  had  had  a  vision
of  his  wife  coming  to  see  him. This  she  spoke  of,  as  if  he
had  just  informed  her  of  it ;  and  it  appeared,  subsequently,
that  he  had  such  a  vision  as  she  described. She  added  nu-
merous  other  details,  for  which  I  refer to  Part  II. She
takes  likings  to  some  of  her  new  acquaintances  thus  formed,
and dislikings to  others,  and  is  much annoyed,  and  ren-
dered angry,  by  anything  mean  or  bad. In  one  case,  where
she  traced  a  stolen  watch,  and  described  the  thief,  who  was
not  habitually  such,  she  spoke  to  the  thief  of  that  thief's
feelings,  fears,  and  intentions,  and  scolded  her  severely  for
her  theft  and  hypocrisy,  stating  that  she  was  afraid  of  what
she  had  done,  and  intended  to  return the  watch,  and  say
that  she  had  found  it. "  But  you  took  it  !  you  know  you
did  !"  said  she  with  angry  energy. Before  the  account  of
this  sitting  reached  the  proprietor  of  the  watch,  it  had  been
returned  by  the  person  indicated,  who  said  she  had  found
it. (See  Part  II.) E.  has  frequently  discovered  lost  and


IN  REGARD  TO  ABSENT  PERSONS.  129

stolen  property,  when  put  in  communication  with  it,  or  with
its  proprietor.  She  has  also  frequently  discovered  missing
papers  of  value  in  the  same  way.  Another_  clairvoyanto
lately  recovered  fifteen  bales  of  cotton,  which  had  been
stolen  from  a  ship  in  New  Orleans,  and  traced  it  thence  in
another  ship  to  Havre,  where  it  was  found ;  and  the  fact  is
attested  by  the  captain  of  the  former  vessel,  who  thus  es-
caped the  loss  of  a  large  sum  of  money.  I  have  myself
tested  E.  with  various  hand-writings  and  other  objects,  and
found  her  power  to  be  most  remarkable.  For  some  details,
see  Part  II.

10.  Another  very  striking  fact  is,  that  some  clairvoyants
will  accurately  indicate  the  time  of  the  places  they  thus
mentally  visit.  E.,  who  is  one  of  these,  does  this  with  great
accuracy.  It  is  sometimes  said  by  the  clairvoyant  to  be
done  by  observing  the  appearance  and  position  of  the  sun,
and  is  probably  a  guess,  more  or  less  accurate,  as  in  the
case  of  many  of  us  in  the  ordinary  state.  But  E.  declares
that  she  does  it  by  reading  the  clocks  of  a  place,  or  the
watch  of  the  individual  seen  by  her.  And  it  is  found  that
she  will  give,  for  the  same  place,  at  any  hour  of  the
day,  invariably  the  same  difference  of  time,  so  that,  where
both  watches  are  correct,  the  difference  of  longitude  may
be  ascertained.  For  some  very  well-devised  and  satisfac-
tory experiments,  made  with  her  at  the  request  of  my
honored  friend,  Sir  W.  C.  Trevelyan,  on  this  point,  I  again
refer  to  Part  II.

11.  Not  only  do  clairvoyants  see  persons  asked  for,  and
such  as  are  not  asked  for,  but  whose  hair,  writing,  &c.  are
put  into  their  hands,  but  they  also  see,  in  the  same  ways,
persons  who  are  no  longer  alive.  Mr.  D.  has  described  to
me,  possibly  by  thought-reading,  persons  long  dead,  of
whose  death,  and  even  of  whose  existence,  he  was  not  aware,
when  I  have  asked  for  them  by  name.  They  usually  ap-
peared to  him  as  if  alive,  or,  as  he  expressed  it,  like  us;
while  he  saw  his  own  brother,  dead  five  years,  not  like  us,  but
quite  different.  E.  has  the  same  power  of  seeing  dead  peo-
ple, but  she  also  will  not  speak  of  them  as  dead ;  they  are
shelled.  In  one  or  two  very  curious  experiments,  she  was,
spontaneously,  or  by  some  obscure  inducement,  while  on  her
way  to  visit,  mentally,  a  lady  in  a  distant  town,  led  to  enter


130  VISIONS  OF  DEAD  PERSONS,  ETC.'

another  house,  where  she  saw  a  lady,  who  turned  out  to  be
shelled,  and  rather  frightened  her  at  first,  till  she  found  that
out.  She  is  never  frightened,  nor  are  clairvoyants  in  gene-
ral, by  seeing  those  who  are  dead.  They  rather  like  to  see
them.  Mr.  D.  delights  in  contemplating  his  dead  brother,
although  he  is  moved  and  saddened  at  the  sight.  E.  also  likes
to  see  shelled  persons.  Both  instinctively  feel  a  difference,
but  never  use  the  word  death  or  dead,  and  will  use  the  most
ingenious  circumlocutions  to  avoid  it,  till  they  hit  on  some
peculiar  term.

12.  Clairvoyants  can  only  see,  not  only  dead  persons,
but  those  of  former  ages,  and  the  events  in  which  they  are
concerned.  I  have  heard  of  some  very  striking  instances
of  this,  in  reference  to  historical  personages,  which  I  may.
afterwards  mention,  and  in  which,  all  that  could  be  verified
was  found  to  be  correct.  One  clairvoyant,  for  example,
traced  the  history  of  a  ring  for  about  800  years,  and  was
found  to  be  accurate  for  TO  or  80  years  back  or  more.  The
shelled  lady,  seen  by  E.,  as  mentioned  in  the  preceding
paragraph,  was  in  the  costume,  and  the  room  had  the  fur-
niture, of  280  to  300  years  ago.  She  saw  various  events
connected  with  this  shelled  lady,  and  when  asked  what  she
had  died  of,  started  back  in  surprise,  and  with  a  very  sig-
nificant gesture,  said,  that  she  died  of  having  her  head  cut
off.  See  Part  II.  I  have  some  reason  to  think,  that,  by
means  of  very  lucid  clairvoyants,  many  obscure  points  in
history  might  be  cleared  up,  and  that,  by  the  discovery  of
documentary  evidence.

This  power  of  seeing  the  past  is  truly  remarkable,  and
deeply  interesting.  It  would  appear  to  indicate,  that  what
has  once  existed,  or  happened,  leaves  a  trace  of  some  kind,
perceptible  to  the  inner  vision  and  soul  of  man,  when  no
longer  obscured  or  overpowered  by  the  coarser  impressions
conveyed  to  the  sensorium  by  the  external  senses.  This
idea,  which  has  often  been  entertained  by  philosophers  and
thinkers,  we  shall  again  refer  to,  in  its  proper  place.

13.  Another  power,  exhibited  by  the  clairvoyant,  is  that
of  seeing  the  structure  and  interior  of  his  own  frame.  The
most  eloquent  descriptions  ever  given  of  the  wonders  of  the
human  body,  never  produced  half  the  effects  on  the  mind
which  is  caused  by  the  simple,  but  graphic  words  of  the
clairvoyant,  who  is  perhaps  altogether  ignorant  of  anatomy,


INTRO  VISION.  1  3 1

and  yet  sees,  in  all  their  beauty  and  marvellous  perfect  ion,
the  muscles,  vessels,  bones,  nerves,  glands,  brain,  lungs,  and
other  viscera,  and  describes  the  minutest  ramification  s  of  nerves
and  vessels,  with  an  accuracy  surpassing  that  of  the  most  skil-
ful anatomist.  He  will  trace  any  vessel  or  nerve  in  its  most
complex  distribution  ;  the  whole,  to  him,  is  transparent,
bathed  in  delicate  light,  and  full  of  life  and  motion.  Some,
at  first,  are  terrified  on  seeing  these  wonders,  but  soon  learn
to  admire  and  delight  in  them.  But  it  is  only  a  certain
proportion  of  clairvoyants  who  pass  into  that  particular
stage,  and  as  experiments  are  most  frequently  made  on  the
uneducated,  or  half  educated,  they  are  often  at  a  loss  for
words  to  describe  what  they  see.  I  cannot  doubt  that,
when  intelligent  medical  men  shall  be  themselves  rendered
clairvoyant,  some  useful  information  will  be  derived  from
the  exercise  of  this  power.

It  is  easy  to  understand,  that  when  the  sleeper  sees
his  frame  in  this  perfect  way,  he  can  detect  disorder
and  disorganisation  in  it.  This,  indeed,  he  very  readily
does,  and  his  diagnosis  is  often  confirmed  by  that  of
the  physician  who  attends  him  when  he  is  suffering  from
illness.

14.  The  clairvoyant,  in  some  cases,  possesses  the  same
power  in  reference  to  the  bodies  of  those  en  rapport  with
him.  He  describes  their  structure,  and  its  derangements;
and  I  have  good  reason  to  believe,  that  in  some  instances,
when  the  disease  is  of  an  obscure  nature,  his  diagnosis  has
proved,  and  has  been  acknowledged  to  be,  correct.

The  clairvoyant  who  possesses  this  power,  can  often  ex-
ercise it  at  a  distance,  with  the  help  of  the  hair  or  of  the
hand-writing.  I  have  seen  it  done  both  ways,  and  repeat-
edly with  very  great  minuteness  and  accuracy.  The  obser-
vations of  the  clairvoyant  have  always  corresponded  to  the
opinion  of  the  physician  who  knew  and  treated  the  case,
but  have  often  gone  further,  and  in  the  subsequent  opinion
of  the  physician,  correctly,  in  the  cases  I  have  studied.

I  have  already,  in  treating  of  sympathy,  alluded  to  this,
and  stated  my  opinion,  that  the  treatment  recommended  by
the  clairvoyant  is  almost  always  a  reflection  of  that  which
he  has  himself  experienced,  or  learned  from  some  medical
man.  It  has  generally,  in  each  prescribing  clairvoyant,
one  unchanging  character. It  is  homoeopathic,  or  hydro-


132  CLAIRVOYANT  PREVISION.

pathic,  or  mesmeric,  &c,  &c.  But  some  clairvoyants  do
appear  to  have  an  instinctive  power  of  selecting  unknown
remedies,  although  I  have  had  no  opportunities  of  seeing
this  done.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted,  that  some  persons,  not  at  all
qualified  for  the  task,  use  genuine  or  possibly  spurious  clair-
voyants, who  are  made  to  examine  and  prescribe,  for  the
object,  exclusively,  of  pecuniary  profit  to  their  employers.
This  ought  to  be  discouraged;  but  on  the  other  hand,  where
a  well  qualified  medical  man,  of  good  character,  is  fortunate
enough  to  meet  with  a  good  clairvoyant,  he  does  rightly  in
availing  himself  of  the  power,  to  assist  his  diagnosis.  I
rejoice  to  know  that  this  is  done,  in  more  than  one  instance,
by  medical  gentlemen  of  character  and  standing.

I  shall  here  close  this  Letter,  and,  in  the  next,  I  shall  go
on  to  some  other  phenomena,  connected  with  the  subject  of
direct  or  true  clairvoyance.


LETTER  VIII.

We  now  come  to  a  part  of  the  subject  which,  to  some,  is
the  most  interesting;  nay,  which,  in  some  minds,  swallows
up  all  the  rest,  so  that  when  Animal  Magnetism,  or  Mes-
merism, but  especially  Clairvoyance,  is  spoken  of,  this  phe-
nomenon, namely,  Clairvoyant  Prevision,  or  the  power  of
predicting  future  events,  is  alone  understood.

I  would,  in  the  first  place,  remark,  that  whether  Prevision
exist  or  not,  we  have  now  what  I  consider  sufficient  evidence
that  clairvoyants  do  possess  the  power  of  seeing  contem-
porary or  present  events,  as  well  as  that  of  seeing  past
events.  And  even  if  it  should  turn  out,  that  all  alleged
cases  of  prevision  are  founded  on  some  fallacy,  this  would
not  affect  these  other  phenomena,  which  must  rest  on  their
own  evidence.  I  premise  this,  because  I  have  often  heard
the  alleged  impossibility  of  prevision,  or  its  absence  on  a
particular  case,  employed  as  an  argument,  or  rather  a  proof,
against  the  possibility  of  clairvoyant  vision,  introvision,  and


DURATION  OP  SLEEP  PREDICTED.  133

retrovision. Now,  I  cannot  consent  that  these  should  he,
in  any  way,  made  to  depend  on  the  other.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  these  things,  vision,  introvision,
and  retrovision,  being,  as  I  think,  established  as  facts,
though  not  explained  or  understood  as  occurring  under  any
known  laws,  furnish  undoubtedly  an  additional  argument  for
the  possibility  of  prevision.  If,  in  some  way,  to  us  at  pre-
sent unaccountable,  present  and  past  events  are  presented
to  the  mind's  eye,  may  not  future  events  be  also  thus  per-
ceptible ?  If  past  occurrences  leave  a  trace  behind  them,
may  not  "coming  events  cast  a  shadow  before?"  If  the
latter  is  inconceivable,  the  former,  had  we  not  seen  them,
would  be  equally  so,  and,  whether  conceivable  or  not,  the
one  is  as  easy,  or  rather  as  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
explain  as  the  other.

1.  We  have  already  seen  that  many  somnambulists  can
predict,  to  the  second,  how  long  they  have  to  sleep ;  and
they  will  do  so,  however  often  they  may  be  asked,  at  differ-
ent intervals  of  the  same  sleep,  and  always  name  the  same
minute.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  they  are  never  wrong,
for  some  known  interferences  may  derange  the  phenomena,
while  some  unknown  ones  seem  also,  at  times,  to  operate.
But  in  those  who  possess  the  power,  failure  is  the  exception.
Thus,  in  a  set  of  observations  I  made  on  this  point  in  one
case,  where  this  power  was  early  developed,  out  of  thirty-
five  sittings,  the  time  of  waking  was  precisely  predicted  in
thirty-one,  in  many  of  these  three  or  four  times,  at  different
intervals;  in  all,  more  than  once.  Of  the  remaining  four,
in  two  the  time  was  not  asked  at  all;  in  the  other  two,  dis-
turbance occurred,  as  I  shall  explain  below.

The  form  of  prediction  varies.  Some  subjects  name  the
hour  and  minute,  usually  by  the  watch  of  the  operator,
without,  however,  its  being  shown  to  them;  or  by  some
clock,  to  which  they  are  accustomed  to  refer.  They  say,
for  example,  "I  shall  sleep  till  eight,"  or,  "I  shall  wake  at
thirty-four  minutes  past  nine,"  &c.  Others,  among  whom
is  the  person  referred  to  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  name
the  number  of  hours  or  minutes  they  have  to  sleep.  That
person,  for  example,  would  say,  "I  have  fifty-three  minutes
to  sleep;"  (I  never  caused  him  to  sleep  more  than  an  hour
in  these  trials;)  and,  if  I  asked  again,  after  twenty-one
minutes  by  my  watch,  he  would  say,  after  a  moment's  at-
12


134  DURATION  OF  THE  SLEEP

tention,  "I  have  still  thirty-two  minutes  to  sleep."  When
I  again  enquired,  after  an  interval  of  fourteen  and  a  half
minutes,  he  said,  "I  have  to  sleep  eighteen  minutes,  no!
only  seventeen  and  a  half,"  and  so  on.

It  would  appear  that  these  two  modes  of  fixing  the  time
of  waking  depend  on  the  form  of  that  which  presents  itself
to  the  interior  vision.  The  former  class  see  the  hour  on
some  imagined  clock  or  watch,  or  possibly  look  by  their
lucidity  at  the  house  clock,  or  at  the  operator's  watch.  I
know  that  some  have  said  that  they  saw  a  watch  or  time-
piece of  some  kind  before  them  when  asked  the  question,
and  that  some  internal,  inexplicable  feeling  showed  them
the  point  at  which  the  hands  would  be  at  the  moment  of
their  awaking.  The  individual  above  referred  to,  on  the
other  hand,  spontaneously  told  me  of,  and  most  minutely
described,  a  sort  of  apparatus  that  enabled  him  to  answer
the  question.  He  saw  a  kind  of  scale,  or  measuring  rod,
which  accompanied  him,  and  seemed  to  pass  before  his  eyes,
moving  from  left  to  right,  slowly,  so  that  while  certain
marks  or  divisions,  at  one  time  to  the  left  of  his  eye,  "when
they  seemed  to  advance  out  of  a  dark  cloud  or  mist,  moved
towards  his  eye,  others  came  into  view  on  that  part  of  the
rod  formerly  shrouded  from  his  sight.  On  the  right,  the
portion  of  rod  (the  ends  of  which  he  never  saw)  which  had
passed  his  eye,  at  a  certain  distance  entered  a  similar  cloud.
He  was  very  intelligent,  and  compared  it  to  an  endless  re-
volving tape,  of  which  only  a  small  portion,  and  that
straight,  was  at  any  one  time  visible  to  him,  extending  to
a  variable  distance  on  each  side  of  his  eye,  and  constantly
advancing.  It  had  marks  or  divisions,  representing  minutes,
and  at  every  ten  there  was  either  a  longer  mark,  or  the
mark  was  broader,  so  that  he  could  instantly  distinguish  it ;
but  he  said  this  was  not  necessary.  Indeed,  I  think  he
occasionally  spoke  as  if  the  marks  were  all  alike,  and  at  all
events  he  counted  them  by  an  instinctive  and  instantaneous
process.  He  did  not  always  notice  this  scale,  that  is,
attend  to  it,  while  looking  at  other  objects ;  but  he  had  a
sense  of  its  constant  presence,  even  when  not  attending  to
it.  When  asked  how  long  he  had  to  sleep,  he  had  only  to
look,  and  there  it  was.  There  were  no  numbers  on  the
scale,  but  he  could  always  see  as  far  as  was  required  (in  his
case  never  more  than  sixty  minutes  or  degrees  of  the  scale,


PREDICTED  BY  CLAIRVOYANTS.  163

to  the  left  of  his  eyes).  The  degree  right  in  front  of  his
eye  he  knew  to  he  that  of  the  present  minute,  and  a  pecu-
liar feeling,  which  he  spontaneously  compared  to  the  con-
science of  right  and  wrong,  told  him,  on  looking  towards
the  cloud  on  the  left,  the  degree  which,  at  waking,  would
be  found  opposite  his  eye.  He  was  also  quite  sensible  that
the  degrees  to  the  right  represented  past  minutes,  as  those
to  the  left  represented  future  minutes.  He  could  apparently
recognise,  after  it  had  passed  on  towards  the  right,  the  de-
gree which  was  present  when  he  first  fixed  the  time,  and
found  it  easiest  to  count  how  many  degrees  it  had  moved  to
the  right,  and  deduct  this  number  from  that  originally  fixed,
when  he  was  again  asked.  But  he  could  answer  either  way.
The  whole  of  this  description  was  given  as  nearly  as  possi-
ble in  the  words  and  order  here  set  down;  and  I  asked  no
questions  until  he  had  finished  his  account  of  it,  which  he
had  spontaneously  offered  to  give  me.

I  should  observe,  that  in  about  one  half  of  the  trials  made
with  him,  I  first  commanded  him  to  sleep  30,  40,  45,  50,  55,
or  60  minutes ;  and  in  the  remainder  I  allowed  him,  when
first  asked,  to  fix  his  own  time,  which  he  did  instantly,  by
looking  at  his  scale,  and  which  was  not  copied  from  my  ex-
periments, inasmuch  as  he  varied  from  7  or  8  to  12,  14,  15,
20,  22,  34,  35,  40,  41,  43,  47,  50,  and  52  minutes.  One
reason  why  he  never  exceeded  the  hour,  any  more  than  my-
self, was  doubtless  the  fact  that  our  time,  on  both  sides,
was limited, and  that  he  retained  this  impression  in  his


From  the  variation  in  the  times  fixed  by  himself  from
those  fixed  by  me,  and  from  his  invariably,  as  he  told  me,
looking  first  at  his  scale,  before  he  could  specify  the  time,  I
conclude,  that  the  length  of  the  sleep  was  not,  in  those  in-
stances in  which  he  fixed  it,  the  result  of  suggestion.  But,
granting  that  it  was  so,  surely  the  fact,  that  he  could  see
the  moment  fixed  upon,  when  asked,  visible  as  a  future
point,  advancing  to  the  present,  and  subsequently  fading
into  the  past,  is  truly  remarkable.  I  am  not  aware  that
this  curious  phenomenon  has  been,  in  other  cases,  so  minutely
enquired  into.  I  had  the  great  advantage  of  having  a  sub-
ject highly  educated,  of  great  natural  ability,  and  able  to
express  his  feelings  and  observations  in  good  and  precise
language. But  I  have  no  doubt,  that  if  other  cases  were


136  A  NEW  STATE  INTERPOLATED.

fully  investigated,  we  should  arrive  at  very  interesting  re-
sults in  reference  to  this  subject.

In  the  two  instances  in  which  the  prediction  of  the  time
of  waking  was  not  precisely  fulfilled  in  this  case,  the  sub-
ject slept  about  fifteen  minutes  longer  than  the  allotted
period.  The  first  time,  I  observed  some  symptoms  of
change  in  his  face  and  manner,  but  was  not  aware,  till  he
awoke,  that  the  time  had  been  exceeded.  Next  day,  I  ob-
served him  more  closely,  and  saw  the  same  signs  of  some-
thing unusual.  He  became  silent,  and,  after  a  time,  told
me,  that  he  was  in  no  place,  but,  as  it  were,  in  air,  and  then
he  said,  he  was  in  a  different  world, — not  meaning  by  this,
as  I  ascertained,  more  than  that  he  was  in  a  different  coun-
try, and  among  strange  people.  He  also  saw  better.  At
this  time  he  was  in  a  progressive  state,  the  power  of  pre-
dicting the  time  of  waking  having  appeared  in  him  very
early,  before  he  saw  plainly.  This  change  occurred  about
seven  or  eight  minutes  before  the  time  he  had  named  for
waking.  He  continued  to  describe  the  new  scene  for  about
fifteen  minutes,  which,  as  I  was  busy  noting  what  he  said,
seemed  to  be  a  shorter  time.  All  at  once,  he  became  again
silent,  and  then  spoke  of  the  things  he  had  been  alluding  to
before  the  change.  I  then  asked  him  how  long  he  had  to
sleep,  and  he  said  seven  minutes,  which  proved  correct.
Here,  being  in  a  progressive  state,  he  had  spontaneously
passed  into  another  stage,  the  fifteen  minutes  passed  in
which  did  not  count  in  his  first  state,  but  had  been,  as  it
were,  interpolated.  It  is  highly  probable,  that  many  in-
stances of  inaccuracy  in  the  time  fixed  as  the  duration  of
the  sleep,  especially  in  the  early  stages,  may  admit  of  a
similar  explanation.  I  think  it  also  very  probable  that,  oc-
casionally, the  interference  of  a  third  party,  especially  if  he
should  touch  the  sleeper,  may  derange  the  result,  either  by
confusing  his  sensations,  or  by  temporarily  inducing  a  dif-
ferent stage  of  sleep.

2.  The  next  form  in  which  prevision  appears,  is  that  in
which  the  somnambulist  predicts  changes  in  his  own  state
of  health.  This,  of  course,  is  observed  in  those  affected  with
diseases,  and  chiefly  in  such  as  suffer  from  attacks  of  a
spasmodic  nature,  or  from  fits  of  neuralgic  pain,  migraine,
fainting,  &c.  They  will  often,  quite  spontaneously,  predict
the  precise  time  of  one  or  more  attacks ;  they  will  describe


LUCIDITY  PRODUCED.  137

their  intensity,  and  specify  their  duration  ;  and  they  fre-
quently do  so  long  before  their  occurrence,  so  that  the  neces-
sary precautions  may  be  taken.

They  further  announce,  and  not  unfrccjuently,  especially
when  under  magnetic  treatment,  that  the  first,  second,  third,
or  other  attack,  to  take  place  on  a  certain  day,  at  an  hour
and  minute  named,  will  be  the  last.  And  all  these  predic-
tions are  very  frequently  fulfilled,  quite  independently  of
any  regularity,  nay,  along  with  the  utmost  irregularity,  in
the  recurrence  of  the  attacks.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,
that  the  patients  are  very  often,  perhaps  always,  in  perfect
ignorance  of  their  own  prediction,  having  no  recollection  of
what  occurs  in  their  sleep,  so  that  it  is  often  difficult,  with-
out causing  alarm,  to  keep  them  under  our  eyes,  and  within
reach  of  assistance,  when  the  predicted  fit  approaches.
Such  cases  have  been  recorded  in  great  numbers,  but  I  have
no  personal  experience  of  them,  my  experiments  having  been
chiefly  made  with  healthy  subjects.

3.  The  somnambulist  often  predicts,  in  his  own  case,  the
precise  period  when  lucidity  is  to  appear,  or  when  it  is  to
reach  its  highest  degree.  He  says,  on  such  a  day,  I  shall
be  light,  or  I  shall  see,  or  I  shall  be  able  to  see  such  a  per-
son, or  such  a  place,  or  to  fix  the  time  when  I  shall  become
so,  or  the  time  when  I  shall  have  a  fit.  He  will  often  pre-
scribe the  peculiar  form  of  magnetism,  which  will  bring  about
the  result,  whether  gazing,  or  laying  the  hand  on  the  head,
or  passes  downward  in  front,  or  behind,  or  passes  round  the
head,  or  breathing  over  the  head  or  forehead,  or  over  the
heart  or  epigastrium,  or  holding  the  hands,  &c.  He  tells  us,
how  many  times  he  must  be  magnetised,  and  for  how  long
each  time.  And  when  he  predicts  the  result,  and  prescribes  a
method,  it  is  generally,  perhaps  always,  found  that  he  is  right.

In  the  case  above  referred  to,  when  I  asked  the  subject,
who  had  begun  to  show  imperfect  lucidity,  but  could  predict
the  duration  of  his  sleep,  whethor  he  should  become  lucid,  he
said  he  should ;  but  must  first  be  magnetised  many  times.
When  I  enquired  how  many,  he  looked  intently,  and  then  said
that  he  could  not  specify  the  number  of  times ;  that  he  saw
the  figures  (Arabic)  so  dimly,  that  he  could  only  say  there
were  two  of  them,  and  that  these  were  not  only  shrouded  in  a
thick  mist,  of  which  at  this  period  and  long  after  he  bitterly
complained,  but  were  also  in constant  motion,  so  that  he

12*


138  PREDICTIONS  CONCERNING

could  not  fix  them.  The  next  time  I  asked,  he  saw  two  figures,
no  longer  obscured  by  mist,  but  of  a  red  color,  dazzling  his
eyes,  and  whirling  round  with  such  rapidity,  that  he  could
only  distinguish  that  the  first  of  them  was  a  6  or  a  9,  and  the
second  a  6,  a  9,  or  possibly  a  0.  I  had  thus,  at  this  period,
the  agreeable  choice  of  the  numbers  60,  66,  69,  90,  96,  99.
This  referred  to  his  highest  lucidity ;  but  I  soon  found  that
he  improved  rapidly  in  clearness  of  vision,  as  far  as  his
power  extended,  and  that  the  high  degree  or  stage  to  which
he  looked  forward,  was  one  in  which  he  expected  to  possess
powers  at  this  time  not  observable  at  all.  I  shall  give  more
details  of  this  case,  which  is  that  already  referred  to  as  Mr.
D.,  in  Part  II.  Many  instances  of  the  same  kind  of  pre-
vision are  on  record,  and  while  I  write,  I  am  awaiting,  in
the  case  of  E.  formerly  mentioned,  the  fulfilment  of  a  very
remarkable  prediction  concerning  a  trance  or  extasis,  the
time  of  which  she  has  fixed.

I  should  here  add,  that  Mr.  D.,  in  his  waking  state,  has
no  idea  either  of  what  he  predicted  as  to  his  attaining  a
high  lucidity,  nor  the  slightest  recollection  of  his  remarkable
scale  of  time,  of  which  he  will  be  informed,  for  the  first
time,  by  reading  these  letters.  I  believe  that  E.  is  equally
unaware  of  having  predicted  a  trance.  And  this  happens
generally,  if  not  uniformly,  in  such  cases.

4.  The  somnambulist  will  often  predict  the  course  of  dis-
ease and  its  termination,  in  those  persons  with  whom  he  is
en  rapport,  or  sympathy.  This  phenomenon  has  been  fre-
quently recorded,  but  I  have  not  hitherto  had  an  opportunity
of  personally  examining  or  verifying  it.  I  may  allude,  how-
ever, to  one  remarkable  case  of  this  kind,  in  which  Adele,
the  somnambulist  of  M.  Cahagnet,  predicted  his  death  at
the  end  of  six  years ;  and  I  am  informed,  on  good  authority,
that  he  died  at  the  time  specified,  from  natural  causes.
There  exists  also  a  very  striking  case  of  a  similar  prediction,
made  by  a  sorceress  or  divineress  in  Venice,  concerning
the  death,  at  different  periods,  fixed  by  her,  of  three  gen-
tlemen, friends,  who  together  consulted  her.  They  all  died
at  the  times  predicted ;  one  from  an  accident ;  the  other  from
acute  disease ;  and  the  last,  who  died  of  fever,  was  so  far
from  laboring  under  the  depressing  influence  of  the  pre-
diction, that  he  was,  not  long  before  his  death,  full  of  his
hopes  of  recovery,  and  of  his  plans  for  the  enjoyment  of


OTHER  PERSONS.  139

f6tes  about  to  occur.  I  would  not  allude  to  this  case,  were
it  not  that  I  have  it  on  the  best  authority,  and  that  it  must
be  regarded  as  perfectly  attested.  The  divineress,  it  is  in
the  highest  degree  probable,  was  in  the  state,  either  spon-
taneous or  artificially  produced,  of  waking  clairvoyance.

Another  case  illustrates  the  power  of  predicting  illness,
and  shows  that  clairvoyants  do  really  perceive  changes  in
the  state  of  health  of  others,  before  the  persons  examined
do  so  themselves.  A  gentleman,  highly  distinguished  by  his
acquirements,  his  vast  abilities,  and  his  position,  happened,
when,  as  far  as  he  knew,  in  perfect  health,  to  visit  a  re-
markable clairvoyant,  who  told  him  he  felt  a  chill  in  his
limbs,  and  a  severe  pain  in  his  side.  As  he  felt  nothing  of
the  kind,  he  regarded  the  statement  as  a  mere  blunder.
But  not  many  hours  after,  he  was  attacked  by  a  violent  pain
in  the  side  indicated,  and  soon  afterwards  felt  a  chill  in
his  limbs;  he  then  recollected  that,  just  before  seeing  the
clairvoyant,  he  had  gone  out  in  a  biting  wind,  with  very  thin
trowsers,  and  had  felt  much  chilled  at  the  time,  but  had
forgotten  the  fact  till  he  perceived  the  invasion  of  illness.
It  appears  to  me  clear,  that  the  clairvoyant  here  perceived
a  change  in  the  part,  and  its  nature,  before  it  had  advanced
so  far  as  to  be  sensible  to  the  patient.  And  thus  the  acute
observation  of  the  present  fact  amounted  to  a  prediction,
unless  we  suppose  that  the  future  state  of  the  patient  ap-
peared to  the  clairvoyant  to  be  present,  in  which  case  it  was
a  case  of  real  prevision.

5.  Other  cases  are  recorded,  and  not  unfrequently,  in
which  the  clairvoyant  has  predicted  an  accident  which  was
to  befal  him,  and  perhaps  to  cause  a  fit  of  fainting  or  of
epilepsy.  This  I  have  not  seen,  but  it  appears  to  be  well
authenticated,  and  is  remarkable  for  the  prevision  of  some-
thing external  to  the  subject,  and  with  which  he  has  no
direct  sympathy,  or  means  of  communication,  save  the  un-
known or  obscure  one  to  which  these  phenomena  are  usually
referred.  The  accident  is  often  predicted  vaguely  as  to  its
nature,  but  precisely  as  to  the  time  of  occurrence,  and  the
effects  produced  by  it.  It  may  be  a  fright  from  a  rat  or
mouse,  or  other  cause,  or  it  may  be  a  fall  or  stumble,  kc.

6.  In  other  cases,  again,  the  clairvoyant  is  said  to  have
accurately  predicted  events,  altogether  unconnected  with
himself. He  has  told  the  operator  of  a  letter  to  be  received


140  SPONTANEOUS  CLAIRVOYANCE.

next  day,  or  several  days,  or  even  weeks  after,  and  the  name
of  the  writer,  as  well  as  the  contents  of  his  letter.  I  know
of  one  very  remarkable  case,  in  which  a  clairvoyant,  whom
I  afterwards  saw,  and  found  to  possess  considerable  lucidity,
(although  he  was,  when  I  examined  him,  in  a  different,  and
lower  stage  of  lucidity,  which  had  spontaneously  super-
vened,) predicted  to  his  magnetiser  the  arrival  of  a  letter
from  a  distance,  on  a  particular  day,  with  other  details  of  a
private  nature,  which  were  found  to  be  correct.  Not  having
had  personal  experience  of  this  form  of  prevision,  I  shall
not  dwell  further  upon  it.

The  same  degree  of  prevision  has  been  alleged,  as  occur-
ring in  reference,  not  only  to  letters,  but  to  events  of  various
kinds ;  but,  for  the  reason  above  given,  I  shall  not  here  enter
into  further  details,  as  enough  has  been  said  to  illustrate  the
nature  of  the  alleged  facts.  And  it  appears  to  me,  that  as
the  facts  of  prevision,  in  regard  to  the  duration  of  the  sleep,
to  the  course  of  the  somnambulist's  illness,  or  of  his  fits,  and
in  regard  also  to  the  time  when  certain  powers  or  stages  of
lucidity  are  to  occur,  must  be  admitted,  we  must  pause  before
rejecting  those  phenomena  of  prevision,  in  reference  to  per-
sons and  things  unconnected  with  the  sleeper^  which,  often
on  the  very  same  authority,  and  that  good  authority,  are
likewise  recorded.

Those  who  have  the  opportunity,  which  I  have  not  at  pre-
sent, should  particularly  investigate  this  part  of  the  subject;
and  as  cases  of  this  kind,  though  somewhat  less  frequent  than
others,  are  yet  said  to  occur  pretty  often,  there  is  every  rea-
son to  hope  that  flie  question  will,  if  this  be  done,  be  very
soon  and  satisfactorily  settled.


Does  clairvoyance,  using  the  term  in  a  general  sense,  occur
spontaneously  ?  When  we  consider,  that  the  state  of  natural
or  spontaneous  somnambulism  is,  in  all  probability,  or  rather
certainly,  identical  with  the  artificial  magnetic  sleep,  we  are
prepared  to  expect  that,  as  in  some  cases  of  the  latter  sym-
pathy and  clairvoyance  occur,  so  also  will  these  phenomena
be  sometimes  present  in  the  former.  And  when  we  further
reflect,  that  sympathy  and  even  clairvoyance  may  and  do
occur,  when  produced  artificially,  in  the  ordinary  waking  or
conscious  state,  that  is,  in  a  state  the  consciousness  of  which


REMARKABLE  CASE.  141

is  continuous  with  our  ordinary  consciousness,  we  may  look
for  their  occurrence,  naturally ,  in  the  ordinary  state. Indeed,

as  to  sympathy,  this  is  a  we'll- known  fact,  although  there  is
good  reason  to  believe  that  the  state  of  reverie  or  abstrac-
tion, as  might  be  expected,  is  the  most  favorable  to  their
production.

Now  when  we  enquire,  we  find,  that  facts  are  known,  and
have  been  recorded,  which  prove  the  occurrence  of  sponta-
neous clairvoyance  in  reference  to  present  or  passing  events.
Every  one  has  heard  of  such  examples,  which,  however,  are
generally  noticed  as  freaks  of  imagination  and  strange  coin-
cidences. If  they  be  coincidences,  they  are  indeed  most
strange,  for  the  chances  against  them  as  such,  must  have
been  almost  infinitely  great.

I  have  been  informed,  on  what  I  consider  perfectly  good
authority,  of  the  following  case,  which  is  not  generally  known.
A  lady  was  subject,  occasionally,  not  to  illness,  but  to  a  cer-
tain state  of  mind,  possibly  connected  with  a  tendency  to
reverie  or  abstraction,  in  which  she  became  aware  of  what
the  persons  she  thought  of  were  doing  at  the  moment,  even
at  very  considerable  distances.  She  did  not  know,  at  least
so  far  as  I  am  informed,  any  cause  which  produced  this  state.
On  one  occasion,  residing  at  some  distance  from  town,  she
had,  in  this  way,  while  fully  awake,  but  late  in  the  evening,
a  vision  of  her  son's  chambers  in  town,  such  as  I  believe  she
had  often  had  before.  She  saw  the  porter  of  the  chambers
leave  his  own  room,  with  a  candle  in  one  hand  and  a  knife
in  the  other,  and  proceed  to  her  son's  bed-room,  which  he
entered  softly,  and,  going  to  the  bed-side,  ascertained  that
his  master  was  asleep.  He  then  took  from  the  clothes  of
that  gentleman  a  key  or  set  of  keys,  went  to  the  other  end
of  the  room,  opened  a  trunk  or  box,  took  out  a  pocket-book,
and  from  it  a  £50  Bank  of  England  note.  The  thief  then
returned  to  the  bed,  replaced  the  key,  and  once  more  look-
ing, to  ascertain  that  the  sleeper  still  slept,  retired  to  his  own
room.  The  lady  was  naturally  much  alarmed,  and  next  day
drove  to  town,  and  saw  her  son.  Without  letting  him  know
her  vision,  she  contrived  to  ascertain  that  he  had  placed  in
his  box  a  bank-note  for  £50,  and  begged  him  to  look  whether
it  was  still  there.  The  note  was  gone;  the  lock  uninjured.
She  now  told  her  story,  and  after  consultation  with  her  son,
who  agreed  with  her  that  he  could  not,  on  this  evidence,


142  SPONTANEOUS  CLAIRVOYANCE.

accuse  any  one  of  the  theft,  the  note,  the  number  of  which
was  known,  was  stopped  at  the  bank,  and  the  fact  advertised.
It  was  never  presented  for  payment.  The  porter  soon  left
the  chambers,  and  there  the  matter  would  have  ended;  but
some  time  afterwards  he  was  taken  up  for  some  other  rob-
bery. And  when  his  lodgings  were  searched,  there  was
found  the  very  identical  note,  rolled  up  hard  into  a  small
bulk,  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  criminal's  purse.

This  remarkable  vision  was  told  me  by  a  gentleman  of
great  acquirements  and  of  the  highest  character,  who  him-
self had  it  from  the  lady,  and  told  me  that  I  might  entirely
rely  on  its  authenticity.  It  was  no  dream,  but  a  waking
vision.  And  had  it  been  a  dream,  this  would  only  prove  that
the  clairvoyant  state  had  this  time  occurred  during  sleep,
which  had  often  occurred  in  the  waking  state  to  the  same
lady.  The  fact  would  not  be  less  striking  nor  less  valuable.
I  shall  return  to  this  case.

I  cannot  entertain  a  doubt,  that  many  dreams,  which  are
found  afterwards  to  have  been  true  and  exact,  depend  on
the  same  cause ;  nay,  I  think  it  probable,  d  priori,  that  the
state  of  spontaneous  clairvoyance,  like  natural  somnambu-
lism, occurs  much  more  frequently  in  the  sleeping  than  in
the  waking  state.  We  all  know  how  heterogeneous  dreams
often  are ;  but  it  is  very  far  from  being  impossible,  or  even
improbable,  that,  in  certain  persons,  many  of  their  dreams
are  the  result  of  true  clairvoyance.  Baron  von  Reichenbach
has  observed,  that  not  only  those  who  walk  in  their  sleep,
but  those  who  talk  much  in  their  sleep,  are  uniformly  sensi-
tive to  the  odylic  influence ;  and  we  know  that  the  highly
sensitive,  in  this  sense,  are  found  to  be  most  easily  thrown
into  magnetic  sleep  and  clairvoyance.

The  striking  case  of  Zschokke,  the  celebrated  and  amiable
Swiss  novelist,  proves  that  sympathetic  retrovision  is  also
a  spontaneous  occurrence.  He  frequently  found  himself,
as  he  has  described  it  in  his  works,  possessed  of  a  perfect
memory  of  the  past  life  of  the  person  he  was  speaking  to ;
and,  on  one  occasion,  he  confounded  a  sceptic  who  defied  him,
by  declaring  to  him  certain  passages  of  his  past  life,  known
to  himself  alone,  and  such  as  he  could  not  have  wished
to  be  known  to  others. This  was  done  in  a  large  company.

With  regard  to  clairvoyant  prevision,  I  have  already
spoken  of  its  occurrence  in  the  Venetian  sorceress,  as  possi-


SPONTANEOUS  RETllOVISION  AND  REVISION.  143

bly  induced  by  artificial  means.  But  I  have  no  information
on  this  point,  and  it  is  at  least  possible,  that,  in  her  case,  it
may  have  been  spontaneous.

But  there  are  numerous  recorded  instances  of  spontane-
ous prevision,  and  among  them  that  of  M.  do  Cazotte,  which,
as  it  is  far  from  being  so  well  known  as  it  deserves,  I  shall  give
in  Part  II.  In  his  case,  as  in  that  of  the  lady  above  men-
tioned, the  occurrence  of  the  peculiar  state  was  frequent,
and  it  was  always  observed  that  he  was,  when  lucid,  in  a
peculiar  sleep,  not  ordinary  sleep.  There  was,  very  pro-
bably, in  his  case,  divided  consciousness.  Persons  of  the
highest  character  are,  or  lately  were,  yet  alive,  who  heard
his  remarkable  prophecy  spoken  of  and  often  ridiculed,  be-
fore the  events  to  which  it  refers  took  place.

Moreover,  we  have  the  recorded,  and  in  many  cases,  well
attested  instances  of  second  sight,  to  prove,  if  not  the  ex-
istence of  spontaneous  prevision  of  coming  events,  at  least
the  firm  conviction  of  its  existence,  impressed  on  the  popu-
lar mind  in  many  countries.  I  am  disposed  to  think,  that
no  such  general  belief  ever  prevailed,  without  a  natural
truth  for  its  origin  or  foundation,  apart  altogether  from  the
precise  nature  of  that  truth,  and  of  the  true  explanation,
which  is  matter  for  enquiry.  I  shall  return  hereafter  to
the  subject  of  popular  predictions.


I  have  now  to  mention  a  few  circumstances,  connected
with  the  magnetic  sleep,  which  I  have  either  not  hitherto
noticed,  or  only  briefly  alluded  to,  because  they  do  not  occur
so  frequently  or  uniformly  as  those  which  I  have  discussed.
It  is  possible,  and,  in  some  instances,  probable,  that  these
also,  when  the  matter  is  carefully  investigated,  may  be
found  to  be  present  in  most  or  in  all -cases,  and  to  present
themselves  in  particular  stages,  so  that  they  may  often
have  been  overlooked.  Observers  should  therefore  attend
to  them.

1.  The  first  is,  the  occurrence  of  a  very  great  unwilling-
ness to  name  any  person,  place,  or  object.  The  sleeper  will
often  take  a  minute  or  two  to  describe,  rather  than  use  the
appropriate  name.  He  seems  often  to  labor  under  a  diffi-
culty in  finding  the  name,  but  still  oftener,  his  manner  in-
dicates that  he  will  not  use  the  name. Thus,  while  he  often,


144  PECULIARITIES  OF  SPEECH.

if  urged,  gives  himself  a  wrong  name,  very  often  that  of  his
magnetiser,  he  will  not  address  his  magnetiser,  or  speak  of
him,  under  his  name,  hut  will  use  a  circumlocution.  He
will  not  speak  of  being  lucid,  or  clairvoyant,  in  some  cases,
but  will  say  he  is  light,  or  bright,  or  warm,  or  sent  or  taken
away,  and  so  on.  And  very  many  clairvoyants  will  not
speak  of  death,  but  will  use  the  most  laborious  circumlocu-
tions rather  than  do  so,  whether  it  be,  that  the  dead  do  not
appear  as  dead  to  them,  or  that  the  idea  of  death  is  repug-
nant to  them ;  and  I  have  not  had,  as  yet,  sufficient  oppor-
tunities to  enable  me  to  speak  confidently  on  this  matter.
When  they  adopt  a  word  or  phrase,  they  usually  adhere  to
it,  for  the  person  or  object  to  which  they  have  applied  it ;
and  hardly  any  very  lucid  subject  is  without  some  peculiar
form  of  expression.  Thus,  E.  always  speaks  of  a  dead  per-
son as  shelled,  and  of  being  magnetised  as  being  warmed;
and  I  haVe  heard  of  various  similar  examples.  In  other
respects,  the  language  of  clairvoyants  is  generally  improved,
and  often  remarkably  distinct  and  energetic  in  its  character.
This  point  is  well  worthy  of  study.  Many  cases,  however,
at  least  in  the  stages  observed,  either  exhibit  no  peculiari-
ties, or  such  as  have  been  overlooked.

2.  I  have  already  alluded  to  the  difficulty,  in  some  cases,
of  ascertaining,  at  the  moment,  whether  a  clairvoyant  is
describing  a  past  or  a  passing  scene.  It  would  appear  that
the  impressions  of  both,  being  alike  peculiar,  are  of  so
equal  a  vividness  as  to  be  liable  to  be  confounded  together.
I  think  it  right  here  again  to  point  out,  that  this  often
causes  an  appearance  of  doubt  and  of  failure,  where  all  is
true,  and  is  found  so,  when  we  are  enabled  to  trace  the  im-
pressions to  their  source.  It  often  happens,  that  the  sub-
ject, if  his  attention  be  called  to  the  point,  finds  the  means
of  distinguishing  past  from  present  things,  but  this  appears
not  to  be  always  the  case.

3.  Although  the  clairvoyant  has,  naturally,  no  recollec-
tion whatever  of  his  magnetic  sleep,  yet,  in  many  cases,  he
may  be  made  to  remember  the  whole,  or  part,  of  what
passes,  by  the  will,  and  at  the  command  of  the  magnetiser.
In  many  cases,  in  which  this  has  not  been  observed,  I  believe
it  has  not  been  tried.  But  I  have  myself  often  desired  the
subject  to  remember,  when  awake,  any  fact  or  statement,  or
the  whole,  of  what  he  has  seen  and  described  ;  and,  on  wak-


DIFFERENT  STATES  OF  CONSCIOUS*  J  145

ing,  he  has  clone  so,  just  as  we  sometimes  remember  the
whole,  or  part  of  a  dream,  and  at  other  times  remember
only  that  we  have  dreamt,  but  not  the  subject  of  our  dream,
which  yet  was  very  vivid  at  the  time.

The  influence  of  the command  of  the  magnetiser  is  so
great,  that  we  can  even  affect  the  feelings  by  a  command
given  in  the  sleep. We  can  cause  the  sleeper  to  awake  with
a  pleasant  sensation,  even when  he  has  seemed  like one
under  a  nightmare ;  and  although I  should  be  sorry  to  do
it,  I  am  sure  that  in  some  cases  I  could  cause  the  sleeper,
when awake,  to  feel  uneasy  and  wretche'd  by  a  command
given  in  the  sleep. I  have  already  mentioned  the  power  we
have  of  impressing  the  sleeper's  mind  so,  that,  when  awake
or  long  after,  he  shall,  without  knowing  why,  feel  compelled
to  perform  some  act,  although  it  may  have no object,  and
can  only  cause  him  to  be  laughed  at. But  I  repeat,  that
we  do  not  find  it,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  easy  to  do  this,  when
the  act  required  appears  to  the  sleeper  improper  or  wrong.
4.  I  would  here  mention  a  fact,  which  has  several  times  pre-
sented itself  to  me,  and  which  I  suspect  is  much  more  fre-
quent than  is  generally  supposed. I  mean,  the  occurrences,
during  the  magnetic  sleep,  or  rather  during  the  existence
of  a  certain  consciousness  separate  from  the  ordinary  one,
of  a  third  consciousness  separate  from  both,  which  spon-
taneously occurs,  and  is,  as  it  were,  interpolated. If  this
happen  on  several  successive  occasions,  I  observe  that  the
sleeper  does  not  mix  up  any  of  the  three  consciousnesses,  but
when  his  ordinary  magnetic state  is  present,  has no  more
recollection  of  what  has  passed  in  the  more  unusual  one,  than
he  has  of  the  former  in  his  waking  state ;  nor  is  there  any
connection  between  the  waking  state  and  the  second  magnetic
consciousness,  any  more  than  the  first. Whichever  of  the
three  states  he  is  in,  he  remembers  the  previous  periods  in
that  state  alone. In  one  case,  that  in  which  I  first  noticed
it,  (the  fact  has,  I  believe,  been  often  recorded,  but  I  had
forgotten  it, when it was forced on  my attention,) the
sleeper  all  at  once  changed  his  manner,  and  spoke  of  a  new
vision,  which  was clearer than  any  previous  one,  and  was
preceded  by  a  comparatively  long  journey  through  space  or
air,  to  the  scene  of  it. He  was much  delighted  with the
distinctness  of  what he  saw,  and,  although he had  never
been within perhaps thousands  of  miles  of  the  place,  he
13


146 OCCURRENCE  OF  PECULIAR  STATES

described  it,  down  to  the  minutest  details,  exactly  as  if  lie
were  on  the  spot,  pointing  out  the  features  of  a  landscape,
and  attracted  by  a  thousand  minute  beauties.  Nay,  he
identified  himself  with  the  scene  to  such  an  extent,  that  he
spoke  of  every  hill,  tree,  house,  man,  and  beast,  as  if  they
were  old  friends,  and  insisted  that  he  was  born  there,  and
had  lived  there  a  long  time,  when  a  boy.  I  thought  he
had  passed,  permanently,  into  a  higher  stage  of  lucidity
than  before,  and  that  thenceforward  I  should  always  obtain
the  same  state ;  but  I  was  mistaken ,  for  when  I  asked  him  how
long  he  had  to  sleep,  the  time  he  had  fixed  being  past,  he
strenuously  denied  that  he  was  asleep,  and  when  I  told  him
his  eyes  were  shut,  declared  they  were  wide  open,  even
after  feeling  them  at  my  request.  As  this  had  never  hap-
pened before,  I  saw  he  was  in  a  new  stage,  and  I  was  cal-
culating on  its  permanence,  when  I  observed  a  change  come
over  him,  and  when  I  again  spoke  to  him,  he  had  returned
to  the  place  in  which  he  had  been  before  his  first  change.
He  now  not  only  admitted  being  asleep,  but  fixed  the  time
of  waking,  when  it  appeared,  that  the  new  state,  which  had
lasted  about  fifteen  minutes,  had  been  interpolated  merely.
He  had  now  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  that  new  state,
or  of  his  erroneous  idea  of  having  been  born  and  having
spent  his  early  years  in  that  country ;  and  when  awake,  he
had  quite  forgotten  both  the  magnetic  states.

It  may  appear  to  many,  that  the  remarkable  vision  above
alluded  to,  was  simply  a  vivid  dream,  and  I  am  not  disposed
to  quarrel  with  the  name.  But  then,  what  is  a  dream  ?  The
truth  is,  we  know  so  little  of  the  matter,  that  it  is  quite
possible,  nay,  more  than  possible,  that  all,  or  at  least  many
dreams  are  clairvoyant  visions,  the  fine  and  subtle  influences
by  which  clairvoyance,  if  it  exist  at  all,  must  be  produced,
being  noticed  in  their  impressions  on  us,  better  during
sleep,  natural  or  magnetic,  because  the  disturbances  caused
through  our  external  senses  are  then  shut  out.  And  when
we  find  the  dreamer  describing  not  only  localities,  but  the
occupations  of  people  in  those  localities,  correctly,  as  then
passing  events,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  dreams  may  often  be
true,  and  to  understand  how  it  is,  that  we  sometimes  re-
member, and  sometimes  forget  them.  When  our  dreams
are  obviously  only  imaginary,  as  concerns  ourselves,  we
may  be  mixing  up  various  impressions,  and  sympathizing


OF  CONSCIOUSNESS  IN  CLAIRVOYANTS.  147

with  others,  in  their  actions,  or  in  their  thoughts,  and  the
sudden  transitions  of  our  dreams  are  matters  of  daily  expe-
rience in  Animal  Magnetism.

5.  It  sometimes  happens,  strange  as  it  may  appear,  that
a  person  is  seen  to  be,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  in  two
distinct  states,  and  to  possess,  at  once,  two  consciousnesses.
Thus,  while  he  is  conversing  rationally  with  you,  and  ob-
serving all  that  goes  on,  he  will  suddenly,  and  without  ceas-
ing to  follow  the  current  of  talk,  see  before  him  scenes  and
objects  and  persons  of  which  he  has  no  recollection,  but
which  his  magnetiser  instantly  recognises  from  the  descrip-
tion. Thus  E.,  formerly  alluded  to,  while  awake  and  per-
fectly collected,  will  suddenly  see  persons  whom  she  has
formerly  seen  and  described  in  the  sleep,  but  does  not  re-
member, the  magnetic  consciousness,  which,  in  the  full
sleep,  would  enable  her  to  remember  them  as  seen  in  a
former  sleep,  being  apparently  overpowered  by  the  stronger
ordinary  consciousness.  When  told  that  the  persons  she
sees  are  not  present,  but  only  visions,  she  is  puzzled  and
alarmed.

I  am  not  given  to  accounting  for  facts,  especially  wdien
they  have  not  been  fully  studied ;  I  am  satisfied  to  observe
and  to  verify  them;  but  I  cannot  refrain  from  here  saying,
that  this  strange  phenomenon  of  double  and  simultaneous
consciousness  may  not,  after  all,  be  so  very  strange.  It
seems  to  be  caused  by  the  circumstance,  that  the  two  halves
of  the  brain,  which  are  equal  and  alike,  so  that  we  have
two  brains,  as  wTe  have  two  hands,  or  two  eyes,  are  not
acting  together,  so  that  wThile  the  one  half  is  in  the  ordinary
waking  state,  (and,  like  one  eye,  it  suffices  for  most  purposes,)
the  other,  probably  by  some  derangement  of  health,  has
passed  into  the  magnetic  state,  spontaneously.  It  recals
the  visions  of  a  former  magnetic  sleep,  or  rather,  it  repeats
the  act  of  clairvoyance  on  objects  formerly  seen.

Every  one  has  felt  the  strange  sensation  of  knowing
beforehand  what  is  about  to  be  said  or  done.  I  have  often
perceived  it  myself,  so  that  I  felt  as  if  I  could  say,  "  Now
you,  Mr.  A.,  are  going  to  say  so  and  so,  to  which  Mr.  B.
will  answrer  so  and  so,  and  then  you  will  reply  so  and  so,"
&c.  But  I  never  could  actually  force  myself  to  say  this,
till  too  late,  nor,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  any  one  else  been
able  to  do  so. I  am  inclined  to  believe,  that  this  sensation


148  TRANSFERENCE  OF  SENSES.

*

also  depends  on  the  unequal  action  of  the  two  brains ;  that
while  we  are,  with  the  one,  in  a  reverie,  which  is  a  close
approach  to  the  magnetic  state,  we  are,  with  the  other,
drinking  in  what  passes,  hut  not  attending  to  it  at  the  time,
and  that  on  suddenly  coming  out  of  our  abstraction,  we
notice  at  a  glance,  and  a  lightning  glance,  all  that  has
passed,  which,  by  some  confusion  of  two  consciousnesses,
appears  future ;  but  it  may  also  be,  that  with  one  brain,  we
have  unconsciously  exercised  a  certain  degree  of  clairvoyant
prevision.  This  confusion  is  always  of  short  duration.  I
do  not  pretend  that  I  have  here  explained  it;  I  merely  wish
to  show,  that  it  may  be  connected  wTith  unequal  action  of
the  two  brains,  and  that  a  careful  study  of  similar  facts  in
Animal  Magnetism,  wTill  probably  enable  us  to  explain  it.

6.  I  have  not  hitherto  noticed,  save  in  passing,  a  phe-
nomenon which  occasionally  presents  itself,  but  which  is  not
by  any  means  uniformly  present  in  a  marked  form ;  I  mean,
transference  of  the  senses  to  some  special  part  of  the  body.
I  have  already  stated,  that  the  clairvoyant  sees,  without  his
eyes,  by  means  of  peculiar  emanations,  we  shall  say,  which
reach  his  sensorium  by  another  path.  I  have  also  men-
tioned, that  he  will  often  place  an  object  on  his  head  to  see
it  better.

But  it  sometimes  happens,  that  the  power  of  seeing,  not
the  ordinary  sense  of  sight,  but  the  clairvoyant  power,  is
located  in  some  special  part.  It  has  been  observed  to  be
located  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,
in  the  occiput  as  well  as  in  the  forehead,  or  on  the  top  of
the  head,  and  in  one  case  which  I  heard  of  from  a  scientific
gentleman  who  tested  it,  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.  The
books  and  journals  which  treat  of  Animal  Magnetism  teem
with  similar  facts;  and  the  head,  hand,  and  epigastrium,
seem  to  be  the  usually  selected  parts,  probably  from  the
proximity  to  the  brain  in  the  first,  the  great  development
of  the  nerves  of  touch  in  the  second,  and  the  presence  of
the  great  sympathetic  plexus  of  nerves  in  the  third.  The
fact  itself  is  beyond  all  doubt,  and  it  is  quite  unnecessary
to  accumulate  cases.  In  one  form  or  other,  the  power  of
dispensing  with  the  eyes,  and  yet  perceiving  color,  &c.
quite  plainly,  is  found  in  every  good  subject.

The  same  thing  frequently  happens  with  hearing.  Thus
E.,  when  on  her  travelling  state  or  stage,  is  utterly  deaf  to


TRANSFERENCE  OF  PAIN.  149

all  sounds,  save  those  which  are  addressed  to  her  by  speak-
ing with  the  mouth  in  contact  with  the  tips  of  her  fingers.
This  fact  I  have  myself  verified.  I  believe  she  would  not
hear  a  pistol  fired  at  her  car,  in  that  state.

Cases  are  also  recorded,  in  which  the  sense  of  taste  was
transferred  to  the  epigastrium ;  and,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,
although  I  cannot  find  the  reference  to  it,  the  sense  of
smell  has  also  been  located  there.  As  for  touch,  being
already  present  in  all  parts,  it  cannot  of  course  be  trans-
ferred.

In  all  these  instances,  it  is  not  that  the  part  acquires  the
peculiar  properties  of  the  regular  external  organ  of  the
sense  transferred :  but  that  the  nerves  of  the  part  serve  as
conductors  of  the  subtle  (probably  odylic)  influence  to  the
cerebral  organ  of  the  internal  sense.  The  fingers  do  not
collect  and  transmit  the  rays  of  light,  so  that  they  shall
fall  on  the  retina,  and  the  image  there  formed,  according  to
the  laws  of  optics,  be  conveyed  by  the  optic  nerve  to  the  sen-
sorium ;  but  the  nerves  of  the  fingers  convey  to  the  sensorium,
directly,  an  influence,  which  there  produces  an  image  of  the
object.  At  least,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  trace  it,
such  appears  to  be  the  process.

7.  Another  curious  phenomenon,  frequently  witnessed,  is
the  apparent  transference  of  pain  from  the  subject  to  the
magnetiser.  If  the  subject  have  a  headache,  or  a  tooth-
ache, or  a  neuralgic  or  rheumatic  pain,  it  often  happens
that  the  magnetiser,  who  does  not  perhaps  know  of  its  exist-
ence, finds  himself  affected  with  it.  And,  at  the  same  time,
the  patient  is  partially  or  entirely  relieved.  I  am  not  satis-
fied that  the  two  facts  are  related  to  each  other  necessarily,
as  cause  and  effect ;  for  a  pain  is  often  relieved  when  the
magnetiser  perceives  no  pain  himself;  and  he  may  suffer,
without  sensibly  relieving  the  patient.  But  it  does  occur,
especially  where  the  object  has  not  been  to  relieve  the  pain,
that  he,  as  it  were,  catches  it ;  and,  in  many  instances,  it
is  also  relieved  in  the  patient,  not,  however,  as  I  conceive,
so  much  because  the  magnetiser  has  got  it,  as  because  he
has  magnetised  the  patient.

I  had  once,  in  my  own  experience,  a  striking  poof  that
the  magnetiser  may  suffer.  I  was,  however,  in  that  case
the  patient.  I  have  for  years  suffered  from  weakness,  swell-
ing and  pain  of  the  limbs,  arising  from  a  chronic  affection  of

13*


150  TRANSFERENCE  OF  PAIN.

the  lymphatics.  Of  late  the  pain  has  been  nearly  altogether
removed,  so  as  only  to  appear  when  I  walk  or  stand  too  long,
and  the  limbs  have  become  much  stronger  than  before,  by  the
use  of  the  mineral  waters  of  Aix-la-Chapelle.  On  one  occa-
sion, Mr.  Lewis  tried  to  act  on  my  right  leg,  with  the  view
of  showing,  to  an  audience,  that  he  could  paralyse  the  mus-
cles by  his  influence,  in  those  who  were  susceptible  to  it.  I
was  but  slightly  susceptible,  this  being  the  first  trial ;  and
Mr.  Lewis,  before  he  succeeded,  which  he  did,  in  paralysing
the  limb  so  that  I  could  not  move  it  from  the  floor,  had  to
exert  all  his  power  for  a  considerable  time.  He  also  made
passes  over  the  limb,  but  not  with  the  intention  of  relieving
pain,  of  which  I  had  not  complained,  as  at  the  time  I  had  lit-
tle or  none.  Next  day,  and  even  the  day  followng,  Mr.  Lewis
suffered  so  much,  although  otherwise  perfectly  well,  from
weakness,  swelling,  and  some  little  pain,  but  especially  weak-
ness of  his  leg  and  ankle,  that  he  was  compelled  to  put  on  a
bandage.  He  informed  me,  that  similar  things  had  often
occurred  to  him,  as  he  is  of  an  exceedingly  susceptible  and
sensitive  temperament;  but  that,  had  he  known,  or  thought
of,  the  state  of  my  limb,  he  could  have  prevented  the  effect
on  himself.  All  this,  from  what  I  have  seen,  I  believe  to  be
true.

I  may  here  allude  to  a  fact,  which  I  cannot,  however,
vouch  for  as  having  seen  it,  or  tested  it,  but  which  I  have
on  what  I  regard  as  the  unexceptionable  testimony  of  a
gentleman  much  experienced  in  these  matters,  and  of  a  truly
philosophical  turn  of  mind,  that  a  magnetiser  may  thus  be
affected  with  the  aches  of  his  patient,  even  at  a  great  dis-
tance, if  some  objects,  such  as  a  glove  or  a  handkerchief,  be
used  ;  which,  being  placed  on  the  suffering  part,  is  then  sent
to  him,  and  will  often  produce  in  him  the  same  pain.  I  may
return  to  this,  when  treating  of  the  magnetisation  of  inani-
mate objects.

It  also  occasionally  happens,  if  the  magnetiser  be  suffer-
ing from  pain,  and  if  he  magnetise  a  healthy  but  susceptible
person,  that  the  pain  is  transferred  from  the  former  to  the
latter.  This  does  not,  of  course,  occur  frequently,  because
it  is  a  general  rule,  not  to  magnetise,  unless  the  magnetiser
be  in  good  health.  But  I  have  seen  a  headache  thus  trans-
ferred, so  that  the  patient  had  it  for  the  remainder  of  the
day,  while  the  magnetiser  was  instantly  and  entirely  relieved.


NAMES  GIVEN  TO  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.  151

Many  such  cases  have  hecn  recorded,  and  have  led  to  the
adoption  of  the  rule  above  mentioned.

In  my  next  Letter,  I  shall  consider  the  phenomena  pro-
ducible in  the  conscious  state,  that  is,  "without  going  so  far
as  to  induce  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  which  have  often  been
supposed  to  be  radically  distinct  from  those  of  Animal
Magnetism,  and  have  made  much  noise,  both  in  America
and  in  this  country,  under  various  new  names,  such  as
Electro-biology,  Electro-psychology,  &c.  &c.  I  shall  also
bring  before  you  that  peculiar  method  of  inducing  the  mag-
netic sleep,  or  at  least,  a  magnetic  sleep,  which  is  preferred
by  Mr.  Braid,  and  by  him  called  Hypnotism.


LETTER  IX.

As  I  am  now  about  to  discuss  matters  to  which  various
names  have  been  given,  I  think  it  is  best  to  remind  you  that
I  use  the  term  Animal  Magnetism,  not  as  theoretically  per-
fect, nor  as  quite  satisfactory,  but  because  it  is  established,
known,  and  generally  used  in  Europe ;  and  is,  theoretically,
at  least  as  good  as  any  other  that  has  been  at  all  generally
employed.  Mesmerism  has  come,  in  this  country,  to  have
a  meaning  limited,  in  some  instances,  to  the  sleep,  and  its
phenomena,  in  others,  to  the  curative  agency.  Electro-
biology  signifies  vital  electricity,  or  the  electric  -theory  of
life ;  electro-psychology  signifies  the  electric  theory  of
thought  or  of  mind.  Both  proceed  on  the  assumption,  now
generally  regarded  as  fallacious,  that  that  which  we  call  life,
or  vitality  and  thought,  mind,  or  soul,  are  essentially  elec-
trical, or  depend  on  electricity  as  one  of  their  conditions.
Now  it  is  impossible  to  deny,  that  the  view  which  regards
the  nerves,  whether  of  motion  or  sensation,  as  wires  con-
ducting electric  currents,  is  very  tempting  to  the  speculative
enquirer,  and  can  appeal  to  some  very  striking  analogies.
Mr.  Smee's  work  will  explain  what  I  mean.  Nay  more,
Matteucci  and  Dubois  Reymond  have  proved  that  electric
currents  do  take  place  in  the  body,  and  especially  during
muscular  action. But  then,  there  are  many  points  which


152  PHENOMENA  OF  SUGGESTION

electricity  cannot  clear  up ;  the  analogies  are  partial  only ;
and  the  presence  of  electric  currents  does  not  prove  these
to  be  the  causes  of  muscular  action.  They  may  be  its
effects.  Indeed,  since  we  know  that  at  every  moment,  in
every  motion,  in  every  sensation,  in  every  thought,  a
chemical  change  is  concerned,  we  might  deduce  from  this,
a  priori,  the  probability  of  electric  currents  in  the  body.
But  we  are  not  entitled,  on  that  account,  to  say  that  the
vital  phenomena  are  electrical,  more  than  we  are,  perhaps
not  so  much  as  we  are,  to  say  that  they  are  chemical.
Chemico-biology  is  a  better  founded  name  than  electro-
biology  ;  but  yet  it  is  not  to  be  recommended.  It  may  be
urged,  and  truly,  that  Animal  Magnetism  places  magnetism
where  the  other  names  place  electricity  and  chemical  action.
But  then  this  name  is  established ;  and  the  analogies  be-
tween vital  and  magnetic  phenomena  are  quite  as  strong  as
in  the  other  cases.  Besides,  the  magnet,  in  addition  to
Ferro-magnetism,  does  actually  possess  a  force  capable  of
producing  the  phenomena  in  question,  such  as  the  magnetic
sleep.  And  if  we  use  the  term  Animal  Magnetism,  as  dis-
tinguished from  Ferro-magnetism,  to  designate  simply  this
unknown  force  or  influence,  we  do  not  thereby  attribute  life
to  Ferro-magnetism  as  its  cause,  as  the  name  might  possibly
seem  to  indicate,  if  not  explained.  In  this  sense,  then,
Animal  Magnetism  is  synonymous  with  the  odyle  of  Baron
von  Reichenbach ;  it  is  generally  received ;  and  it  embraces
the  whole  series  of  phenomena.  When  I  come  to  treat  of
the  cause  or  of  the  explanation  of  these  phenomena,  I  shall
endeavor  to  show,  that,  if  we  are  to  have  a  new  name,  that
of  odyle  is  unexceptionable.

I  have  already  stated,  that  many  remarkable  phenomena
may  be,  and  daily  are,  produced  on  persons  in  the  ordi-
nary conscious,  or  waking  state,  by  the  usual  magnetic
processes  of  gazing,  with  or  without  contact,  or  passes,
when  not  pushed  so  far  as  to  cause  the  magnetic  sleep,  or
when  the  operator  wills  that  the  sleep  shall  not  be  pro-
duced.

These  phenomena  are  chiefly  such  as  exhibit  the  control
acquired  by  the  magnetiser  over  his  subject's  movements,
sensations,  perceptions,  memory,  will,  &c.  &c.  I  need  not
here  recapitulate  them  in  detail,  because  they  have  been
already  mentioned,  each  in  its  place,  and  because  I  shall


IN  THE  CONSCIOUS  STATE.  IDS

presently  have  to  describe  them,  as  produced  in  a  different
way.  I  shall  merely  remind  you,  that  every  one  of  them
may  be  produced  in  the  sleep,  as  well  as  in  the  waking  state,
by  the  ordinary  processes,  and  that  I  have  myself  often,  by
that  process,  produced  them  in  both  states.

But  they  may  also  be  produced,  or  rather  the  state  favor-
able to  their  production  may  be  induced,  in  a  manner  some-
what different,  without  the  necessity  of  the  influence  which
is  exerted  by  the  magnetiser,  in  the  usual  method,  over  his
patient,  and  rather  by  the  subject's  action  on  himself ;  and
this  is  what  has  been  called,  in  America,  electro-biology  or
electro-psychology.

I  have  recently  had,  and  most  fully  availed  myself  of,
the  best  opportunities  of  witnessing  and  studying  these  phe-
nomena, both  as  produced  in  the  usual  method,  by  Mr.
Lewis,  and  as  produced  in  the  other  way,  by  Dr.  Darling.
I  have  also,  as  above  stated,  produced  them  myself  in  both
ways.  I  cannot  allude  to  these  gentlemen  without  recording
my  grateful  sense  of  their  extreme  kindness  in  enabling  me
to  see  and  study  their  operations,  both  in  public,  and  on
very  numerous  occasions  in  private.  Both  of  them  have
been  honorably  anxious  to  promote  the  progress  of  science,
and  have  spared  no  trouble  to  assist  me  in  my  investiga-
tions. It  is  quite  impossible  for  any  one  to  be  more  ready
and  willing  than  they  are,  to  explain  and  communicate  all
they  know ;  and  their  extended  experience  renders  their
communications  exceedingly  valuable.

1.  The  first  observation  I  would  make  is,  that  there  is
not  the  slightest  shade  of  difference  between  the  phenomena
produced  by  Dr.  Darling,  who  is  a  singularly  neat  operator,
on  persons  in  the  conscious,  waking  state,  by  the  peculiar
process  he  employs,  and  those  produced  by  Mr.  Lewis,  on
the  same  persons,  in  the  same  state,  by  the  usual  process.

It  may  happen,  and  it  does  happen,  that  at  one  time  Dr.
Darling  exhibits  certain  forms  of  experiment,  which  Mr.
Lewis  has  not  on  a  given  occasion  exhibited,  but  which  he
could,  if  he  tried,  produce.  And  I  have  also  seen,  in  the
same  cases,  things  done  by  Mr.  Lewis,  which  Dr.  Darling
had  not  tried  in  these  cases,  but  could  have  shown,  had  he
tried,  and  which  he  has  shown  perhaps  in  other  cases.  This
is  the  only  difference  I  have  been  able  to  detect,  and  it
depends  on  the  circumstance,  that  the  time  is  limited,  and


154  DR.  darling's  method.

that  commonly,  some  particular  form  of  experiment,  which
comes  out  well,  is  dwelt  upon  so  long,  that  no  time  is  left
to  try  others.  But  I  have  seen  no  one  form  of  experiment
tried  by  either,  which  has  not,  at  some  time,  been  also  ex-
hibited by  the  other,  in  the  same,  ordinary  waking  state  of
consciousness.

2.  The  process  followed  by  Dr.  Darling,  which,  he  informs
me,  he  has  never  made  a  secret,  is  to  cause  a  certain  number
of  persons,  willing  to  try,  to  gaze  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes
steadily  at  a  small  coin,  or  double  convex  mass  of  zinc  with
a  small  centre  of  copper,  placed  in  the  palm  of  the  left
hand.  The  other  conditions  are,  perfect  stillness,  entire
concentration  of  the  mind  on  the  object,  and  a  perfectly
passive  will,  or  state  of  mind.  Dr.  Darling  does  not  profess
to  affect  those  who  sit  down  with  an  active  determination
to  resist ;  nor  such  as  come  with  an  eager  desire  to  detect
the  imposture  which  they  politely  attribute  to  him;  nor
such  as  gaze,  not  on  the  coin,  but  on  their  neighbors,  to  see
how  they  get  on ;  nor  such  persons  as  an  ingenious  gentle-
man, who,  after  descending  from  the  platform,  declared,  in
the  hearing  of  my  informant,  that  he  had  given  the  thing  a
fair  trial ;  for  that  he  had  looked  steadily  at  the  coin,  keep-
ing his  eyes  shut  (!  ?),  and  had,  besides,  occupied  himself,
the  whole  time,  in  solving  a  problem  !  Truly  it  would  have
been  wonderful  indeed  had  he  been  affected.

Of  the  persons  tried  as  above  described,  a  certain  pro-
portion, and  of  those  who  really  fulfil  the  conditions,  and
are  not  agitated  or  alarmed,  a  much  larger  proportion,  are
found,  on  examination,  to  be  more  or  less  subject  to  Dr.
Darling's  will.  He  ascertains,  in  the  first  instance,  which
of  them  have  been  affected,  by  desiring  them,  singly,  to  close
the  eyes,  when  he  touches  the  forehead  with  his  finger,
makes  a  few  passes  over  the  eyes,  or  rather  presses  the
eyelids  down  with  a  rapid  sideward  motion,  and  then  tells
them  that  they  cannot  open  their  eyes.  If,  in  spite  of  him,
they  can  do  so,  he  generally  takes  hold  of  one  hand,  and
desires  them  to  gaze  at  him  intently  for  a  moment,  he  also
gazing  at  them,  and  then  repeats  the  trial.  If  it  fail,  he
tries  no  further  at  that  time,  but  goes  on  to  the  next  case.
In  me,  he  succeeded  in  this  on  the  second  trial — I  could  not
open  my  eyes.  Seeing  this,  he  said  "Now  you  can,"  and
I  could  instantly  do  it.


EFFECTS  PRODUCED.  LOO

I  have  seen,  especially  in  private,  a  considerable  propor-
tion found  to  be  thus  affected,  and  I  have  never  seen  the
experiment  tried  on  even  a  small  number,  without  at  least
one  being  affected  to  that  extent.  Those  thus  discovered
to  be  susceptible  are  requested  to  remain  and  to  keep  their
eyes  shut,  the  others  are  dismissed.

8.  He  now  takes  one  of  them,  and,  having  repeated  the
trial  with  the  eyelids,  to  make  sure  that  the  effect  continues,
tells  him  to  close  his  mouth;  and  then,  after  pressing  the
lips  together  with  his  hands,  and  making  a  pass  under  the
jaw,  tells  him  he  cannot  open  it,  which  in  many  instances
proves  to  be  true,  but  was  not  so  in  my  case.  He  then,
perhaps,  causes  the  subject  to  stretch  out  his  hands  and
place  palm  to  palm,  presses  the  hands  strongly  together  by
a  rapid  motion  of  his  own,  and  defies  him  to  separate  them.
This  also  he  cannot  do.  Or  he  makes  him  place  one  or  both
hands  on  his  (the  subject's  own)  head,  strikes  them  rapidly
down  on  the  head,  and  defies  him  to  remove  them,  which,
again,  he  finds  it  impossible  to  do,  till,  as  in  all  these  cases,
Dr.  Darling  says,  "Now  you  can,"  or  "All  right."

In  the  same  way,  Dr.  Darling  proceeds  to  show  his  power
over  the  sensations  of  his  subject.  For  example,  he  deprives
one  hand,  or  one  arm,  of  all  feeling,  and  renders  it  utterly
insensible  to  the  most  acute  pain ;  or  he  makes  his  subject
feel  a  cold  pencil-case  burning  hot,  or  himself  freeze  with
cold,  or  taste  water  as  milk,  brandy,  or  any  other  liquid,
as  I  shall  illustrate  by  a  case  or  two,  in  Part  II.

In  like  manner,  he  controls  the  will,  so  that  the  subject
is  either  compelled  to  perform  a  certain  act,  to  fall  asleep
in  a  minute,  or  to  whistle,  &c.  &c,  or  is  rendered  unable  to
perform  any  act,  as  to  jump  on  a  handkerchief,  which  if  he
tries  to  do,  he  is  sure,  according  to  the  volition  of  Dr.  Dar-
ling, either  to  come  down  straddling  over  it,  or  to  come  down
on  one  or  other  side  of  it ;  or  he  may  hit  out  straight  at  Dr.
Darling's  face,  but  cannot  touch  it,  &c.  &c.

Dr.  Darling  further  controls  the  memory.  He  causes  the
subject  to  forget  his  own  name,  or  that  of  any  other  indivi-
dual ;  or  to  be  unable  to  name  a  single  letter  of  the  alphabet,
&c.  &c.

Moreover,  he  causes  him  to  take  any  object  to  be  what
Dr.  Darling  says  it  is,  a  watch  for  a  snuff-box,  a  chair  for
a  dog,  &c.  &c,  or  to  see  an  object  named,  where  nothing


156  DR.  darling's  method.

really  is,  as  a  book  in  Dr.  Darling's  empty  hand,  or  a  bird
in  the  room,  where  none  is.  The  illusion  is  often  absolutely
perfect.

Again,  he  will  cause  the  subject  to  imagine  himself  another
person,  such  as  Dr.  Darling,  Father  Matthew,  Prince  Al-
bert, or  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  and  to  act  the  character
to  the  life;  to  lecture  on  biology  or  on  temperance,  &c,  or
if  he  imagine  himself  an  officer,  to  drill  imaginary  troops,
and  so  on  ad  infinitum.

Lastly,  Dr.  Darling  can  control,  perfectly,  the  emotions.
If  the  subject  be  laughing,  he  causes  him  first  to  stop  laugh-
ing, then  to  feel  serious,  sad,  and  miserable,  and  to  burst
out  in  tears  and  lamentations,  or,  if  that  appear,  as  it  often
does,  too  painful,  he  will  make  him  feel  intensely  happy,  or
laugh  incessantly,  without  being  able  to  assign  a  cause  for
his  mirth.

Every  one  of  these  forms  of  influencing  the  subject  I  have
seen,  varied  in  a  hundred  details.  The  effect  is  usually,
but  not  always,  instantly  produced,  and  as  instantly  removed
by  the  operator's  simple  word.  And  there  is  no  mystery,  no
secret,  nothing  supernatural  in  it.  It  is  a  perfectly  natural
phenomenon,  and  any  one  who  tries,  may  do  it,  not  indeed
so  well  or  so  successfully,  at  first,  as  Dr.  Darling,  who,  as  I
said  before,  operates  with  extreme  neatness,  and  has  vast
experience  to  aid  him.  But,  with  practice,  even  this  may
be  attained;  and  Lord  Eglinton,  Col.  Gore  Browne,  and
other  gentlemen,  as  well  as  myself,  have  found  no  difficulty,
when  we  lighted  on  a  susceptible  subject.

Good  subjects  are  easily  found,  if  we  only  make  the  trial.
Dr.  Darling  showed  his  power,  on  three  different  occasions,
to  large  parties  at  my  house.  On  the  first,  he  was  entirely
and  most  beautifully  successful  with  a  gentleman  whom  he
had  never  before  seen,  but  whom  Col.  Gore  Browne  had
just  ascertained  to  be  susceptible.  On  the  second,  he  was
equally  successful  with  a  gentleman  whom  he  had  himself
discovered  to  be  susceptible,  on  the  preceding  day,  at  the
house  of  a  lady  well  known  in  literature.  On  the  third,  he
was  again  equally  successful  with  a  young  gentleman,  who,
at  my  request,  consented  to  be  tried,  and  who  had  never
been  even  tried  by  any  one ;  and  on  a  fourth  gentleman,
the  secretary  of  a  public  institution,  whom  Dr.  Darling  had


MR.  LEWIS'S  METHOD  YIELDS  SIMILAR  BESULTS. 157

himself  discovered,  at  his  lecture  the  day  before,  to  be  sus-
ceptible. These  cases,  all  utterly  indisputable,  and  which
were  seen  by  many  persons  of  high  standing,  both  in  society
generally,  in  literature,  in  art,  and  in  science,  will  be  given
in  Part  II.  I  can  testify  to  the  exactness  of  all  the  details.
I  could  multiply  similar  cases  without  end,  but  that  would
be  superfluous.  Every  one  who  saw  the  facts  exhibited  in
these  cases,  was  thoroughly  satisfied  of  their  genuineness.

4.  Now,  when  we  enquire  into  the  cause  or  the  explanation
of  these  facts,  the  first  point  to  be  borne  in  mind  is,  that
the  subjects,  in  order  to  be  successfully  operated  on,  must
not  only  be  susceptible,  but  must  be  brought  into  a  certain
state.  This,  in  Dr.  Darling's  process,  is  done  chiefly  by
themselves,  by  steadily  gazing  at  the  coin,  which,  according
to  Dr.  Darling,  has  not,  as  some  imagine,  a  direct  electric
or  galvanic  action,  but  simply  assists  in  enabling  the  subject
to  concentrate  his  thoughts,  and  thus  to  bring  himself  into
a  state  of  abstraction  favorable  to  the  further  operations.

Mr.  Lewis  produces  the  same  state,  by  gazing  for  five
minutes  only,  with  extreme  earnestness  and  concentration,
at  the  subject,  while  the  latter  gazes  either  at  him,  or  at  an
object  in  the  same  direction.  The  other  conditions  are  the
same  as  those  of  Dr.  D.  He  adds  certain  gestures  and
passes,  all  of  which  are  most  deeply  imbued  with  that  ener-
getic concentration  of  will,  which  I  have  never  seen  so
strongly  developed,  nor  so  beautifully  exhibited  in  the  natu-
ral language,  as  in  Mr.  Lewis.

The  same  state,  I  say,  is  produced ;  that  is,  the  same  in
this,  that  the  subject  is  now,  if  susceptible,  under  the  con-
trol of  the  operator.  But  I  conceive  that  there  may,  nay,
must  be,  a  difference  in  the  two  states,  inasmuch  as  we  can
hardly  suppose  the  effect  to  be  the  same  when  the  powerful
and  often  strongly  felt  influence  of  another  is  added,  and  is
indeed  the  chief  agent  in  disturbing  the  equilibrium  of  in-
fluence, as  when  the  subject  acts  on  himself,  without  ex-
ternal aid.

I  have  not  observed  that  a  greater  proportion  of  persons
is  affected  one  way  than  the  other.  Sometimes  one  method
appears  more  successful,  at  other  times  the  other.  But  this,
so  far  as  I  have  seen,  depends  on  the  more  or  less  strict  ful-
filment of  the  conditions.  I  believe  that  if  ten  persons  were
tried  singly,  tete-a-tete  with  the  operator,  and  with  a  sincere
14


158  EFFECTS  OF  SUGGESTION.

wish  to  fulfil,  fairly,  the  conditions,  seven  or  eight  would  be
affected  in  either  way ;  and  if  more  time  were  allowed,  I  have
little  doubt  that  all  would  be,  sooner  or  later,  influenced  in
some  degree.

It  must  be  at  once  obvious  to  every  person  acquainted
with  physiology,  that  the  peculiar  phenomena  now  under
consideration,  and  which  occur  in  the  conscious  ordinary
waking  state,  depend  on  the  principle  of  suggestion.  This
principle  has  often  been  noticed ;  but  it  was  reserved  for
modern  times,  and  for  the  cultivators  of  Animal  Magnetism,
to  show  how  the  phenomenon  could  easily  be  produced,  in
the  utmost  perfection,  in  a  very  large  proportion  of  man-
kind, and  thus  to  compel  the  universal  admission  of  the
truth.

If  we  try  to  produce  these  effects  on  any  one,  by  sugges-
tion alone,  we  shall  in  all  probability  fail,  unless  we  happen
to  light  on  a  singularly  susceptible  subject.  There  are  some,
who,  especially  after  having  been  once  operated  on,  as  above,
can  be,  at  any  subsequent  time,  and  without  preparation,  in-
fluenced by  the  same  operator.  I  am  not  aware  that  any
are,  or  have  been,  so  influenced  for  the  first  time,  without
the  preliminary  process  ;  but  I  consider  it  very  probable,  in
certain  cases.  As  a  general  rule,  however,  the  preparation
or  preliminary  process  is  required,  at  all  events  the  first
time,  although  it  may  now  and  then  be  afterwards  dispensed
with.

The  cause  which  produces  the  state  in  which  suggestion
becomes  efficient,  is,  I  think,  identical,  in  the  ordinary  pro-
cess, with  the  magnetic  influence ;  for,  if  pursued  a  little
longer,  it  will  cause  the  sleep,  with  its  phenomena.  I  shall
have,  by  and  bye,  to  treat  of  this  cause,  and  shall  not  here
dwell  on  it.

In  Dr.  Darling's  preliminary  process,  the  chief  part  of  the
work  is  done  by  the  subject  himself,  through  intense  gazing
at  an  object.  Now  we  know,  that  in  Mr.  Braid's  process,
even  the  sleep  is  produced  by  the  gazing  of  the  subject  at
an  object  rather  above  and  a  little  before  his  eyes.  This
gazing,  therefore,  since  it  produces  the  greater  effect,  natu-
rally also  produces  the  less,  and  thus  Dr.  Darling's  process
also  is  essentially  the  same  as  the  ordinary  one.

But  there  is  this  difference,  that  both  in  Dr.  Darling's  and
Mr.  Braid's  method,  the  operator  does  not,  in  producing  the


THE  IMPRESSIBLE  STATE.  159

state  in  which  suggestion  acts,  in  the  former,  and  the  sleep
in  the  latter  case,  direct  his  own  magnetic  or  vital  influence,
on  the  subject,  as  is  done  in  the  ordinary  method.  I  speak
here  only  of  producing  an  impressible  state ;  for  Dr.  Dar-
ling also  uses  to  a  certain  extent,  passes,  touch,  and  gazing,
the  ordinary  means,  apparently  to  heighten  the  impression
at  first  produced.

Now,  if  we  suppose,  hypothctically,  the  peculiar  state  in
any  degree  to  consist  in  a  disturbance  of  the  natural  equili-
brium in  the  distribution  of  the  nervous,  vital,  magnetic,  or
odylic  force  or  influence  in  the  patient's  system,  it  plainly
cannot  be  a  matter  of  indifference  hoiv  that  equilibrium  is
disturbed.  When  the  amount  of  force,  natural  to  the  indi-
vidual, is  by  his  own  act  otherwise  distributed  than  usually
happens,  if  more  be  sent  to  the  brain,  or  to  any  part  of  it,
and  less  to  the  muscles  or  to  the  other  viscera,  or  to  the
skin,  the  equilibrium  is  indeed  disturbed,  but  no  force  is
added.  Whereas,  when  a  foreign  influence  is  thrown  into
the  brain  or  any  part  of  that  organ,  the  equilibrium  is  also
disturbed,  but  the  other  parts,  while  having,  relatively,  less
of  the  influence,  have,  absolutely,  as  much  as  before.

Hence  the  two  states  are  not  identical,  although  they
agree  in  this,  that  in  both,  suggestion  has  the  force  of  fact.
And  we  shall  see,  that  in  the  self-produced  sleep  of  Mr.
Braid  there  are  very  marked  differences  from  that  of  ordi-
nary Animal  Magnetism.

The  phenomena  of  suggestion,  then,  whether  produced
by  the  usual  method  of  Animal  Magnetism,  or  by  that  of
what  is  called  electro-biology,  are  the  same ;  while  there  is,
in  all  probability,  a  considerable  difference  in  the  state  of
the  subject,  according  to  the  method  employed  ;  which  dif-
ference becomes  more  marked  in  the  sleep  and  higher
stages.

The  subject  having  been  brought  into  the  state  above
mentioned,  is  found  to  be  under  the  control  of  the  operator.
He  is  accessible  to,  and  so  deeply  influenced  by,  any  sug-
gestion made  by  the  latter,  that  he  finds  it  impossible  to
resist  or  counteract  it.  He  is  told  that  he  cannot  perform
a  certain  act,  and  he  forthwith  loses  the  power  of  doing  so.
The  muscles  are  so  far,  and  no  farther  paralysed,  as  is
necessary  for  the  act.  If  that  be,  for  example,  to  open  the
clenched  fist,  and  drop  an  object  which  is  grasped,  he  can


160  CONTROL  EXERCISED  BY  THE  OPERATOR.

move  the  arm  up  or  down,  backwards,  forwards,  and  late-
.  rally ;  he  can  bend  or  extend  it,  &c. ;  but  his  will  no  longer
acts  on  the  extensors  of  the  fingers,  and  is  powerless  on
these  alone.  Or,  if  he  cannot  tell  his  own  name,  it  is  not
that  he  cannot  speak,  nor  jet  that  he  cannot  tell  any  other
name,  but  that  he  has  lost  the  power  of  recalling  that  one
object  of  memory.  When  he  drinks  water,  and  tastes  it  as
if  it  were  the  strongest  brandy,  it  is  that  the  suggested  im-
pression quite  overpowers  the  real  natural  one.  Just  as  he
can,  at  certain  times,  recall,  by  memory,  the  taste  of  brandy,
or  any  other  taste,  although  his  mouth  be  empty,  and  many
can  do  this  very  vividly,  so  when  brandy  is  suggested  to
him,  a  similar,  but  still  more  vivid,  secondary  impression  is
excited,  and  overpowers  the  evidence  of  his  palate.  As  I
have  already  stated,  the  singular  power  of  suggestion  has
long  been  known  as  a  fact  rarely  occurring,  and  presented,
no  doubt,  when  some  patient  had  spontaneously  fallen  into
the  impressible  state.  But  it  is  only  of  late  years  that  we
know,  that  this  state  may  be  produced  at  will,  in  a  few
minutes,  on  a  large  proportion  of  mankind ;  and  it  is  highly
probable  that  all  persons,  with  a  little  patience  and  perse-
verance, may  be  brought  into  that  state.  We  have,  in  this
phenomenon,  an  additional  proof  of  what  I  formerly  stated,
namely,  that  every  leading  fact  in  Animal  Magnetism  has
occurred  spontaneously,  just  because  these  facts  depend  on
natural  causes.

5.  It  would  appear,  that  many  persons  may  be  brought
into  the  impressible  conscious  state,  who  cannot,  or  who
cannot  without  great  difficulty,  be  brought  into  the  magnetic
sleep.  If  this  be  so,  then  the  process  followed  by  Dr.  Dar-
ling and  others,  becomes  at  once  of  great  practical  value.
For  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  curative  agency  of  mag-
netism, even  in  the  sleep,  depends  on  the  impressibility,
which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  common  to  the  sleep,  and  to  the
ordinary  state  of  consciousness.  This  explains  the  often
recorded  fact,  that  many  magnetic  cures  are  performed  with-
out the  occurrence  of  the  sleep,  or  indeed  of  any  very
marked  or  unusual  sensations.  The  patient  is,  to  use  a  most
barbarous  expression,  which  I  only  do,  in  order  to  protest
against  it,  biologised  ;  that  is,  he  is  only  so  far  magnetised,
as  to  be  thrown  into  the  impressible  state.

When  we  have  seen  the  soundest  natural  sleep  thus  pro-


SLEEP  CAUSED  BY  GAZING.  161

duced,  in  one  minute,  in  persons  who  were  actually,  at  the
beginning  of  the  minute,  in  convulsions  of  laughter,  and  in
others  who  did  their  utmost  to  keep  themselves  awake  ;
when  we  have  seen,  in  a  person  so  perfectly  conscious  as  to
direct  and  dictate  the  experiments,  one  arm  rendered,  in-
stantaneously, absolutely  insensible  to  the  most  severe  pain ;
nay,  when  we  have  ourselves  obtained  these  results,  as  I
have  done,  we  cannot  possibly  hesitate  as  to  the  practical
value  of  the  facts  above  described.

6.  Let  us  now  attend,  for  a  moment,  to  the  hypnotism  of
Mr.  Braid.  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  that  gentle-
man operate,  and  I  most  willingly  bear  testimony  to  the
accuracy  of  his  description,  and  to  the  very  striking  results
which  he  produces.

Mr.  Braid  causes  his  patients  or  subjects  to  gaze  steadily
at  an  object,  such  as  the  knob  of  a  pencil  case,  held  a  little
above  the  eyes,  and  in  front  of  the  upper  part  of  the  fore-
head. It  would  seem,  that  gazing  in  this  strained  position,
very  soon  and  easily  produces  the  necessary  disturbance  of
equilibrium  in  the  peculiar  influence,  vital  or  magnetic,  con-
cerned in  the  result  (to  use  the  merely  hypothetical  term
above  employed).  In  a  short,  but  variable  time,  a  large
proportion  of  the  persons  tried  are  not  only  affected,  but
put  to  sleep.  Nay,  there  is,  as  I  have  proved  on  my  own
person,  no  plan  so  effectual  in  producing  sleep  when  we  find
ourselves  disposed,  in  spite  of  our  wish  to  sleep,  to  remain
awake  in  bed.  Some  persons  have  found  reading,  espe-
cially the  reading  of  certain  tomes,  the  contents  of  which
have  a  ponderous  character,  to  possess  a  powerful  sojDorific
agency;  and,  in  addition  to  the  narcotic  influence  of  the
style  or  matter,  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  concentration
of  mind  necessary  to  penetrate  through  the  copia  verbor init-
io the  meaning,  if  any,  contained  in  these  literary  anodynes,
tends  to  produce  a  sleep,  very  likely  magnetic.  But  let
these  persons  try  the  experiment  of  placing  a  small  bright
object,  seen  by  the  reflection  of  a  safe  and  distant  light,  in
such  a  position  that  the  eyes  are  strained  a  little  upwards
or  backwards,  and  at  such  a  distance  as  to  give  a  tendency
to  squinting,  and  they  will  probably  never  again  have  re-
course to  the  venerable  authors  above  alluded  to.  A  sweet
and  refreshing  slumber  steals  over  the  senses;  indeed,  the
sensation  of  falling  asleep  under  these  circumstances,  as  I

14*


162  MR.  BRAID,  BY  HYPNOTISM,

have  often  experienced,  is  quite  delightful ;  and  the  sleep  is
calm  and  undisturbed,  though  often  accompanied  by  dreams
of  an  agreeable  kind.  Sir  David  Brewster,  who,  with  more
than  youthful  ardor,  never  fails  to  investigate  any  curious
fact  connected  with  the  eye,  has  not  only  seen  Mr.  Braid
operate,  but  has  also  himself  often  adopted  this  method  of
inducing  sleep,  and  compares  it  to  the  feeling  we  have,  when,
after  severe  and  long-continued  bodily  exertion,  we  sit  or
lie  down,  and  fall  asleep,  being  overcome,  in  a  most  agree-
able manner,  by  the  solicitations  of  Morpheus,  to  which,  at
such  times,  we  have  a  positive  pleasure  in  yielding,  however
inappropriate  the  scene  of  our  slumbers.

To  return  to  Mr.  Braid.  His  subjects,  as  I  have  seen,
fall  indeed  into  sleep;  but  if  tried,  are  found  to  be  in  a
state  of  somnambulism  or  magnetic  sleep.  This  would  pro-
bably also  be  found  to  be  the  case  when  we  put  ourselves
to  sleep  as  above  explained ;  but  we  do  not  have  it  tried,
our  wish  being  to  sleep.  It  is  not,  in  fact,  that  the  mag-
netic sleep  differs  from  ordinary  sleep,  as  far  as  mere  sleep-
ing or  restoration  of  the  machine  is  concerned;  but  that
the  internal  senses  are  awake,  while  the  external  senses  and
the  bodily  frame  are  drowned  in  oblivion.  It  is  totally  un-
necessary to  recapitulate  here  all  the  phenomena  which  are
observed  in  the  hypnotic  sleep.  Up  to  a  certain  point,
they  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  ordinary  magnetic  sleep,
so  often  already  referred  to.  There  is  divided  conscious-
ness, closing  of  some  of  the  senses,  and,  above  all,  subjec-
tion to  the  will  of  the  operator,  or  the  impressible  state,  in
which  suggestion  or  command  from  him  are  omnipotent.
Questions  are  readily  answered,  without  the  sleeper  being
awakened;  and  finally  the  curative  effects  are  strongly
manifested.  So  great  is  the  power  exercised  by  Mr.  Braid,
that  feeble  women,  who  were,  moreover,  in  a  great  measure,
deprived  of  the  use  of  their  limbs,  can  be  made,  while  in
the  sleep,  readily  to  walk,  and,  by  frequent  repetitions,  are
often  restored  to  activity.  In  some  cases,  aided,  I  doubt
not,  by  the  energetic  volition  of  Mr.  Braid,  the  effects  pro-
duced in  the  first  sitting  continue,  more  or  less,  in  the  wak-
ing state.  In  other  cases,  slender,  delicate  men,  of  small
natural  power,  are  made,  in  the  sleep,  to  exert  a  muscular
force  superior  to  that  of  strong  men;  to  raise,  with  one


HAH  NOT  PRODTTCED  0L4  I  B .VOYANCE.  1^:>

finger,  weights  which,  if  awake,  they  could  not  move  witfi
both  hands,  &c.  &c.

7.  But  it  is  remarkable  that  Mr.  Braid  has  not  produced,

in  his  subjects,  what  are  called  the  higher  phenomena,  espe-
cially clairvoyance,  so  often  met  with  by  those  who  employ
the  ordinary  magnetic  process.

Two  hypotheses  may  be  proposed  to  explain  this  fact.
The  first  is,  that  Mr.  Braid  may  be  one  of  those  persons
who  cannot  produce  these  phenomena.  There  are  mag-
netisers,  very  successful  in  the  treatment  of  disease,  who
produce  profound  sleep,  yet  never  see  clairvoyance  in  their
own  subjects.  I  have  heard  of  some  magnetisers  who  are
in  this  predicament,  although  they  have  produced  others  of
the  higher  phenomena.  There  is  a  great  variety  in  the  in-
fluence of  different  magnetisers,  insomuch,  as  I  have  already
stated,  that  the  impressions  caused  by  some,  on  certain  pa-
tients, is  distressing  and  intolerable,  while  that  of  others  is
pleasant  and  soothing.  In  like  manner,  it  often  happens  that
one  operator  can  produce  effects  which  another  cannot  suc-
ceed in  producing,  and  vice  versd.

The  second  is,  that  Mr.  Braid's  process,  being  one  of  self-
magnetisation  or  auto-magnetism,  as  it  has  been  called,  may
not  produce  certain  powers,  which  would  perhaps  appear  in
the  same  cases  under  the  influence  of  a  different  operation,
even  if  performed  by  Mr.  Braid  himself.  A  series  of  com-
parative trials  can  alone  determine  this  point,  and  I  hope
that  such  trials  may,  ere  long,  be  made.

Mr.  Braid,  not  having  produced  or  seen  clairvoyance,  has
gone  so  far  as  to  deny  its  existence.  I  entertain  the  highest
respect  for  Mr.  Braid ;  but  I  cannot  help  thinking  he  has
here  been  too  hasty  in  •  his  conclusion.  It  was  long  before
I  myself  saw  the  higher  phenomena,  and,  on  more  than  one
occasion,  I  have  mentioned  this,  when  writing  on  the  subject.
But  I  did  not  feel  warranted  in  rejecting  the  prodigious  mass
of  evidence,  much  of  it,  to  all  appearance,  unexceptionable,
of  their  occurrence.  My  opportunities  were  limited,  as  I
never  had  it  in  my  power  at  all  to  study  this  subject  either
in  London  or  in  Paris  ;  while  in  Aberdeen  and  Edinburgh,
in  which  cities  I  have  lived  since  1839,  no  clairvoyance
occurred,  for  some  years,  within  my  reach.  I  was  further
under  the  impression,  that  I  possessed  little  or  no  magnetic
power,  although  I  had  frequently,  in  persons  who  had  been


164  IMPORTANCE  OF  PERSEVERANCE.

already  magnetised,  and  in  some  very  susceptible  subjects
who  had  not  previously  been  operated  on,  produced  the  sleep,
insensibility  to  pain,  and  various  forms  of  sympathy.  I  did
not  then  know,  practically,  how  much  depended  on  patience
and  perseverance  in  these  matters,  and,  not  at  once  meeting
with  the  higher  phenomena,  I  hastily  concluded  that  I  could
not  produce  them.  I  am  now  convinced,  that  had  I  perse-
vered for  a  short  time,  some  of  these  cases  would  have  ex-
hibited the  finest  phenomena,  and  I  can  only  regret  that  I
lost,  through  ignorance,  opportunities  so  valuable.

More  recently,  however,  I  have  not  only  been  enabled  to
see  and  study  these  phenomena  as  produced  by  others,  but
also  to  produce  them  myself;  and  I  can  only  urge  once  more,
on  all  enquirers,  the  importance  of  time,  patience,  and  per-
severance in  these  researches.  Without  these,  few  will  be
fortunate  enough  to  succeed ;  with  them,  no  one,  of  average
power,  need  fail,  (unless  by  nature  incapable,  as  a  few  are,
of  producing  certain  results,)  in  obtaining  evidence  of  very
wonderful  facts,  and  in  acquiring  a  conviction  of  their  in-
terest and  value,  and  of  the  necessity  of  thoroughly  investi-
gating them.

That  Mr.  Braid  has  not  met  with  clairvoyance  is  to  be
regretted ;  but  I  entertain  the  confident  hope,  that  even  if
he  should  not  succeed  in  producing  it  himself,  he  will  yet  be
enabled  to  see  it  produced  by  others.  He  has,  I  believe,
produced  the  state  of  trance,  and  has,  at  all  events,  written
a  very  interesting  work  on  that  subject.  Now  trance  or  ex-
tasis  is,  in  the  opinion  of  all  writers,  so  far  as  I  know,  a
higher  stage  of  the  phenomena  than  clairvoyance,  and  many
have  not  met  with  it  in  their  own  experience.  But  we  must
not  forget  that  it  is  possible,  that  Mr.  Braid's  method  may
not  induce  the  state  of  clairvoyance  at  all,  a  point  which
can  only  be  decided  by  experiment.  For  my  own  part,  I
find  it  difficult  to  conceive  that  a  person,  who,  when  put  into
the  magnetic  sleep  in  the  usual  way,  becomes  clairvoyant,
will  not  present  that  power,  if  put  to  sleep  by  hypnotism.
But  an  experiment  of  this  kind,  on  a  subject  previously
magnetised  in  the  old  way,  would  not  be  perfectly  satisfac-
tory, since  many  of  them  can  be  put  into  the  full  sleep  by  a
variety  of  means,  in  a  few  seconds,  without  any  notable  ex-
ertion of  influence  on  the  part  of  the  operator,  beyond  tell-
ing them  to  go  to  sleep  in  a  certain  way  and  in  a  certain


THE  FACTS  OF  MAGNETISM  MUST  BE  INVESTIGATED. 165

time,  and  thus  we  should  run  the  risk  of  producing  the  ac-
customed state,  when  we  rather  wished  to  see  the  new  one.
In  fact,  the  facility  with  which  many  subjects,  after  hav-
ing been  brought  fully  under  the  influence,  maybe  sent  into
the  deepest  sleep,  is  one  of  the  most  striking  facts  of  the
whole  subject;  and  must  be  borne  in  mind  when  we  would
make  such  experiments.

It  appears,  then,  from  what  has  been  stated,  that  Electro-
biology,  Electro-psychology,  and  Hypnotism,  are  essentially
the  same  with  Animal  Magnetism,  although  there  is  proba-
bly some  difference  in  the  precise  characters  of  the  states
produced.  The  former  may,  indeed,  be  regarded  more  pro-
perly as  parts  of  the  latter,  than  in  any  other  way.  But  it
is  nevertheless  probable,  that  each  may  have  some  advan-
tages and  disadvantages,  peculiar  to  itself.  All  of  them
should  be  diligently  and  carefully  studied  and  investigated,
with  the  firm  conviction,  that,  like  all  other  natural  truths,
they  must  prove  beneficial  to  mankind ;  and  the  more  so,
the  better  they  are  known.  The  danger,  if  danger  there  be,
and  I  cannot,  for  my  part,  conceive  the  existence  of  a  dan-
gerous truth,  lies,  we  may  be  assured,  in  ignorance,  not  in
knowledge.  "A  little  knowledge"  has  been  said  to  be  "a
dangerous  thing;"  but  why?  because  it  is  little.  Make  it
more,  and  the  danger  diminishes ;  if  we  could  make  it  per-
fect, no  danger  could  possibly  exist.

You  would  do  me  great  injustice,  if  you  supposed  that  I
propounded  the  facts  contained  in  these  Letters,  as  truths
fully  ascertained,  or  duly  investigated,  so  as  to  be  under-
stood. On  the  contrary,  I  give  them,  simply,  as  facts,  so
attested  and  authenticated,  that  we  cannot  disregard  them,
least  of  all  on  the  ground  that  they  are  incredible,  or  that
they  cannot  be  explained.  They  never  can  be  either  under-
stood as  facts,  or  explained  in  the  way  and  degree  in  which
other  natural  facts  are  explained  or  understood,  unless  they
are  thoroughly  and  scientifically  investigated.  When  this
shall  have  been  done — and  it  is  no  easy  task,  no  matter
for  an  idle  hour,  or  for  an  evening's  entertainment,  but  a
serious,  important,  and,  above  all,  laborious  work — we  shall
find  that,  in  proportion  as  we  advance  in  knowledge  of  these
phenomena,  they  will  lose  the  character  of  strangeness  and


166  THE  SUBJECT  BEGINS  TO

supcrnaturality  which,  to  the  ignorant  they  exhibit.  They
will  arrange  themselves  under  natural  laws,  whether  known,
or  yet  to  be  discovered,  as  the  law  of  gravitation,  which  had
acted  from  the  creation,  was  discovered  only  about  200
years  ago  by  Newton.  And  they  will  be  found,  like  all
other  natural  facts,  even  those  at  first  sight  most  unpromis-
ing in  this  respect,  to  admit  of  a  multitude  of  useful  appli-
cations. Man  will  benefit  by  this,  as  he  has  done  by  all
other  knowledge ;  but  we  cannot  expect,  in  this,  the  empiri-
cal stage  of  the  enquiry,  when  we  are  groping  in  the  dark
to  find  the  facts,  and  can  as  yet  discover  no  order  or  beauty
in  them,  to  be  able  to  appreciate,  worthily,  the  purpose  of
the  Creator  in  giving  to  us  that  power  of  influencing  each
other,  which  is  the  essence  of  Animal  Magnetism.

My  sole  object  is  to  convince  those  who  still  entertain
doubts  on  the  subject,  that  certain  facts  exist,  which  are
worthy  of  the  best  and  most  earnest  study  we  can  bestow
on  them.  My  own  observations  have  been  directed  solely
to  the  ascertaining  of  some  of  these  facts,  and  I  make  no
pretensions  to  account  for  them.  My  desire  is  to  promote
scientific  enquiry  into  the  subject,  not  to  present  it  as  al-
ready exhausted.  And  I  shall  feel  amply  rewarded  for  my
labor,  if  one  qualified  person  shall  be  induced,  by  what  I
have  said,  to  devote  his  energies  to  the  scientific  prosecu-
tion of  the  enquiry  into  Animal  Magnetism.


I  have  still  to  allude  to  the  state  of  Trance  or  Extasis,
one  of  the  most  striking,  but  of  the  rarer  phenomena  con-
nected with  this  subject.  I  have  not  hitherto  done  this,
because  I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  personally  examining
the  fact,  and  I  wished,  in  the  first  instance,  to  confine  my-
self to  such  phenomena  as  I  had  been  enabled  for'the  most
part  to  see,  and  in  many  instances  to  produce.  But  many
phenomena  remain,  which  I  have  not  yet  had  the  good  for-
tune to  meet  with ;  and  no  doubt  can  be  entertained,  if  we
may  judge  from  the  results  of  other  scientific  investigations,
such  as  those  of  Astronomy,  Geology,  Physiology,  Optics,
and  Chemistry,  that  a  rich  harvest  of  new  observations  will
reward  those  who  devote  themselves  to  the  cultivation  of
this  boundless  field  of  enquiry,  with  the  means  and  appli-
ances of  scientific  training,  with  the  genuine  and  sincere


ATTRACT  ATTENTION.  167

desire  for  truth,  and  a  matter  of  almost  equal  importance,
the  leisure  necessary  for  the  full  investigation  of  any  branch
of  so  extensive  a  subject.  While  I  rejoice  in  having  been
early  trained  to  habits  of  scientific  study,  and  while  I  have
endeavored,  to  the  best  of  my  power,  to  look  at  the  subject
of  Animal  Magnetism  in  the  light  of  scientific  research;
while,  moreover,  I  may  claim  to  have  approached  the  subject
with  a  due  dense  of  its  importance,  and  as  in  other  sciences,
with,  I  trust,  an  earnest  longing  after  the  truth ;  yet,  occu-
pied as  I  have  ever  been,  with  the  cultivation  and  the
teaching  of  a  science  which  I  chose  from  preference,  and  to
which  I  daily  feel  more  and  more  attached,  I  have  not,  and
cannot  expect  to  have,  command  of  the  requisite  leisure  for
such  an  investigation  as  this.  Had  it  been  otherwise,  I
should  long  ago  have  done  my  utmost  to  prosecute  the  en-
quiry ;  and  it  is  only  by  means  of  observations,  made  chiefly
during  the  vacations,  or  when  opportunities  presented  them-
selves occasionally  at  other  times,  that  I  have  been  able
even  to  jot  down  these  imperfect  sketches.  All  I  can  hope
to  accomplish,  is  to  aid  in  stirring  up  to  active  research
those  who  possess,  and  in  a  far  higher  degree  than  myself,
the  necessary  qualifications ;  and  perhaps  to  assist  younger
observers  in  their  efforts  to  advance ;  to  enable  them  to
know  what  to  look  for,  and  how  to  recognise  the  different
phenomena.

It  is  very  gratifying  to  me  to  be  able  to  say,  that  men  of
the  highest  ability,  and  already  distinguished  in  various
difficult  branches  of  science,  are  now  turning  their  atten-
tion to  this  hitherto  neglected  subject ;  and  I  have  had  the
greatest  pleasure  in  placing  it  in  the  power  of  some  of  these
gentlemen  to  see  phenomena,  which  I  was  sure,  once  seen,
would  never  cease  to  interest  them.  And  as  Austria  has
produced  a  Reichenbach,  who,  by  five  years'  incessant  labor,
has  shed  a  flood  of  light  on  the  phenomena  of  that  influence
which  we  must  regard  as  the  cause  of  vital  magnetic  effects,
so  we  may  hope,  that  Scotland,  the  country  which  first
adopted  and  taught  the  doctrines  of  Newton,  when  he  had
no  adherents  in  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  may  also  produce
men  who  shall  raise  the  veil  which  conceals  the  truths  of
Animal  Magnetism.

When  men  such  as  Sir  David  Brewster,  Sir  W.  0.  Tre-
velyan,  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  Dr. Simpson,  Professor  Forbes,


168  TRANCE  AND  EXTASIS.

Professor  Bennett,  and  Professor  Goodsir, — when  men  like
these,  veterans  in  science,  though  some  of  them  are  young
in  years,  besides  many  others,  have  not  only  seen  the  facts,
more  or  less  extensively,  but  admit  their  importance,  and
have  personally  investigated  into  some  of  them,  the  time
cannot  be  distant,  when  the  subject  of  Animal  Magnet-
ism shall  assume  a  truly  scientific  form.  If  I  cannot  con-
tribute, in  any  degree,  however  small,  to  hasten  that  most
desirable  consummation,  I  shall  ever  feel  grateful  that  I  was
led  to  devote  a  part  of  my  spare  time  to  the  subject.


LETTER  X.

I  now  proceed  to  describe,  briefly,  that  state,  or  rather
those  states,  which  are  often  included  under  the  name  of
Trance,  or  Extasis.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  go  very  fully
into  them,  because  I  have  not  had  an  opportunity,  such  as
I  have  had  in  regard  to  most  of  the  phenomena  hitherto
described,  either  of  seeing  them,  as  produced  by  others,  or
of  producing  them  myself;  and,  consequently,  have  not
been  enabled  to  compare  with  my  own  observations,  the  ac-
counts given  of  the  phenomena  by  those  who  have  seen
them.  But  as,  in  all  cases  in  which  I  have  thus  been  able
to  test  the  published  accounts  of  magnetic  phenomena,  I
have  found  a  very  great  degree  of  accuracy  and  truthful-
ness in  the  accounts  given  of  the  facts  by  the  best  observers
and  authors  on  the  subject,  I  consider  it  but  just  to  regard
their  account  of  the  phenomena  as  accurate,  until  it  shall
be  shown  to  be  otherwise.

1.  The  first  observation  I  would  make  is,  that  it  is  neces-
sary to  distinguish  two  states;  one  in  which  we  have  the
appearances  of  death,  and  which  may  be  compared  to  the
hybernation  or  torpid  winter  sleep  of  some  animals  ;  the
other,  in  which  the  subject  enters,  apparently,  into  a
higher  state  or  phase  of  existence,  and  is  deeply  interested,
nay  often  absorbed  by  his  contemplation  of  visions,  or
scenes  of  beauty  and  happiness  so  perfect,  that,  in  compa-
rison, the  world,  with  all  its  luxuries,  appears  utterly  worth-


i


NATURAL  TRANCE.  169

less  and  insignificant.  These  two  states  have  been  con-
founded by  some  writers,  and  the  term  trance  applied  to
both,  indiscriminately.  And  it  cannot  be  denied  that  there
is  some  analogy  between  them,  and  that,  in  one  sense,  both
may  be  called  trance,  because,  in  both,  the  subject,  as  it
were,  leaves  the  world,  or  indeed  may  be  said  to  leave  life,
for  a  time.  We  shall  call  the  first  state  Trance,  the  other
Extasis.

2.  Trance,  or  a  torpid,  apparently  dead  state,  occurs
spontaneously,  and  has  been  often  recorded.  In  one  re-
markable case  described  in  an  early  volume  of  the  Philoso-
phical Transactions,  the  patient,  a  laboring  man  at  Tins-
bury,  continued  in  this  state,  with  hardly  an  interruption,
for  many  weeks.  He  took  a  little  food  only  once  or  twice
during  the  whole  time,  and  did  so  mechanically,  and,  as  it
were,  instinctively,  without  awaking.  In  the  same  way,  he
occasionally,  but  only  at  very  long  intervals,  performed
certain  bodily  functions.  In  short,  he  was,  for  almost  the
whole  period,  in  a  state  closely  resembling  hybernation,  in
which,  as  is  well  known,  the  hybernating  animal  requires,
and  indeed  can  take,  no  food,  and  the  animal  heat  is  kept
up,  though  at  a  temperature  lower  than  the  normal  one  of
the  waking  state,  by  the  consumption  of  the  fat  stored  up
in  its  tissues  by  the  waking  animal.  He  was  deaf  to  all
sounds,  and  never  spoke,  and  when  at  last  he  awoke,  he
would  not  believe  that  he  had  slept  more  than  usual  till
he  saw  the  fields,  which,  when  he  went  to  sleep,  were  green,
now  ripe  and  yellow,  ready  for  the  sickle.  Another  similar
case  is  recorded  as  having  occurred  lately  in  France.

Such  cases  have  in  all  ages  been  observed,  and  even  re-
corded ;  yet  only  a  few  years  since,  when  the  Tinsbury  case
was  brought  forward  as  a  proof  that  a  state  of  trance,  in-
cluding insensibility  to  pain,  was  possible,  some  of  those
who  seemed  resolved  not  to  believe  in  the  possibility  of  pain-
less surgical  operations,  performed  on  persons  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  declared  that  the  man  must  have  been  an  im-
postor. Yet  there  was  no  ground  for  this  assertion,  for  the
case  excited  much  interest  at  the  time,  and  was  examined  by
several  men  of  science,  members  of  the  Royal  Society,  who
could  not  detect  any  imposture.

That  such  an  unconscious,  torpid state  is  possible,  has,
moreover,  been  proved  by  the  effects  of  accidents,  as  in  the
15


170  MAGNETIC  TRANCE.

tv ell-known  case  of  the  man,  who,  falling  from  the  mast-
head on  the  deck  of  a  ship  of  war  on  the  Mediterranean,
fractured  his  skull,  and  lay  for  months  in  a  perfectly  uncon-
scious state,  eating  and  performing  other  necessary  func-
tions by  a  mechanical  instinct,  until  he  was  trepanned,  and
the  depression  of  the  bone  removed,  in  London,  when  his
memory  went  back  at  once  to  the  period  of  his  fall,  nor  had
he  the  slightest  idea  that  any  time  had  elapsed  since  the
accident.

We  may  see  also,  by  the  occurrence  of  such  cases,  either
spontaneously  from  some  unobserved  affection  of  the  nerv-
ous system,  or  in  consequence  of  accidents,  that  all  the
cases  of  the  alleged  power  to  do  without  food,  or  to  sleep,
for  a  long  time,  need  not  be  supposed  impostures.  It  is
much  more  probable,  that  the  occurrence  of  a  genuine  case,
and  the  curiosity  excited  by  it,  as  well  as  the  profit  derived
from  its  exhibition  to  wondering  crowds,  may  have  led  to  its
simulation,  in  some  instances,  with  a  view  to  gain.

We  may  also  see,  in  these  facts,  the  origin  of  the  oriental
tales  of  sleepers,  who,  falling  asleep  in  some  cavern,  have
found,  on  awaking,  a  new  world  around  them.  It  is  evi-
dent, that  where  one  man  had  slept,  were  it  only  for  a  week
or  a  month,  and  had  awoke,  unconscious  of  the  lapse  of
time,  this  would  infallibly  grow,  in  the  vivid  Eastern  fancy,
to  years  and  centuries  of  sleep.  Here  again  we  see,  that
the  most  incredible  stories,  if  they  have  ever  formed  an  ar-
ticle of  general  belief,  must  have  had  some  foundation  in
natural  truth.

3.  Now  the  same  state  is  said  to  occur,  and  this,  on  ap-
parently good  testimony,  as  a  result  of  magnetic  processes,
and,  at  all  events,  artificially  produced ;  as,  indeed,  we
might  naturally  expect,  if  it  occur  spontaneously.  I  need
not  here  enter  into  details,  for  the  appearances  are  the
same  as  above  described,  in  the  natural  trance.  I  would
only  say,  that  they  are  described,  by  those  who  have  seen
them,  as  occurring  in  a  high  or  deep  stage  of  the  magnetic
sleep.  The  magnetic  trance  must  be  carefully  distinguished
from  the  ordinary  magnetic  sleep,  which  has  usually  a  short
duration,  and  in  which  the  sleeper  is  conscious,  although
not  in  his  ordinary  consciousness,  and  speaks  or  thinks,  or
acts  accordingly.  But  in  the  trance,  he  is  apparently  un-
conscious, and  it  may  last  much  longer. Some  subjects


TRANCJE  PRODUCED  AT  WILL.  171

would  appear  to  have  a  much  greater  tendency  to  fall  into
this  trance  than  others,  and  this,  also,  might  be  anticipated
from  analogy.  Of  the  fact  there  can  be  no  rational  doubt,
but  for  the  reasons  above  given,  I  do  not  enter  into  a  full
or  minute  description  of  it.

4.  It  has  long  been  known,  but  little  attended  to,  that
certain  persons  have  had  the  power  of  producing,  in  them-
selves, at  pleasure,  this  state  of  trance,  or  partially  sus-
pended animation.  Mr.  Braid,  in  an  interesting  little  work
lately  published,  has  collected  the  most  satisfactory  evidence
on  this  point.  He  has  quoted  the  recorded  case  of  Col.
Townsend,  who  often  threw  himself  into  this  state  of  appa-
rent death,  nay,  who  did  so  in  the  presence  of  medical  and
scientific  men,  who  found  his  pulse  and  respiration  to  cease,
and  were  really  alarmed,  lest  they  should  not  return,  and
real  death  ensue.  But  Col.  T.,  after  a  certain  time,  gradu-
ally awoke  to  life;  the  heart  began  to  throb,  the  lungs  to
play,  and  full  vitality  was  soon  restored.

Mr.  Braid  has  also  given,  on  the  authority  of  Sir  C.
Wade,  and  other  gentlemen  of  the  highest  character,  who
had  seen  the  fact  in  India,  several  thoroughly  attested  cases
of  Faquirs,  who  made  a  profession,  somewhat  religious  in
its  character,  of  throwing  themselves  into  a  perfect  trance,
and  allowing  themselves,  in  this  state,  to  be  enclosed  in  a
coffin,  and  buried  for  periods  of  several  days  or  even  weeks.
These  cases  leave  no  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  fact ;  and
the  falling  asleep,  as  well  as  the  waking,  after  certain  fric-
tions and  bathings  had  been  employed,  are  described  in  a
manner  which  is  truly  natural  and  convincing.

As  we  have  seen,  that  the  action  of  a  subject  on  himself,
that  is,  the  great  concentration  of  his  mind  on  one  object,
can  produce,  not  only  the  impressionable  state,  necessary
for  experiments  on  suggestion,  but  also  magnetic  sleep,  as
in  what  are  called  Electro-biology  and  Hypnotism,  we  may
reasonably  conjecture,  that,  in  such  cases  as  those  of  Col.
Townsend,  and  of  the  Faquirs,  the  trance  also  is  produced
by  auto-magnetism,  and  by  a  rare  degree  of  the  concentra-
tive  power.  It  is  possible,  that  in  some  instances,  as  for
example  in  that  of  Col.  T.,  this  may  be  aided  by  a  peculiar
power  of  checking  the  heart's  action,  which  hardly  any  one
possesses.

Such  experiments,  notwithstanding  the  resuscitation  of


172  EXTASIS.

the  Faquirs,  cannot  be  considered  devoid  of  danger;  and,
therefore,  while  I  would  gladly  embrace  any  opportunity  of
studying  the  phenomenon,  should  it  occur  spontaneously  in
a  magnetic  case,  I  should  not  think  it  justifiable  to  try  to
produce  it.  I  have  seen  the  heart's  action  so  affected,  by  a
magnetiser,  at  the  earnest  desire  of  the  subject,  and  for  the
edification  of  certain  sceptical  gentlemen,  that  the  pulse
rose  to  200  beats  in  a  minute,  or  rather,  became  so  frequent
that  it  could  not  be  counted,  while  it  became,  as  it  rose  in
frequency,  so  feeble  as  hardly  to  be  felt.  I  have  seen  sick-
ness and  fainting  thus  produced,  and  it  is  possible  that  the
fainting  may  have  been  a  trance.  But  I  could  not  bring
myself,  either  to  try  such  experiments,  or  to  countenance
them  again,  after  seeing  the  effect  produced.

5.  With  regard  to  the  state  of  Extasis,  it  is  of  compara-
tively rare  occurrence,  and  this,  perhaps,  because  it  is  not
looked  for,  or  because  magnetisers  do  not  seek  to  produce
it.  It  agrees  with  trance,  in  the  complete  separation  from
ordinary  life,  and  even,  in  some  cases,  in  the  existence  of
danger,  if  pushed  too  far.  M.  Cahagnet  has  stated  that  he
has  seen  cases  which  convinced  him,  that  if  prolonged  a
little  longer,  death  might  have  ensued.  I  have  never  seen
this  peculiar  state,  nor  tried  to  produce  it ;  but,  as  already
mentioned,  I  have  seen,  in  the  ordinary  magnetic  sleep,  a
state  supervene,  obviously  different,  and  apparently  higher,
in  which  the  subject  was  intensely  happy,  and  complained
bitterly  of  being  brought  back  to  this  dull,  wretched,  every-
day life.  This  is  a  feature  of  Extasis,  and  therefore  it  is
probable  that,  if  we  were  to  try,  such  subjects  might  be
rendered  ecstatic.  Nevertheless,  I  should  hesitate  before
trying  the  experiment,  since  I  regard  it  as  not  altogether
free  from  danger.

6.  Extasis,  as  well  as  trance,  has  often  been  recorded  as
a  spontaneous  occurrence,  usually  in  females,  of  a  highly
excitable  temperament,  and  affected  with  hysteria  or  other
nervous  disease,  and  under  the  influence  of  intense  religious
or  devotional  excitement.  Such  a  person  is  called  an  "  Es-
tatica,"  and  many  such  "Estatice"  have  been  described.
These  stories  have  been  rejected,  off-hand,  as  mere  impos-
tures ;  but  we  must  beware  of  supposing  that  all  is  imposture
in  them,  even  where  the  patients  have  come  into  the  hands


RELIGIOUS  ECSTATICS.  17o

of  persons  willing  to  use  them,  either  for  purposes  of  gain,
or  in  order  to  promote  certain  religious  opinions.

The  "  Estatice  ''  see  visions,  of  saints  or  angels,  perhaps
of  heaven,  and  describe  these  visions  in  glowing  colors.
Now,  granting  that  these  are,  as  is  probably  often  the  case,
mere  dreams,  the  nature  of  which  has  been  dictated  by  the
priest,  or  suggested  by  reading,  there  is  nothing  in  this  to
justify  the  charge  of  imposture.  A  highly  susceptible  pa-
tient, whether  in  the  magnetic  sleep  or  not,  may  be  made,
as  in  the  experiments  on  suggestion,  to  see  anything  that
the  operator,  in  this  case  the  priest,  suggests  or  commands.
He,  on  the  other  hand,  is  perhaps  aware  of  his  power ;  as
some  priests  are,  who,  from  the  study  of  forgotten  books,
and  by  tradition  in  their  monasteries,  possess  a  knowledge  of
Animal  Magnetism,  and  have  practised  it  in  secret,  since
it  is  regarded,  by  the  decree  of  the  Church,  as  allied  to
magic,  if  not  identical  with  it.  His  strong  convictions  may
lead  him,  innocently,  to  suggest  to  the  estatica  precisely
what  he  wishes  to  find  true  ;  and  she  sees  his  patron  saint,
the  holy  Virgin,  or  any  other  saint,  in  a  form  as  real  to  her,
as  are  the  fancied  objects  to  Mr.  Lewis's  or  Dr.  Darling's
subjects.  If  she  is  desired  to  see  and  describe  heaven  or
hell,  she  sees  that  of  the  priest,  or  of  her  books,  and,  of
course,  finds  in  the  former  all  the  orthodox,  in  the  latter  all
heretics,  according  to  his  or  her  own  views.

All  this,  and  a  great  deal  more,  may  occur  quite  honestly:
but  it  is  not  wonderful,  if  an  ignorant  and  superstitious
priest,  of  whatever  denomination,  engaged,  perhaps  in  a
fierce  controversy  on  some  mysterious  point,  should,  now
and  then,  avail  himself  of  his  influence  over  his  patient,  or
of  her  delusions,  in  a  way  that  indicates  more  zeal  than
honesty.

But  the  estatica  herself  is  usually  sincere.  And,  to  show
that  in  these  spontaneous  cases  we  have  to  do  with  the  same
unknown  cause  as  that  which  produces  the  more  usual  phe-
nomena of  Animal  Magnetism,  I  may  mention,  that  these
patients  are  generally  also  somnambulists,  or  exhibit,  spon-
taneously, the  other  effects,  observed  in  the  lower  stages  of
Animal  Magnetism.  It  is  highly  probable  that  their  visions
are  frequently  the  results  of  real  clairvoyance,  which  many
of  them  possess,  in  so  far,  at  least,  as  regards  the  visions
which  refer  to  natural  objects  and  persons. But  such  cases,

15*


174  LUMINOUS  EMANATIONS.

interesting  as  they  undoubtedly  are,  have  not  been  studied
scientifically.

One  of  the  statements  most  frequently  made  with  regard
to  such  cases,  is,  not  only  that  the  patients  see  luminous
appearances  proceeding  from  objects  or  from  the  persons
present,  but  that  they  themselves  exhibit  a  luminous  appear-
ance, often  described  as  a  halo  or  glory  round  the  head.  I
am  not  prepared  to  reject  this  as  altogether  imaginary.
Baron  von  Reichenbach  has  proved,  that  luminous  pheno-
mena, visible  in  the  dark  to  the  sensitive,  who  are  far  from
rare,  proceed  from  all  objects,. more  or  less  brightly,  and
especially  from  the  head  and  hands  of  human  beings.  Some
are  so  sensitive  in  the  waking  state,  as  to  see  these  emana-
tions even  in  day-light ;  and  somnambulists  almost  always  do
so,  as  already  mentioned.  Now,  if  we  suppose  a  greatly
excited  state  of  the  nervous  system  to  intensify  these  lumi-
nous appearances,  they  may  be  observed  in  the  patients,  by
such  among  those  who  approach  them  as  are  more  or  less
sensitive,  even  in  day-light,  and  by  many  more  in  the  dark.
The  appearance,  once  seen,  and  regarded  as  miraculous,
will  not,  probably,  be  very  soberly  described,  and  may  have
been  much  exaggerated.

Here  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  it  has  been  recorded,
among  others,  by  Sir  Henry  Marsh,  that  dying  persons
often  exhibit  such  a  halo :  and  it  may  be  regarded  as  a
universal  belief,  that  dying  persons  often  acquire  the  power
of  seeing  what  may  be  called  visions,  but  which  are,  most
probably,  the  effects  of  clairvoyance.

Let  us  not,  then,  rashly  pronounce  all  ecstatics  to  be
impostors,  but  rather  investigate  the  phenomena.  I  would
not  even  rashly  decide  on  the  falsehood  of  the  apparent
suspension,  or  rather  counteraction,  of  the  law  of  gravity,
asserted  to  have  been  observed  in  such  cases,  as  welt  as  in
the  celebrated  one  of  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  and  in  which
the  patient  is  said  to  have  remained  for  a  short  period,  sus-
pended in  the  air,  without  support.  There  appear  to  be
facts,  in  artificial  magnetism,  which,  if  confirmed,  would
warrant  us  in  admitting  this  to  be  possible.  I  allude  to  the
strange  attraction  exercised  on  the  subject  by  the  magnetiser,
which,  in  cases  where  the  patient  was  extremely  susceptible,
and  the  magnetiser  very  powerful,  is  said  to  have  occasion-
ally reached  the  point  of  raising  the  former  from  the  floor,


EXTASIS  OFTEN  PREDICTED.  17-5

in  opposition  to  gravity,  and  of  preventing  him  from  falling,
in  positions  in  which  he  could  not  otherwise  have  remained
for  an  instant.

7.  With  regard  to  Extasis,  as  occurring  in  the  course  of
experiments  on  Animal  Magnetism,  it  must  be  regarded  in
so  far  as  artificial,  that  it  occurs  as  a  consequence  of  these
experiments,  and  would  probably,  in  most  cases,  not  occur
without  them.  Still,  as  those  in  whom  they  occur,  even
although  healthy,  are  the  most  sensitive  to  all  magnetic  or
odylic  influences,  extasis,  as  we  have  seen,  does  occur  spon-
taneously. And  even  in  the  course  of  magnetic  experiments
or  magnetic  treatment,  it  usually  comes  unsought,  perhaps
always  the  first  time,  although  the  subject  may  sometimes
become  able  to  induce  it  at  will.

When  it  occurs  in  a  subject,  fortunate  enough  to  be  in
the  hands  of  a  judicious  magnetiser,  who  does  not  thrust
his  notions  on  the  subject,  but  leaves  the  ecstatic  to  tell  his
own  story,  it  certainly  offers  very  remarkable  phenomena,
whatever  interpretation  be  put  upon  them.

The  patient,  or  the  healthy  subject,  will  often  predict
with  great  accuracy,  and  a  long  time  before  the  extasis,
the  day,  hour,  and  minute  of  its  occurrence.  E.,  formerly
spoken  of,  did  so  two  years  ago,  with  regard  to  one  remark-
able extasis  of  hers,  and  I  believe  also  predicted  several
less  striking  since  that  time.  As  I  write,  I  am  in  hourly
expectation  of  hearing  the  details  of  a  second  great,  or
strongly  marked  extasis,  which  she  has  for  some  time  fixed,
in  the  magnetic  sleep,  for  Jan.  8th ;  I  shall,  if  permitted,
give  some  account  of  it  in  Part  II.  E.,  in  her  waking
state,  is  not  aware  of  her  own  prediction,  which  of  course
is  not  spoken  of  to  her,  or  indeed  to  any  one,  except  my-
self and  one  or  two  others,  who  are  much  interested  in
the  result.

In  the  very  remarkable  work  of  M.  Cahagnet,  already
alluded  to,  there  is  an  account  of  a  most  remarkable  clair-
voyante,  who  could  at  pleasure,  and  with  the  permission  and
aid  of  her  magnetiser,  pass  into  the  highest  stage  of  extasis,
in  which  she  described  herself  as  ineffably  happy,  enjoying
converse  with  the  whole  spiritual  world,  and  herself  so  en-
tirely detached  from  this  sublunary  scene,  that  she  not  only
had  no  wish  to  return  to  it,  but  bitterly  reproached  M.  Ca-
hagnet for  forcing  her  back  to  life. On  one  occasion,  at


176  THE  EXTATIC  SOMNAMBULISTS

her  urgent  request,  he  allowed  her  to  enjoy  that  state  longer
than  usual.  But  he  took  the  precaution  of  placing  another
very  lucid  clairvoyant,  a  young  lad,  en  rapport  with  her,
with  strict  orders  to  watch  her  closely.  She  seemed  at  first
unconscious,  but  by  degrees  her  body  assumed  an  alarming
aspect,  became  to  appearance  dead,  that  is,  was  in  the  tor-
pid trance,  like  that  of  the  Faquirs,  pulseless,  cold,  and  de-
void of  respiration.  The  lad,  who  kept  his  eye  (the  in-
ternal vision  of  clairvoyance,)  on  her,  at  last  exclaimed,
"  she  is  gone  !  I  see  her  no  longer  !"  M.  Cahagnet  then,
after  much  fruitless  labor,  and  not  until,  as  he  informs  us,
he  had  prayed  fervently  to  be  enabled  to  restore  her  to  life,
succeeded  in  re-establishing  warmth  and  respiration.  The
girl,  on  waking,  overwhelmed  him  with  reproaches  for  what
he  had  just  done,  and  could  not  be  pacified  till  he  succeeded  in
convincing  her,  she  being  a  young  woman  of  pious  charac-
ter and  good  feeling,  that  what  she  desired  amounted  to
suicide,  and  was  a  grievous  crime,  for  which  he  would  be
held  responsible.

Various  other  examples  of  this  form  of  extasis  are  men-
tioned in  the  work  of  M.  Cahagnet,  to  which  I  refer  the
curious  reader.  M.  Cahagnet  is  since  dead,  or  I  should
have  endeavored  to  see  his  experiments  ;  he  was  an  opera-
tive, who  seems  to  have  been  possessed  of  excellent  abili-
ties, and  to  have  made  his  observations  with  great  care.
His  subjects  exhibited  clairvoyance  in  its  most  perfect  forms,
and  most,  or  all,  of  them  also  passed  into  extasis,  in  which
they  described  the  spiritual  world.  Indeed,  this  is  the  dis-
tinguishing: feature  of  extasis :  and  the  extreme  form  above
described,  where  the  body  assumes  the  aspect  of  death,  as
in  trance,  is  very  rare.  In  general  the  ecstatics,  as  in  the
cases  of  M.  Cahagnet,  and  in  that  of  E.,  describe  minutely
all  they  see  and  feel.

Now  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  M.  Cahagnet  was  an  en-
thusiast, in  the  genuine  and  good  sense  of  the  term,  in  re-
ference to  this  subject,  and  no  wonder,  when  such  facts  were
presented  to  him.  But  I  can  see  no  reason,  in  his  book,
to  suppose  that  his  enthusiasm  in  any  way  affected  his  in-
tellect. Many  are  ready  to  imagine  without  enquiry,  that
the  visions  of  his  ecstatics,  concerning  the  spiritual  world,
are  only  dreams,  the  character  of  which  is  determined  by
his  views  on  the  subject,  and  hence  the  remarkable  agree-


OF  M.  CAHAGNET.  177

ment  which  in  general  exists  between  the  statements  of  his
different  ecstatics.  Such  was  the  view  which  first  offered
itself  to  my  own  mind.  But  I  am  very  averse  to  deciding
such  questions  without  ^enquiry,  and  on  reading  further  and
more  attentively,  I  found  that  this  view  would  not  apply  to
all  the  facts  recorded.  Indeed,  if  on  some  points  the  ecsta-
tics expressed  views  and  opinions  in  accordance  with  his,  in
many  others  they  not  only  differed  from  him,  but  pertina-
ciously held  their  own  opinions,  and  the  result  finally  was,
that  he  adopted,  and  says  he  was  compelled  to  adopt,  no-
tions in  regard  to  the  spiritual  world,  entirely  opposed  to
his  former  views,  which  seem  to  have  been  materialistic.

I  do  not  propose,  in  such  a  work  as  this,  the  object  of
which  is  chiefly  to  record  my  own  observations,  to  enter
fully  into  such  matters  as  these,  of  which  I  have  no  expe-
rience. But  I  have  thought  it  right  to  mention  the  subject,
and  to  refer  to  the  work  of  M.  Cahagnet,  which  will  be
found  very  interesting  by  all  those  who  wish  to  penetrate,
as  far  as  is  permitted,  into  the  mysteries  of  the  world  of
spirits.  If  there  be  a  spiritual  world  at  all,  and  such  is  the
almost  universal  belief  of  mankind,  it  is  at  least  possible,
that  the  revelations  of  ecstatics  may  be  more  or  less  true,
just  as  they  may  be  supposed  to  be  mere  dreams.  I  con-
fess that  what  most  strongly  affects  my  mind,  and  deters
me  from  assuming  the  latter  hypothesis,  until  I  shall  have
been  enabled  to  study  the  phenomena  of  Extasis,  is  the  sin-
gular harmony  between  the  visions  of  different  ecstatics,
between  those,  for  example  of  E.,  and  those  of  M.  Cahag-
net's  subjects.  I  may  add,  that  Dr.  Haddock,  in  whose
house  E.  lives,  and  who  has  described  the  phenomena  of
her  case,  is  a  gentleman  of  cool  and  reflecting  mind,  a  good
observer,  and  besides,  as  I  know  from  experience,  a  most
judicious  and  prudent  magnetiser.  And  I  can  also  state,
having,  by  his  kindness,  been  permitted  to  study  his  inte-
resting clairvoyante,  although  not  in  the  extatic  stage,  at
my  leisure,  and  in  his  absence,  as  well  as  when  he  was  pre-
sent, that  she  is  a  genuinely  honest,  truthful,  and  intelligent
girl,  although  she  has  not  had  the  advantages  of  even  a
common  education.  I  have,  therefore,  no  reason  to  doubt
the  facts  as  described  by  Dr.  Haddock,  any  more  than
those  given  by  M.  Cahagnet  and  others,  whatever  may
hereafter  prove  to  be  their  true  nature.


178  THE  SPIRITUAL  WORLD.

If  the  visions  of  magnetic  ecstatics  be  nothing  but  dreams,
then,  as  described  by  the  observers  of  such  cases,  they  must
be  regarded  as  dreams  of  a  very  remarkable  and  peculiar
character,  and  they  are  found,  in  different  cases,  very  closely
to  resemble  each  other  in  their  general  or  essential  pecu-
liarities. The  ecstatics  find  themselves  (and  this  is  said  by
all,  whether  educated  or  not,  and,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  not
only  without  prompting  on  the  part  of  the  magnetiser,  but
very  often  to  his  great  surprise,  and  sometimes  contrary  to
his  belief,)  in  communication  with  the  spiritual  world.
They  hold  long  conversations  with  spirits,  to  whom  they
often  give  names,  and  who,  in  many  cases,  according  to
their  account,  are  the  spirits  of  departed  friends  or  relations.
The  remarks  and  answers  of  these  visionary  beings  are
reported  by  the  ecstatics.  Some  of  them  affirm  that  every
man  has  an  attendant  good  spirit,  perhaps  also  an  evil  one
of  inferior  power.  Some  can  summon,  either  of  themselves
or  with  the  aid  of  their  attendant  spirit,  the  spirit  or  vision
of  any  dead  relation  or  friend,  and  even  of  persons  also
dead,  whom  neither  they  nor  the  magnetiser  have  ever  seen,
whom  perhaps  no  one  present  has  seen;  and  the  minute
descriptions  given  in  all  these  cases,  of  the  persons  seen  or
summoned,  is  afterwards  found  to  be  correct.  Many  other
details,  some  of  them  still  more  astounding  are  given,  but,
for  the  reason  already  given,  I  confine  myself  here,  to  a
brief  general  indication  of  the  strange  phenomena  of  Ex-
tasis,  which,  be  it  remembered,  I  have  not  myself  had  an
opportunity  of  observing.

Now,  certainly  such  visions  as  these,  whatever  be  their
real  nature,  are  not  ordinary  dreams.  It  is  idle  to  reject
them  as  altogether  imaginary,  and  illogical  to  do  so  without
enquiry.  And  I  repeat,  that  all  those  who  believe  in  the
existence  of  a  spiritual  world,  must  feel  that  they  may  pos-
sibly contain  revelations  of  it.

The  belief  in  the  existence  of  the  world  of  spirits  is  as
old  as  mankind  ;  and  the  belief  that  men  are,  in  certain  cir-
cumstances, capable  of  entering  into  communication  with  it,
it  is  not  much  less  venerable.  It  has  been  the  favorite  dream
of  philosophers,  poets,  and  divines,  in  all  ages,  and  there-
fore, without  venturing  to  pronounce  dogmatically,  I  would
say  to  all,  observe,  study,  reflect  and  examine,  before  coming
to  a  decision  on  this  mysterious  subject. It  is  easy  to  say


THE  POUGHKEEPSJi;  8EER.  179

that  Swedcnborg  was  a  mad  enthusiast  ;  hut  it  is  not  the
less  certain,  that  he  was  a  man  of  prodigious  ability  and
learning,  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  science  of  his  day  ;
and  the  most  striking  circumstance,  in  my  opinion,  con-
nected with  magnetic  ecstatics  is,  that  they  agree  in  very
many  points  with  Swedenborg  ;  and  that  this  agreement  is
found  to  occur  precisely  in  regard  to  those  things  which  we
are  accustomed  to  regard  in  him,  as  the  products  of  an  in-
sane enthusiasm.  It  is  observed,  moreover,  in  ignorant  per-
sons, who  have  never  even  heard  of  the  name  and  opinions
of  the  Swedish  philosopher.

I  do  not  here  refer  to  the  case  of  the  Poughkeepsie  Seer,
Andrew  Jackson  Davis.  I  think  there  can  be  no  doubt,
that  his  revelations,  which  present  an  appalling  hotch-potch
of  all  possible  metaphysical  systems,  are  essentially  the
genuine  results  of  a  most  remarkable  degree  of  magnetic
sympathy  with  all  who  approach  him,  which  leads  him  to
retail,  as  they  are  imaged  in  his  own  mind,  the  hetero-
geneous opinions  and  ideas  of  such  as  act  upon  him,  un-
known to  themselves,  and  have  read  and  thought  upon  me-
taphysical subjects.

There  are,  I  believe,  cases  of  Extasis,  not  disturbed  by
this  kind  of  sympathy,  and  such  cases  are  well  worthy  of
and  will  richly  reward  the  most  diligent  and  attentive  in-
vestigation.

In  my  next  Letter,  I  shall  go  on  to  those  facts  connected
with  the  excitement  and  manifestation  of  individual  mental
faculties,  which  have  been  called  by  some,  with  not  a  happy
selection  of  terms,  Phreno-mesmerism,  or  Phreno-magnet-
ism.  I  have  already  very  briefly  alluded  to  the  fact  that
the  mental  faculties  may  be  roused  into  action,  in  a  person
who  is  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  in  a  variety  of  ways.  I  now
propose  to  examine  this  matter  somewhat  more  fully.


LETTER  XL

1.  When  certain  subjects  are  thrown  into  the  magnetic
sleep,  it  is  found,  on  trial,  that  by  touching  certain  parts  of


180  PHRENOLOGY.

the  head,  marked,  and  sometimes  violent,  manifestations  of
certain  mental  faculties  occur.  It  is  further  observed  that
these  manifestations  correspond,  in  their  nature,  to  the  part
of  the  head  touched,  on  the  principles  of  Phrenology.  This
has  been  proclaimed  by  some  as  a  convincing  proof  of  the
truth  of  Phrenology,  and  by  others  either  rejected,  because
it  seemed  to  favor  that  science,  or  it  has  been  ascribed  to
other  causes,  entirely  independent  of  the  cerebral  organs  of
the  Phrenologist.  Both  parties  appear  to  me  to  have  been
hasty  in  their  conclusions:  for  the  phenomena  may,  and  do
occur,  occasionally,  in  such  a  way  as  not  necessarily  to
prove  the  truth  of  the  organology  of  Gall,  while,  on  the
other  hand,  cases  are  met  with  in  which  we  cannot,  I  think,
explain  the  facts  except  on  the  hypothesis  of  Gall,  that
every  mental  faculty,  whether  it  be  a  propensity,  a  senti-
ment, or  an  intellectual  aptitude,  is  dependent  for  its  mani-
festation in  this  life,  on  a  certain  portion  of  the  brain.

2.  This  is  not  the  place  for  a  discussion  of  the  truths  of
Phrenology,  even  if  these  were  less  generally  adopted  and
felt  to  be  true  than  they  are.  In  spite  of  the  storm  of
abuse  which  was  showered  on  Gall  and  Spurzheim  as  quacks
and  impostors,  their  anatomy  of  the  brain  is  now  universally
admitted  to  be  the  best,  and  their  mode  of  dissecting  it  the
only  good  one ;  and  their  view  of  the  constitution  of  the
mental  faculties,  considered  by  itself,  as  well  as  their  classi-
fication, are  regarded  as  eminently  practical,  and  at  least
equal  to  those  of  any  other  metaphysician.  Men  see  that
those  who  have  thus  distinguished  themselves  as  investiga-
tors in  Anatomy  and  as  thinkers  in  Mental  Philosophy,  are
not  likely  to  have  been  quacks,  and  still  less  impostors.
And  even  their  organology,  after  so  short  an  interval  as
barely  half  a  century,  is  no  longer  regarded  as  absurd,  but,
on  the  contrary,  its  ideas  pervade  our  conversation  and
literature,  and  even  its  language  is  employed,  as  singularly
precise  and  convenient,  by  writers  of  every  class.  Phre-
nology has  passed  through  the  first  stage  of  violent  opposi-
tion, in  which  it  was  decried  as  a  mischievous  novelty ;  it
has  even  passed  through  the  second,  in  which,  as  invariably
happens  with  new  truths,  it  was  declared,  by  those  who  had
at  first  denounced  it  as  new,  to  be  old  and  well  known ;  and
it  will  soon  be  generally  not  only  admitted,  but  taught  as
true  science. The  late  Lord  Jeffrey,  in  an  article  on  the


REAL  ORIGIN  OF  GALL'S  SYSTEM.  181

subject  in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  boldly  scouted  it  in  every
aspect,  and  fulminated  the  memorable  dictum,  that  "there
is  not  the  smallest  reason  to  suppose  that  the  brain  is  con-
cerned in  any  mental  process,  save  only  the  perceptions
derived  from  the  external  senses  !"  a  statement  which,  even
at  that  time,  must  have  appeared  ludicrously  absurd,  and  a
proof  of  the  grossest  ignorance,  to  all  acquainted  with  either
physiology  or  mental  philosophy;  not  to  speak  of  those  who
could  see  what  daily  passed  around  them,  and  who  saw  the
effects  of  a  blow  on  the  head,  or  an  apoplexy,  on  all  the
mental  powers  without  exception ;  or  who  know  that  idiots
have  commonly  either  singularly  small  or  else  misshapen
and  diseased  heads,  and  that  there  is  no  instance  on  record
of  any  one  whose  head  measured  less  than  fourteen  inches
in  its  greatest  circumference,  who  possessed  human  faculties
and  intelligence  at  all,  while  yet  many  such  unfortunates
have  lived,  or  rather  vegetated,  possessed  of  a  few  animal
instincts  and  of  the  external  senses.  Nay,  I  may  go  much
further,  and  say  that  few,  if  any,  are  now  to  be  found  who
doubt  that  a  well-formed  head,  that  is,  brain,  is  desirable ;
or  who  will  deny  that  a  full,  high,  broad  forehead  indicates
superior  intellect ;  that  a  large  base  and  posterior  part  of
the  head  indicates  powerful  animal  propensities,  and  that  a
full  development  of  the  coronal  region  is  somehow  connected
with  refined,  virtuous,  and  religious  feelings.  These  three
great  regions  are  admitted  by  most  people,  but  they  hesitate
at  what  they  call  the  small  details  of  the  organology ;  they
imagine  Grail  to  have  invented  these,  and  to  have,  of  his  own
fancy,  subdivided  the  three  regions,  which  they  suppose  to
have  been  generally  admitted  before  his  time,  into  those
smaller  mappings,  which  to  some  are  so  great  a  stumbling-
block. Such  is  a  very  common  notion  of  Phrenology.

But  that  notion  is  not  only  unfounded,  it  is  the  direct  re-
verse of  the  truth.  The  three  great  regions  of  the  brain
were  not  admitted  before  Gall's  time.  Some  authors  had
done,  what  he  did  not ;  they  had  arbitrarily  mapped  out  the
head,  not  from  observation,  but  from  fancy.  Some  of  these
cranial  maps  are  extant,  and  one  exhibits  the  intellect  lo-
cated in  the  occiput.  And  even  Gall  himself  did  not  at  first
recognise  or  admit  the  intellectual,  animal,  and  moral  regions.
It  was  only  after  he  had,  by  observation  and  comparison,
pursued  with  unwearied  diligence  for  years,  detected  the
16


182  EFFECTS  OF  TOUCHING  THE  HEAD

connection  of  the  powers  of  certain  isolated  feelings,  propen-
sities, and  talents,  and  of  their  absence  or  deficiency,  with
the  more  or  less  perfect  development  of  certain  parts  of  the
brain,  indicated  externally  by  the  corresponding  parts  of  the
head,  that  he  was  at  last  struck  with  the  fact,  that  the  or-
gans of  certain  allied  feelings,  &c,  were  allied  in  position
also ;  that  the  groups  of  the  domestic  feelings,  of  the  observ-
ing powers,  of  the  reflecting  faculties,  and  of  the  higher  sen-
timents, were  represented  by  groups  of  organs  associated
together  in  place.  Hence  the  idea,  which  belongs  to  Gall,
of  the  three  great  regions.  His  march  was  precisely  the
reverse  of  what  is  often  attributed  to  him.  It  was  strictly
inductive ;  and  the  details  of  mapping,  which  are  often  de-
nied and  rejected  as  purely  arbitrary,  were  actually  the  first
observed,  and  furnished  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of
those  great  regions,  which  are  admitted  by  those  who  reject
the  details,  and  are,  indeed,  instinctively  felt  to  be  true,
when  pointed  out.

Such  being  the  case,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  anticipate
the  universal  reception  of  Phrenology  in  the  course  of
another  half  century  or  another  generation.  I  may  safely
hazard  the  prediction,  that  the  Edinburgh  Review  will  not
venture  again  to  issue  the  anti-physiological  dictum  above
referred  to.  Should  it  do  so,  the  merest  tyro  among  its
readers  would  laugh  it  to  scorn.  The  lamented  author,  who
fell  into  so  gross  an  error,  (which,  by  the  way,  was  not,  so
far  as  I  know,  reprehended,  or  even  noticed,  by  any  physi-
ologist, except  the  phrenologists,)  when  he  ventured  into
regions  previously  unexplored  by  him,  announced,  in  the
same  article,  his  intention,  if  at  the  end  of  ten  years  from
that  date,  phrenology  should  still  survive,  to  annihilate  it
once  more.  At  the  end  of  the  ten  years,  with  the  inconve-
nient tenacity  of  life  exhibited  by  all  truths,  physiological  or
metaphysical,  or  of  any  other  kind,  phrenology  was  more
rampant  than  ever,  and  as  we  have  seen,  it  continues  to
exist.

"  The  thane  of  Cawdor  lives ;  a  prosp'rous  gentleman ;"

and  phrenology  still  awaits  the  coup  de  grace,  for  that  pro-
mise was  never  fulfilled.

3.  As  I  admit  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  phrenology,
without  imagining  so  new  a  science  to  be  perfect  or  com-
plete, I  am  quite  prepared  to  find  it  confirmed  in  the  mag-


IN  THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  183

netic  sleep,  as  it  is  in  the  waking  state. Let  us  now
what  the  facts  are.

In  some  magnetic  sleepers,  if  we  touch  with  the  finger  any
given  part  of  the  head,  such,  for  example,  as  the  organ  of
Tune,  or  of  Self-Esteem,  without  a  word  of  suggestion,  we
instantly  obtain  a  corresponding  manifestation.  It  is  really,
in  many  cases,  like  touching  the  keys  of  an  organ  (in  the
other  sense  of  the  word)  when  the  bellows  are  full  of  wind,
and  the  sound  instantly  follows.  If  Tune  be  the  organ
touched,  the  subject  forthwith  breaks  into  song.  If  it  be
Self-Esteem,  he  throws  back  his  head,  struts  with  immense
dignity,  and  declares  himself  superior  to  the  rest  of  man-
kind. Touch  the  organ  of  Love  of  children,  and  he  dandles
an  imaginary  babe,  with  most  paternal  affection.  Touch
Benevolence,  the  expression  changes  to  that  of  compassion ;
his  hand  is  thrust  into  his  pocket,  and  held  forth  with  all  his
store.  Touch  Acquisitiveness,  the  griping  miser  instantly
appears,  and  with  appropriate  look  and  speech,  the  money
is  restored  to  its  original  receptacle ;  it  is  well  if  the  nearest
object,  however  bulky,  be  not  also  "boned,"  to  use  a  slang
but  expressive  phrase.  If  Caution  be  the  stop  touched,  the
music  is  the  most  distressing,  nay,  often  appalling  pantomime
of  fear,  or  of  misery.  But  if  Hope  be  played  on,  the  clouds
vanish,  and  joyous  sunshine  gilds  every  feature.  Such  are
a  few  of  the  effects  produced.  I  speak  of  but  a  small  part
of  what  I  have  often  seen,  and  often  produced.  It  is  unne-
cessary to  say  that  I  have  done  so  in  cases  where  no  decep-
tion was  or  could  be  practised.  The  question  is  rather,  How
are  these  effects  produced  ?

4.  There  are  two  theories;  the  first  supposes  them  to  be
the  mere  results  of  the  operator's  will,  or  of  sympathy  with
him;  the  second  believes  them  to  be  the  genuine  results  of
the  effect  of  the  touch  in  exciting  the  subjacent  cerebral
organs.

I  believe  that  both  are  true  ;  that  is,  that  some  cases
may  be  explained  on  the  first  theory,  but  that  other  cases
exist,  in  which  it  does  not  suffice ;  the  second  alone  can  be
adopted  in  these.

There  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt,  that  in  some  cases  the
will  of  the  operator  is  almost  omnipotent.  Even  in  the
conscious  impressible  state  of  Mr.  Lewis,  or  in  that  of  Dr.
Darling,  precisely  similar  effects  are  produced  by  suggestion.


184  CASES  IN  WHICH  SYMPATHY

The  subject,  if  told  that  he  is  Father  Mathew,  delivers  a
lecture  on  temperance  ;  if  desired  to  sing  or  spout,  he  does
so  ;  if  persuaded  that  he  is  ruined,  he  exhibits  in  perfection
the  pantomime  of  despair,  and  so  on,  as  I  have  often  seen.
And  as  I  have  also  seen  many  effects,  of  all  kinds,  produced
by  the  silent  will,  I  cannot  doubt  that  it  is,  in  some  cases,
capable  of  replacing  suggestion.  Besides,  to  a  person  ac-
quainted with  phrenology,  the  suggestion  may  be  conveyed
by  touching  a  particular  part  of  the  head.  I  confess  that
I  think  that  this  last  explanation,  although  certainly  possi-
ble, can  apply,  at  most,  to  a  very  few  persons ;  for  on  trial,
I  seldom  find  any  one,  not  a  professed  and  practical  phreno-
logist, who  can  point  out  the  position  of  the  phrenological
organs,  with  any  degree  of  accuracy,  even  among  those  who
admit  phrenology  to  be  true.

Further,  the  manifestations  can  be  often  called  out,  not
only  by  suggestion,  but  by  touching  other  parts  of  the  body
than  the  head,  and  that,  in  cases  where  perhaps  touching
the  head,  as  often  happens,  has  no  effect.  Some  have  endea-
vored to  show,  that  touching  a  particular  part  of  the  arm,
leg,  or  trunk,  is  followed  by  the  same  manifestation  at  all
times  and.  in  all  cases  ;  but  I  have  not  seen  any  good  evi-
dence of  this.  Mr.  Lewis  informs  me,  that  in  cases  in  which
he  can  produce  such  effects  by  the  will,  he  can  do  so,  what-
ever part  he  touches,  and  can  call  out  the  same  faculty  by
touching  many  different  parts.  His  will,  as  I  have  already
mentioned,  is  singularly  powerful.

As  to  sympathy,  it  is  necessary  in  so  far,  as  it  is  a  con-
dition indispensable  to  the  successful  exercise  of  the  will.
But  no  one  who  has  ever  seen  these  beautiful  manifestations,
■which  are  invaluable,  from  their  truth  and  beauty,  to  the
intelligent  artist,  can  suppose  that  the  state  of  the  subject
is  a  mere  reflexion  of  the  operator's  mind.  For  while  the
latter  is  tranquil,  the  former  may  be  heaving  with  emotion ;
and,  as  I  have  seen,  accidental  emotions  in  the  operator
are,  very  often,  not  communicated  to  the  subject,  who  may
be  an  excellent  one,  and  is  perhaps  acting  some  passion  or
feeling  to  the  life,  when  the  operator  becomes  convulsed
with  laughter,  &c,  and  yet  he  is  not  thereby  affected
at  all.

I  therefore  admit,  nay  I  maintain,  that  there  are  many
cases,  in  which  suggestion,  or  the  will  of  the  operator,  or


AND  SUGGESTION  DO  NOT  ACT.  V*>i>

sympathy  with  him,  will  suffice  to  explain  the  occurrence  of

the  facts.

6.  But  there  are  other  cases,  in  which  this  explanation
does  not  apply.  And  I  would  again  remark,  that  I  have
taken  all  precautions  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  deception.

First,  the  subject  is  often  unacquainted  with  the  very
name  of  Phrenology,  and  ignorant  of  the  position  of  a  single
organ.  Yet  he  will,  if  a  good  case,  respond  to  the  touch
instantly  wherever  it  maybe  made,  just  as  where  will  is  the
agent.

But  secondly,  when  the  operator  is  himself,  as  often  hap-
pens, as  ignorant  of  phrenology  as  the  patient,  he  is  sur-
prised and  confounded  at  the  results,  because,  when  touching
a  part,  he  knew  not  its  function,  and  therefore  had  no
volition  on  the  matter  at  all.  Yet  here  also,  as  I  have
seen,  the  manifestation  will  often  come  out  as  well  as  before.
Nay,  the  pressure  of  a  chair,  or  of  the  wall,  on  a  part  of
the  head,  will  sometimes,  when  quite  accidental,  as  well  as
the  accidental  touch  of  a  hand  or  arm,  whether  of  the  ope-
rator or  not,  produce  the  same  effects.  Indeed,  it  often
happens,  that  when  an  operator  who  knows  phrenology,
intends  to  touch  one  organ,  and,  turning  to  speak  to  some
one,  touches  a  wrong  organ,  with  the  idea  of  the  first  in  his
mind,  or  when  his  hand  slips  from  one  organ  to  another,  he
is  surprised  at  what  appears  a  wrong  result,  till  he  detects
the  cause  of  it,  and  all  this  in  cases,  where  the  subject  has
no  idea  whatever  of  phrenology.

Thirdly,  it  frequently  happens,  that  the  operator,  when
touching  an  organ,  either  does  not  know  what  manifestation
to  expect,  or  possibly  expects  one,  and  yet  an  admirable
manifestation  is  the  result,  different  from  any  he  had
imagined.  Thus,  in  trying  a  number  of  organs,  I  had  no
idea  what  to  expect  from  that  of  weight,  which  is  believed
to  give  the  sense  of  resistance,  and  to  aid  in  preserving  the
balance.  I  tried  on  two  subjects,  both  seated,  and  I  took
no  time  to  consider  what  would  be  the  result.  The  first
drew  himself  up  from  a  stooping  posture,  into  a  perfectly
upright  one,  with  a  deep  sigh.  With  this  in  my  mind,  I
tried  the  other,  but  he  immediately  leaned  forward,  his  face
assumed  an  expression  of  horror,  and  he  screamed  out  that
he  was  falling  into  a  bottomless  abyss.  Both  manifestations
belong  to  the faculty,  but  most  certainly  neither  was  ex-

16*


186  COMBINED  MANIFESTATIONS.

pected  by  me.  When  I  tried,  in  the  second  case,  the  organ
of  Size,  the  subject  instantly  spoke  of  an  elephant,  40  feet
high,  which  he  saw,  "  a  big  black  beastie,"  as  he,  being  an
Aberdonian,  called  it  at  first,  with  that  intense  delight  in
diminutive  terms,  which  characterises  the  natives  of  Bon
Accord.  I  had  formerly  seen  the  same  faculty  manifested
in  the  form  of  the  perception  of  vast  distance,  one  of  its
functions  being  to  observe  distance,  and  was  expecting  that,
rather  than  the  "beastie."  I  might  give  other  examples,
but  I  refrain.

Fourthly :  when  I  tried  the  combination  of  two  or  more
organs,  touched  at  once,  combined  manifestations  came  out,
as  quickly  as  the  single  ones,  and  before  I  could  even  con-
jecture what  was  likely  to  ensue.  Thus,  when  I  touched
Acquisitiveness  and  Benevolence  at  once,  in  a  subject  in
whom  both  came  out  well  separately,  he  began  discoursing
to  an  imaginary  beggar,  with  his  hand  in  his  pocket,  which
however  he  could  not  prevail  on  himself  to  extract  from
thence,  concerning  the  duty  of  assisting  the  poor  by  good
advice,  and  by  taking  trouble  about  them,  rather  than  by
giving  money.  In  another  subject,  I  obtained,  accidentally,
a  very  fine  combination,  indicating  at  the  same  time,  that
the  excitement  produced  by  touch  lasts  for  a  certain  time,
which  is  longer  in  some  cases  than  in  others.  When  Vene-
ration was  excited,  the  subject  exhibited  a  beautiful  picture
of  devotion.  He  knelt  and  prayed,  with  a  fervor  and  in-
tensity of  expression  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  surpass.
Humility  was  intensely  predominant  in  his  gesture.  When
Self-esteem  was  touched,  the  organ  being  large,  he  exhibit-
ed pride  and  hauteur  to  a  most  ludicrous  degree,  and  this
faculty  was  kept  excited  for  a  time.  At  this  moment  a
gentleman  entered  the  room,  who  anxiously  desired  to
witness  the  manifestation  of  humble  devotion.  I  therefore
touched  Veneration,  being  firmly  convinced  that  I  should
obtain,  as  I  had  frequently  done,  the  former  result;  but  I
was  disappointed.  Devotion  indeed  came  out,  but  with  a
totally  different  character.  Instead  of  kneeling,  he  stood
erect,  and  his  prayer  began;  "  0  Lord!  I  thank  thee  that
thou  hast  made  me  so  much  superior  to  all  other  men  in
knowledge  of  thee,"  &c.  The  tone  of  voice  was  no  longer
humble,  and  in  short,  an  artist,  wishing  to  paint  a  picture
of  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple,  and  the  Publican  afar  off,


EFFECTS  IN  THE  CONSCIOUS  STATE.  187

would  have  found  this  man,  in  his  last  state,  a  perfect  model
for  the  former;  in  his  first,  an  equally  perfect  study  for  the
latter.  I  have  seen  many  other  instances  of  combined
minifestations,  where  I  knew  not  what  to  expect.

From  the  above  considerations  I  think  it  is  evident,  that
there  are  cases  in  which  Sympathy  and  Will  do  not  suffice
for  the  explanation,  and  where  nothing  but  the  admission
of  the  phrenological  organs,  and  of  the  influence  of  the
operator  on  these  by  contact,  can  explain  the  results
obtained.

7.  I  have  seen  cases  in  which  I  could  easily,  by  touch,
excite  some  organs,  but  not  others,  which  in  other  cases  I
could  easily  bring  into  action.  In  one  case,  where  the
organ  of  Caution  could  not  be  excited,  my  hand  happened
to  touch  that  of  Secretiveness,  lying  just  below  it,  unknown
to  me.  Instantly  a  bystander  said,  "Look  !  look  !  what  is
she  doing  ?"  and  I  saw  her  secreting  under  her  shawl,  some
small  object  taken  very  cunningly  from  the  table.  I  was
thinking  of  and  desiring  a  manifestation  of  fear  or  of  terror.

8.  Lastly,  I  have  observed  that,  in  some  persons,  in  their
ordinary  state,  certain  faculties  not  only  become  unusually
active,  but  are  easily  excitable  by  touching  their  organs.
A  lady  mentioned  to  me  that  she  was  annoyed  with  spectral
illusions,  which  indicated  morbid  activity  of  Form,  Color,
and  other  perceptive  faculties.  I  tried  the  effect  of  touch-
ing, in  succession,  all  the  perceptive  organs.  Those  of
Form,  Color,  Size,  Order,  and  Number,  all  responded  to
the  touch,  and  exhibited  beautiful  objects  of  many  kinds,
singly,  or  in  vast  numbers ;  grouped  in  disorder,  or  symme-
trically arranged;  grey,  or  splendid  in  varied  hues;  and
extending  to  infinite  distance,  and  small  or  large,  according
to  the  organs  touched.  When  Weight  was  touched,  she  felt
as  in  a  bad  dream,  as  if  falling  from  a  precipice,  or  the
ground  falling  away  from  her  feet.

This  case  confirms  that  theory  of  spectral  illusions,  which
refers  some  of  them  to  morbid  excitement  of  the  perceptive
organ,  which,  however,  does  not  explain  all  spectral  ap-
pearances.


On  the  whole,  we  must,  I  think,  admit  that  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  and  in  susceptible  subjects,  the  mental  faculties


188  EFFECTS  OF  MAGNETISM

may  be  readily  excited  to  action  by  touching,  or  pointing  at,
their  organs,  as  well  as  by  the  will  of  the  operator.  See
Part  II.


The  next  subject  to  which  I  wish  to  direct  your  atten-
tion, is  the  fact,  that  the  lower  animals  are  susceptible  of
the  magnetic  influence.  This  has  been  often  observed,  and
it  is  important,  as  excluding  the  action  of  the  imagination,
as  well  as  the  idea  of  collusion,  and  leading  to  the  conclu-
sion that  a  real  influence  exists,  which  passes  from  the  ope-
rator to  the  subject.

1.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  celebrated  horse-
tamer,  and  others  who  were  in  the  habit  of  subduing  un-
broken or  savage  animals,  have  used,  perhaps  without  know-
ing it,  some  magnetic  process.  The  great  Irish  horse-tamer
is  said  to  have  shut  himself  up  for  a  short  time  with  the
horse,  and  at  the  end  of  the  time  to  have  produced  him
tamed.  He  evidently  had  a  secret,  and  it  would  appear
that  it  must  have  been  very  simple,  or  he  would  not  have
been  so  fearful  of  its  being  discovered.  It  is  said,  however,
that  either  he,  or  other  tamers,  breathed  into  the  animal's
nostrils,  and  certainly  this  process  has  been  found  very
powerful  by  some  who  have  tried  it.  Now,  we  know  that
breathing  is  one  of  the  processes  adopted  in  Animal  Magnet-
ism, and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  breath  is  strongly
charged  with  the  influence.  The  influence  of  the  human
eye  on  the  lower  animals  is  a  familiar  fact,  and  a  great
part,  if  not  the  whole  of  the  feats  of  Van  Amburgh,  and
others  who  subdue  lions  and  tigers,  depends  on  the  use  of
the  eye.  They  never,  if  they  can  help  it,  especially  in  the
case  of  very  fierce  animals,  withdraw  their  fixed  gaze,  and
so  long  as  that  is  kept  up,  and  the  eye  of  the  animal  is
fascinated  in  this  way,  so  long  does  he  attempt  nothing
against  his  subduer.  It  is  well  known,  however,  that  it  is
often  dangerous  to  relax  the  steadiness  of  the  gaze,  or  to
turn  away  the  eye.  Now  gazing  is  an  extremely  powerful
means  of  magnetising,  so  much  so,  that  in  my  experience,
I  always  begin,  in  a  new  case,  by  gazing  steadily  for  five  or
ten  minutes  into  the  eyes*  of  the  subject.  Mr.  Lewis,  whose
power  is  so  remarkable,  operates  chiefly  by  gazing,  and
those  who  have  seen  him  operate,  can  readily  understand


ON  THE  LOWEE  ANIMALS.  189

the  fascination  of  the  eye,  when  used  with  so  intense  a
power  of  concentration  as  is  found  in  Mr.  Lewis.  Within
these  few  days,  Mr.  Lewis  easily  and  completely  magnetised
a  cat,  in  the  presence  of  several  persons.  A  case  was
lately  published  in  the  Zoist,  in  which  the  Duke  of  Marl-
borough magnetised  a  very  fierce  dog  by  gazing  alone.

Miss  Martineau  has  also  recently  published  a  case,  in
which  she  not  only  magnetised  a  cow,  suffering  from  acute
disease,  but  cured  the  animal  by  magnetic  treatment.

It  would  appear  that  the  lower  animals,  being  in  a  more  natu-
ral state  than  civilised  man,  are  generally,  perhaps  always,
susceptible  to  magnetic  influence,  as  man,  in  his  natural  state,
probably  is  also.  Experiments  on  this  subject  would  certain-
ly yield  very  interesting  results.

2.  Not  only  are  the  lower  animals  susceptible  of  the  hu-
man magnetic  influence,  but  they  can  exert  a  similar  influ-
ence on  each  other.  The  power  of  the  snake  to  fascinate
birds  by  gazing,  is  pure  Animal  Magnetism.  Not  only  is
this  fact  daily  observed  in  America,  but  snakes  are  very
often  seen  to  fascinate  larger  animals,  such  as  the  domestic
cat,  and  even  at  incredible  distances.  Mr.  Lewis  informs
me  that  he  has  often  seen  this.  The  cat  becomes  strange-
ly agitated,  when  those  observe  it  see  no  snake ;  but  a  snake
is  always  found  on  looking  for  it,  with  its  eyes  fixed  on  the
cat.  The  latter  is  compelled  to  move  towards  the  reptile,
and  after  a  time,  falls  down  apparently  unconscious,  and
quite  helpless,  unable  to  use  its  limbs,  when  if  not  rescued,
it  falls  an  easy  prey  to  the  snake,  It  is  also  observed,
that  when  the  snake  is  frightened  away,  or  killed,  and  its
gaze  suddenly  removed,  the  cat,  in  some  instances,  instantly
dies.  This  Mr.  Lewis  has  seen.  This  reminds  us  of  the
facts  formerly  mentioned,  in  regard  to  the  magnetic  trance,
or  extasis,  which  may  pass  into  death,  and  in  which  it  is
sometimes  difficult  for  the  magnetiser  to  restore  full  life.

3.  There  would  appear  to  exist  among  the  lower  animals,
some  means  of  communication  unknown  to  us.  This  has  been
observed  in  all  animals,  and  is  usually  ascribed  to  Instinct.
But  what  is  Instinct  ?  This  is  merely  giving  the  fact  a  name,
not  explaining  its  nature.  In  the  dog,  this  peculiar  sagacity
has  been  much  noticed,  because  the  dog  is  so  much  in  con-
tact with  man  ;  but  there  is  hardly  an  animal  which  does  not
exhibit  it,  and  in  regard  to  which  it  has  not  been  recorded.  The


190  SYMPATHY  IN  ANIMALS.

courts  of  justice  and  punishments  of  rooks,  the  movements
of  birds  of  passage,  and  hundreds  of  analogous  facts,  point
to  some  peculiar  influence.  How  does  a  dog  trace,  not  only
his  master,  but  also  any  thing  which  his  master  has  .touched,
and  commands  him  to  seek,  even  although  it  be  concealed  ?
How  does  a  dog,  carried  to  a  distance  by  sea,  or  in  a  bag,  find
his  way  home  by  the  direct  route  ?  Who  can  explain  the
well-attested  fact,  that  a  Scotch  terrier,  having  been  taken
to  England,  and  there  cruelly  mangled  by  a  large  dog,  not
only  found  his  way  home,  but  immediately  again  departed
for  the  scene  of  his  ill-usage,  not  however  alone,  but  with  a
companion,  an  old  friend,  in  the  shape  of  a  large  dog,  who,
when  they  arrived  at  their  destination,  assisted  him  to  worry
his  tormentor?  If  we  ascribe  to  the  scent,  the  dog's  power
to  trace  his  master,  the  degree  of  scent  required  is  so  great,
that  it  amounts  to  a  new  sense ;  for  he  will,  after  long  con-
finement, often  go  to  where  he  last  saw  his  master,  and  not
finding  him  there,  will  yet  trace  him,  through  many  places,
till  he  find  him.  We  cannot  suppose  ordinary  scent  here  to
be  the  agent.

I  am  rather  inclined  to  ascribe  many  of  the  marvels  of
Instinct  to  magnetic  sympathy,  which  there  is  reason  to  be-
lieve is  very  active  and  powerful  in  animals.  We  know  that
animals,  of  different  genera,  and  even  classes  or  orders,  often
exhibit  an  attachment  very  similar  to  that  sometimes  observed
between  a  magnetiser  and  his  subject;  and  they  also  shew
very  unaccountable  antipathies,  both  to  men  and  animals.

It  has  lately  been  stated,  by  M.  Allix,  on  the  authority  of
M.  Benoit  in  Paris,  and  of  another  discoverer,  (also,  I  be-
lieve, a  Frenchman,  who  is  now  in  America,)  both  of  whom,
during  the  last  ten  years,  have  been  employed  in  working
out  the  discovery,  which  they  had  severally  and  independ-
ently made,  although  they  are  now  associated  to  work  it  out,
that  this  magnetic  sympathy  is  remarkably  developed  in
snails ;  that  these  animals,  after  having  once  been  in  commu-
nication or  in  contact,  continue  ever  after  to  sympathise,  no
matter  at  what  distance  they  may  be.  And  it  has  been  pro-
posed to  found,  on  this  fact,  a  mode  of  communication  be-
tween the  most  distant  places.  Nay,  M.  Allix  describes,
with  care  and  judgment,  experiments  made  in  his  presence,
in  which,  the  time  having  of  course  been  fixed  beforehand,
words,  spelled  in  Paris  by  M.  Benoit,  and  also  by  M.  Allix


SNAIL  TELEGRAPH.  191

himself,  were  instantly  read  in  America,  and  as  instantly
replied  to,  by  words  spelled  there,  and  read  in  Paris.  All
this  was  done  by  means  of  snails,  and  although  the  full  de-
tails of  the  apparatus  employed,  and  of  all  the  proce
necessary  to  ensure  success,  have  not  yet  been,  published,  yet
the  account  given  by  M.  Allix,  and  also  by  M.  Benoit,  goes
so  far  as  to  enable  us  to  conceive  the  principle  made  use  of.

It  would  appear  that  every  letter  has  a  snail  belonging  to
it  in  Paris,  while  in  America,  each  letter  has  also  a  snail,
sympathetic  with  that  of  the  same  letter  in  Paris,  the  two
snails  of  each  letter  having  been  at  some  period,  and  by  some
process,  brought  into  full  sympathy,  and  then  separated  and
marked.  There  is,  of  course,  a  stock  of  spare  snails  for  each
letter,  in  case  of  accident,  but  it  is  found  that  these  animals
will  live  for  a  year  without  food,  should  that  be  necessary.
When  a  word  is  to  be  spelled  in  Paris,  the  snail  belonging
to  the  first  letter  is  brought  by  some  galvanic  apparatus,  not
yet  fully  described,  into  a  state  of  disturbance,  with  which
his  fellow  in  America  sympathises.  But  this  requires  to  be
ascertained ;  which  is  done  by  approaching,  in  America,  to
all  the  snails  successively,  a  testing  apparatus,  not  described,
which  however  includes  a  snail.  On  the  approach  of  this,
the  snail  whose  fellow  in  Paris  has  been  acted  on,  exhibits
some  symptom,  which  is  not  exhibited  by  any  other,  and  the
corresponding  letter  is  noted  down.  This  is  done  with  each
letter,  and  thus  the  word  is  finally  spelled.

Now  all  this  may  appear,  at  first  sight,  very  absurd  and
ridiculous.  I  confess  it  appeared  so  to  me,  when  I  first
heard  of  it.  But  when  I  recollected  all  I  had  seen  of  sym-
pathy in  man,  all  that  was  known  about  sympathy  in  the
lower  animals,  and  when  I  read  the  account  given  by  M.
Allix,  a  gentleman  well  versed  in  science,  of  the  successful
experiments  at  which  he  had  assisted,  I  perceived  that  the
only  difficulty  lay  in  admitting  the  fact  of  the  extraordinary
sympathy  of  snails,  and  that,  this  being  granted,  all  the  rest
was  not  only  possible  but  easy.  Now,  I  know  nothing  what-
ever about  the  habits  of  snails ;  and  surely  I  am  not  entitled
to  reject  facts,  thus  attested,  without  some  investigation  into
them.  I  cannot  say  that  the  alleged  sympathy  is  impossi-
ble. But  an  investigation  into  the  matter,  so  long  as  the
full  details  of  the  experiments  made  by  the  discoverers  are
not  published,  is  certain  to  be  a  laborious  task,  and  probably


192  ACTION  OF  MAGNETS

a  fruitless  one.  It  cost  them  a  long  time  to  ascertain  the
facts,  and  they  have  been,  for  ten  years,  engaged  in  bring-
ing their  discovery  into  a  practical  form.  Till  the  promised
publication  appears,  we  can  only  admit  the  possibility  of  the
thing,  and  wait  for  the  explanation,  which  shall  enable  us
to  verify  it  for  ourselves.  It  will  certainly  be  very  remark-
able, if  a  snail  telegraph  should  come  into  action,  which,  in
spite  of  the  proverbial  slowness  of  the  animal  concerned,
should  rival  in  rapidity  the  electric  telegraph,  and  surpass
it  in  security,  inasmuch  as  there  are  no  wires  to  be  cut  by
an  enemy,  besides  being  infinitely  less  costly,  since  no  solid,
tangible  means  of  communication  are  required,  and  all  that
is  needed,  is  the  apparatus  at  either  end  of  the  line,  and  the
properly  prepared  snails.

It  appears  from  the  paper  of  M.  Allix,  that  even  this  as-
tounding novelty  is  not  new.  At  least,  it  would  seem,  that
a  long  time  ago,  I  cannot  fix  the  period,  a  secret  mode  of
correspondence  was  devised,  intended  chiefly  for  communi-
cations with  a  beleaguered  fortress,  in  which  it  is  believed
that  animal  sympathy  played  the  leading  part.


LETTER  XII.

In  this  Letter  I  shall  proceed  to  mention,  in  a  very  gen-
eral way,  the  action,  on  the  human  system,  of  inanimate
objects,  such  as  magnets,  crystals,  &c.  It  is  the  less  neces-
sary to  dwell  at  length  on  this  subject,  as  Baron  von  Reichen-
bach's  Researches  on  Magnetism,  (a  translation  of  which  I
published,  in  so  far  as  they  have  appeared  in  Germany,  in
the  month  of  May  1850,  having  previously  given,  in  1846,
an  Abstract  of  Part  I.)  contain  the  results  of  the  only  truly
scientific  investigation  which  has  yet  been  made  on  that
point.  It  is  true  that  we  only  possesss,  at  present,  a  part
of  these  admirable  researches,  which  were  continued,  with
great  labor  and  astonishing  perseverance,  for  five  years.
The  Baron,  during  that  time,  collected  full  materials  for  a
work  on  the  numerous  branches  of  the  subject  investigated
by  him  ;  but  he  has  not,  as  yet,  been  able  to  publish  more


AND  OF  OTHER  BODIES.  193

than  a  part,  sufficient,  however,  to  make  us  eager  to  obtain
the  remainder.  The  labor  and  time  required  for  arranging
and  publishing  the  details  of  so  many  investigations,  made
on  upwards  of  100  different  persons,  is  very  great,  and  the
remainder  of  the  work  can  only  appear  gradually,  as  it  is
brought  into  a  state  fit  for  publication.

In  Part  I.  however,  we  have  a  general  summary  of  the
whole  investigation,  and  it  is  to  that  that  we  must  refer  for
the  facts  which  have  been  ascertained  on  this  matter.

1.  Mesmer  observed  the  effects,  not  only  of  magnets,  but
of  other  things  on  the  human  body ;  but  he  seems  to  have
been,  and  his  followers  certainly  were,  in  too  great  a  hurry
to  apply  the  power  he  had  observed  to  profitable  purposes,
and  to  the  cure  of  disease,  so  that  they  made  no  thorough
or  scientific  examination  of  it ;  and  the  whole  subject  fell
into  discredit.

Nevertheless,  in  now  appears,  that  the  fundamental  facts
are  true.  Magnets  do  act  on  the  human  body.  When
passes  are  made  with  them,  the  same  sensations  are  experi-
enced, as  when  the  operator  uses  his  hand.  Here,  no  doubt,
the  influence  of  the  hand  is  combined  with  that  of  the  mag-
net ;  but,  by  using  the  magnet  without  the  hand  of  the
operator,  or  in  the  hand  of  a  person  whose  hand,  by  itself,
has  no  perceptible  effect,  it  is  ascertained  that  the  magnet
does  exert  an  influence  identical  with  that  exerted  by  the
human  body.

This  influence  may  go  so  far  as  to  produce,  even  at  a  great
distance,  unconsciousness,  as  well  as  the  true  magnetic  sleep,
and  in  highly  susceptible  cases,  even  cataleptic  rigidity  and
convulsions.  In  one  such  case,  mentioned  by  Reichenbach,
a  large  magnet,  being  disarmed  at  the  greatest  distance
permitted  by  the  room,  instantly  struck  the  patient  into
complete  rigidity  and  unconsciousness.  But  Reichenbach
has  also  shown  that  a  large  number  of  perfectly  healthy  per-
sons are  sensitive  to  the  influence  from  the  magnet.  This
sensitiveness  is  not  a  morbid  condition,  and  is  found,  in  dif-
ferent degrees,  in  one  person  out  of  three,  on  an  average,  of
healthy  and  diseased  people.

2.  This  influence  is  conducted,  or  passes,  through  all
matter,  differing  in  this  from  the  electrical  influence,  which
cannot  pass,  for  example,  through  glass  or  resin,  but  passes
easily  through  metals.

17


104  COMMUNITY  OF  EMOTIONS.

anv  inclined  to  think,  that  the  state  of  the  eye  is  opposed  to
the  making  of  such  experiments  in  a  satisfactory  manner.

5.  In  regard  to  Hearing,  I  have  not  seen  experiments
tried  in  this  way.  I  have  already  said,  that  the  sleeper  is
usually  deaf  to  all  but  the  voice  of  the  magnetiser,  or  of  the
person  en  rapport  with  him.  Does  he  hear  what  is  said  to
that  person  by  others?  I  have  no  doubt  that,  in  many
cases,  he  does ;  and  that  in  this  way,  he  often  becomes  ac-
quainted with  matters  intended  to  be  kept  secret  from  him.
This  should  be  carefully  attended  to  in  making  experi-
ments.

6.  There  is  often,  but  perhaps  less  so  than  in  regard  to
the  senses,  a  Community  of  Emotion.  In  these  cases,  what-
ever mental  emotion  occurs  in  the  magnetiser,  or  in  others
placed  en  rapport  with  the  sleeper,  is  also  experienced  by
him.  I  have  not  yet  examined  this  phenomenon  so  minutely
or  fully  as  the  others,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  calling
up  at  pleasure,  a  genuine  and  marked  emotion.  On  this
account,  the  observations  are  commonly  accidental.  Thus,
I  have  seen  some  patients  smile  and  laugh  when  their  mag-
netiser happened  to  do  so;  and  I  have  also  seen,  what  has
been  very  often  described  by  other  observers,  the  sleeper
painfully  affected  by  nervousness  and  alarm  on  the  part  of
the  operator.

This,  indeed,  as  formerly  hinted,  is  the  cheif  cause  of  all
the  unpleasant  results  which  occasionally  arise  when  persons,
who  have  no  experience  or  knowledge  of  Animal  Magnetism,
try,  for  amusement,  or  out  of  curiosity,  to  produce  magnetic
effects.  They  succeed  better  than  they  had  supposed  pos-
sible, merely  by  imitating  the  gestures  of  some  magnetiser
whom  they  have  seen  operate,  without,  perhaps  having
attended  minutely  either  to  his  operations  or  to  the  cautions
and  directions  he  may  have  given.  The  subject  operated
on,  probably  a  young  person,  or  even  a  young  lady,  falls
into  a  deep  sleep,  and  hears  nothing  that  is  addressed  to
her,  perhaps  by  her  father,  mother,  or  other  near  relations.
These  persons  become  alarmed,  never  having  before  seen
anything  of  the  kind,  and  not  being  aware  that  this  deaf-
ness is  a  common  character  of  the  sleep,  and  that  the  sleep  is
not  only  harmless,  but  beneficial.  They  ask  the  luckless
operator,  with  much  agitation,  perhaps  with  some  anger,  to
relieve  her,  and  while  he  hesitates  and  becomes  infected  with


DANGER  OF  RASH  EXPERIMENTS.  105

their  fears,  not  knowing  how  to  proceed,  they  seize  her
hands,  and  their  own  influence,  unknown  to  them,  crosses
his,  producing  uneasiness,  which  appears  in  the  countenance
of  the  sufferer,  and  almost  invariably  out  of  all  proportion
more  intensely  pictured  there,  than  truly  corresponds,  by
the  patient's  own  subsequent  statement,  to  the  actual  suf-
fering. This  again  frightens  them  still  more ;  they  call  on
her,  they  weep,  they  rage  against  the  magnetiser,  and  over-
whelm him  with  reproaches.  At  last,  goaded  almost  to
madness,  he  tries  to  undo  the  charm.  He  takes  the  patient's
hand,  perhaps  while  several  other  persons  are  in  contact
with  her,  or  acting  on  her,  and  by  sympathy  with  him,  she
becomes  instantly  and  seriously  worse.  This  continues  for
a  time,  varied  only  by  every  sort  of  useless  and  hurtful  in-
terference on  the  part  of  the  bystanders,  not  one  of  whom,
perhaps,  knows  what  ought  to  be  done,  and  the  unhappy
victim  of  ignorance  and  temerity  falls  into  a  fainting  fit,
and  possibly  into  severe  convulsions.  I  need  not  pursue  the
unpleasant  picture  further,  but  I  may  suggest  that  it  is  only
aggravated  by  the  proceedings  of  the  medical  man  finally
summoned,  if,  as  is  too  often  the  case,  he  have  either  ac-
cidentally, or  acting  on  a  firm  resolution,  declined  making
himself  familiar  with  these  phenomena,  or  the  laws  which
regulate  them.  Then,  when  it  is  too  late,  he  regrets  that
carelessness  or  prejudice  have  led  him  to  neglect  facts,  often
presented  to  his  notice ;  then  the  parents  discover  that  an
able  and  estimable  physician  has  been  induced  to  commit  a
grievous  error,  namely,  to  shut  his  eyes  to  some  of  the  most
wonderful  and  practically  important  phenomena.  But  there
is  an  end  of  their  scepticism,  if  they  had  any ;  possibly  of
the  doctor's  too.  Yet  even  in  such  circumstances,  where  it
has  been  quite  evident  that  the  slightest  acquaintance  with
the  matter  would  have  enabled  us  to  avoid  all  that  suffering
and  danger,  I  have  heard  of  physicians  who  drew  no  other
moral  from  the  occurrence  than  this,  that  Animal  Magnet-
ism was  dangerous ;  and  they  then  shut  their  eyes  to  it  as
resolutely  and  as  closely  as  before.

True.  Animal  Magnetism  is  dangerous.  But  it  is  not
the  study  of  it,  nor  the  knowledge  of  it,  but  ignorance  of  it,
and  the  rash  experiments  of  those  who  are  ignorant  of  it,
that  are  dangerous.

In  the  hands  of  qualified  experimenters,  I  have  never


106 MAGNETISM  SAFE  IN  GOOD  HANDS.

seen  one  unpleasant  accident.  I  have  heard  of  several  in
the  circumstances  above  sketched,  and  on  the  authority  of
both  the  operators  and  of  their  subjects.  But  I  can  go
farther.  For  I  have  never  yet  seen  a  case  in  which  the
magnetic  sleep  was  produced  in  the  proper  way,  in  which
the  sleeper  did  not  declare,  not  only  that  he  sustained  no
injury,  but  also,  that  he  always  felt  better,  stronger,  and
more  fit  for  work  of  any  kind  after  the  sleep  than  before  it.
And,  in  very  many  cases,  the  general  health,  if  in  any  way
bad,  has  been  improved,  or  a  complete  cure  effected,  by  a
course  of  Animal  Magnetism.  I  do  not  mean  to  say,  that
it  never  can  prove  injurious  to  any  one ;  because  I  have  not
sufficient  experience  to  justify  me  in  drawing  such  a  con-
clusion. But  this  I  can  say,  that  in  all  the  cases  I  have
seen  in  the  hands  of  others,  and  in  all  that  have  been  in  my
own  hands,  including  in  both  categories  many  nervous  per-
sons, affected  with  various  maladies,  some  of  them  precisely
of  that  kind,  such  as  heart  complaints,  which  would  appear
the  most  likely  to  suffer  from  any  undue  excitement,  the
effect  of  the  magnetic  process  in  general,  and  of  the  sleep
in  particular,  has  always  been  soothing,  and  never,  in  any
one  instance,  unpleasant  to  the  patient,  besides,  as  I  have
said,  acting  beneficially  on  the  health.  I  regard  it  as
equally  safe  and  more  beneficial  to  impaired  health  than
ordinary  sleep  ;  that  is,  as  far  as  my  experience  goes.

Of  course,  I  do  not  here  speak  of  exciting  exhibitions  of
striking  phenomena ;  of  causing  excessive  laughter,  or  rous-
ing violent  passions  or  emotions.  That  is  a  kind  of  experi-
ment of  which  I  entirely  disapprove,  as  I  do  likewise  of  all
those  in  which  strong  and  false  impressions,  especially  of  a
disagreeable  nature,  are  made  in  the  mind ;  as  when  a  man
is  made  to  believe  he  is  ruined,  or  that  he  is  a  wild  beast.
Not  that  these  are  always  hurtful,  but  that  they  may,  in
very  susceptible  temperaments,  become  so.  Such  experi-
ments, especially  in  the  form  of  exhibition,  are  not  justifi-
able, and  are  at  most  permissible  in  private,  with  a  view  to
the  ascertaining  a  fact,  necessary  to  complete  our  knowledge
of  the  phenomena,  and  to  enable  us  usefully  to  apply  it.

Public  exhibitions  of  the  phenomena  of  Animal  Magnet-
ism are  not,  in  my  humble  opinion,  good  things.  I  have
already  given  some  reasons  against  them,  and  I  would  here
add,  that  to  employ  these  wonderful  and  beautiful  facts


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  BYSTANDERS.  107

merely  to  excite  wonder  and  produce  amusement,  is  a  great
abuse  of  our  powers.  Animal  Magnetism  is  not  a  play-
thing; it  is  a  serious,  I  would  say,  a  sacred  thing,  which
ought  to  be  studied  with  reverence,  and  not  degraded  to
minister  to  the  idle  curiosity  of  those  who  regard  it  merely
as  an  exhibition,  to  be  forgotten  the  hour  after  it  has  served
to  gratify  our  love  of  novelty,  or  to  raise  a  laugh. — In  pri-
vate alone  can  it  be  properly  studied.  No  one  in  a  public
hall,  save,  perhaps,  one  or  two  close  to  the  subject,  can  see
the  phenomena  as  they  ought  to  be  seen,  or  judge  aright  of
their  truth,  and  of  the  beautiful  evidence  of  that  truth
afforded  by  the  countenance  and  manner  of  the  sleeper.  I
have  seen  many  persons  who  came  from  a  public  lecture
quite  unsatisfied,  convinced  in  five  minutes  in  a  private
room,  where  they  could  really  see  what  was  done  and  hear
what  was  said.

I  have  been  led  into  this  digression  by  considering  the
effects  of  sympathy  in  sometimes  giving  rise  to  unpleasant
accidents,  when  magnetism  is  tried  by  the  ignorant  and  inex-
perienced. I  would  here  repeat,  what  I  have  formerly  stated,
that,  when  such  accidents  unfortunately  occur,  the  safest
plan  is  to  let  the  patient  sleep  out  his  sleep.  The  magnetiser,
if  he  can  recover  his  own  composure,  may,  in  general,  easily
awake  him  by  upward  or  reyersed  passes.  But  it  ought  to
be  an  invariable  rule,  never  to  try  such  experiments  without
the  presence  of  one  experienced  magnetiser.

7.  Returning  to  the  topic  of  sympathy,  in  the  form  of
community  of  emotion,  I  would  further  point  out  the  strong
effects  often  produced  on  the  sleeper  by  the  bystanders.
Many  sleepers  do  not  require  to  be  placed  en  rapport  with
others,  in  order  to  be  very  strongly  affected  by  their  emo-
tions. Thus  sceptical,  unreasonable,  prejudiced,  uncandid
persons  often  excite,  by  their  approach,  the  most  unpleasant,
often  distressing  sensations ;  while  the  approach  of  the  ra-
tional and  kind  may  easily,  in  many  cases,  be  traced  in  the
expression  of  the  sleeper.  But,  above  all,  the  approach  of
many  different  persons,  all  probably  much  excited,  produces,
in  very  susceptible  cases,  a  great  confusion  of  feelings,  aris-
ing, in  part,  from  sympathy  with  their  mind,  in  part  from
the  crossing  of  so  many  streams  of  magnetic  influence.

This  is  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  failure  in  public  exhibi-
tions of  the  more  delicate  phenomena,  as  I  have  already  ex-


108  THOUGHT-READING

plained.  It  ought  always  to  be  avoided,  as  far  as  possible.
Fortunately  for  exhibitors,  there  are  cases  which  are  not
much  affected  by  this  source  of  error  and  confusion.  But
some  are  so  quick,  that  they  will  detect,  by  sympathy  alone,
the  presence  of  one  individual,  and  even  discover  his  state
of  mind.

8.  This  brings  us  to  that  peculiar  form  of  sympathy  which
consists  in  reading  the  thoughts  of  others,  especially  of  those
en  rapport  with  the  sleeper.  This  is  quite  a  distinct  pheno-
menon from  feeling  their  emotions ;  it  extends  to  tracing  all
the  intellectual  processes  or  images  in  their  minds,  and  it
thus  constitutes  a  kind  of  clairvoyance,  which  may  be  called
sympathetic  clairvoyance  or  thought-reading .  It  is,  as  we
shall  see,  a  very  beautiful  and  interesting  phenomenon.  But
before  describing  it,  I  would  remark,  that  many  persons,
who  are  extremely  averse  to  admit  the  existence  of  clairvoy-
ance at  all,  are  apt  to  suppose  that  they  get  rid  of  it,  when
the  facts  are  forced  on  their  attention  so  that  they  can  no
longer  be  denied,  by  ascribing  them  to  thought-reading,  as
if  thought-reading,  the  power  of  seeing  into  another  man's
soul  (and  through  his  body  too),  were  at  all  less  wonderful
than  the  power  of  seeing  through  a  stone  wall,  or  a  floor.

To  my  apprehension,  thought-reading  is  still  more  won-
derful and  incomprehensible  than  that  kind  of  clairvoy-
ance, which  takes  note  of  material  things  at  a  distance.  In
the  latter  case,  we  can  imagine  some  subtle,  rare  medium
by  which  impressions  may  be  conveyed  to  us,  as  light  or
sound  are.  But  how  do  we  perceive  thoughts,  not  yet  ex-
pressed, in  the  mind  of  another  ?

It  would  appear,  then,  that  those  who  would  explain  all
clairvoyance  by  thought-reading,  only  fall  from  the  frying-
pan  into  the  fire.  They  account  for  an  apparently  unac-
countable phenomenon,  by  one  still  more  incomprehensible.

Yet  both  the  phenomena  are  true ;  and,  as  far  as  we
know,  both  depend,  essentially,  on  the  same  cause.  After
the  discussion  of  thought-reading,  we  shall  be  prepared  to
enter  on  that  of  true,  that  is,  direct  clairvoyance.

Thought  reading  presents  itself  in  every  possible  variety
of  form.  The  sleeper,  being  placed  en  rapport  with  any
person,  can  often  describe,  with  the  greatest  accuracy,  the
subject  that  occupies  the  thoughts  of  that  person.  It  may
be  an  absent  friend,  or  his  own  house,  or  that  of  another,


IN  ITS  DIFFERENT  FORMS.  109

or  his  drawing-room,  bed-room,  study,  &c.  &c.  All  these
things  the  sleeper  perceives,  as  they  pass  through  the  mind
of  the  experimenter,  and  describes  with  great  minuteness
and  accuracy,  so  as  to  excite  our  astonishment.

Or  he  goes  further ;  he  not  only  perceives  the  present,
but  the  past  thoughts  of  the  person  en  rajyport  with  him ;
he  shares  his  memory.  Thus  he  will  mention  facts,  no
longer  so  existing,  but  remembered  by  the  experimenter.

Nay,  he  goes  still  further  even  than  this ;  for  he  perceives
things  once  known  to,  and  now  forgotten  by,  the  experi-
menter, who  very  often  contradicts  the  sleeper,  and  persists
in  maintaining  his  own  opinion,  until,  on  further  enquiry,  he
not  only  finds  him  to  be  right,  but  himself  is  enabled  to  re-
cal  the  fact,  which  had,  as  we  say,  escaped  his  memory.

We  all  know  that  we  are  apt,  at  times,  to  forget  facts,
which  subsequently  recur  to  the  memory.  But  here,  it
would  seem  that  the  sleeper  sympathises  with  our  past
thoughts,  as  to  read  what  we  ourselves  are  for  the  moment
blind  to.  At  least,  this  must  be  admitted  by  those  who
ascribe  all  clairvoyance  to  sympathy ;  but  it  is  difficult,  in
many  cases,  to  distinguish  between  sympathetic  and  direct
clairvoyance,  if  we  admit  the  possibility  of  the  latter.

For  example,  the  sleeper  describes  a  room  at  the  request
of  the  experimenter.  He  details  the  form,  size,  doors,
windows,  book-cases,  tables,  carpet,  fire-place,  sofas,  chairs,
piano-forte,  &c.  &c,  and,  as  he  goes  on,  every  statement  is
confirmed  by  the  proprietor,  who  sees  the  whole  in  his  mind's
eye,  as  when  he  left  it.  But  all  at  once,  perhaps,  the
sleeper  speaks  of  the  hangings,  or  pictures,  and  says  he
sees  the  picture  of  a  dog,  a  horse,  or  a  man,  in  such  or  such
a  position,  with  reference  to  another  object.  This  is  denied;
but  the  sleeper  is  firm.  So  is  the  other,  and  after  a  long
dispute,  each  retains  his  opinion.  But  on  returing  home,
the  experimenter  finds  that  he  has  been  mistaken,  and  the
sleeper  right.  He  now  remembers,  that  up  to  a  certain
period,  the  picture  hung  where  he  had  said,  but  that  he
himself,  or  some  one  else,  had  changed  its  position  to  that
described  by  the  sleeper,  as  he  himself  formerly  knew,  but
had  forgotten.  Similar  occurrences  are  very  common.  But
they  admit  of  two  explanations.

In  the  first  place,  the  sleeper,  in  many  cases,  declares
that  he  reads  the  thought  of  the  other  party,  and  certainly
10


110  THOUGHT-READING.

does  so  in  some  cases,  even  where  lie  is  not  aware  of  doing
so,  but  thinks  he  is  looking  directly  at  the  objects  described.
Now,  it  may  be,  and  this  is  the  phenomenon  properly  under
consideration,  that  he  reads  the  past  thought  of  the  experi-
menter, and,  in  some  obscure  manner,  discovers  that  it  is
true,  while  the  present  thought  is  erroneous.

Or  it  may  be,  that  when  asked  to  describe  the  room,  the
sleeper,  finding  the  trace  in  the  questioner's  mind,  follows
it  up  until  he  comes  into  direct  communication  with  the  ob-
ject, by  direct  clairvoyance.  That  this  often  happens,  I
think  cannot  be  doubted,  and  we  shall  see  further  on,  that
the  experiment  may  be  so  made  as  to  prove  it ;  but  I  am
also  inclined  to  believe,  that  the  former  explanation  applies
in  some  cases,  and  that,  in  some  instances,  the  mediate  and
immediate  modes  of  perception  of  distant  objects  are  mixed
or  combined.

One  frequent  form  of  thought-reading  is  that  of  perceiv-
ing the  contents  of  a  closed  letter,  or  of  a  sealed  packet,  or
of  a  sealed  box.  Some  sleepers  can  do  this  readily,  if  en
rapport  with  a  person  who  knows  these  contents,  but  not
otherwise.  But  here  it  must  be  noted,  that,  in  some  cases,
the  rapport  is  established  without  contact,  so  that  it  suffices
for  the  sleeper,  that  one  person  who  knows  the  contents  of
the  closed  objects  should  be  present.  And  lastly,  it  appears
that  some  subjects,  who  at  one  time  possess  the  power  of
direct  or  immediate  clairvoyance,  at  other  times  are  desti-
tute of  this,  and  have  only  that  of  thought-reading.

Of  course,  when  it  is  done  by  thought-reading,  failure
will  take  place,  when  no  one  who  knows  the  object  to  be  de-
scribed is  present,  while,  on  the  entrance  of  such  a  person,
the  sleeper  succeeds.  All  these  things  must  be  carefully
attended  to  in  our  experiments,  otherwise  our  results  have
no  value  whatever,  and  only  lead  to  confusion.  When  a
sleeper,  of  the  sympathetic  class,  fails  at  one  moment,  and
succeeds  in  the  next,  after  a  person  at  first  absent  has
arrived,  the  idea  of  collusion  arises  in  many  minds  ;  whereas,'
if  we  were  well  acquainted  with  all  the  facts,  and  with  their
infinite  variety,  we  should  see,  in  that  result,  a  new  proof
of  the  truth  of  the  fact,  and  the  integrity  of  the  sleeper.

Those  who  meet  with  cases,  in  which  thought-reading  is
found  to  be  the  true  explanation  of  the  phenomena,  should
reflect,  that  thought-reading  is,  in  itself,  a  beautiful  and


SOURCES  OF  ERROR.  Ill

most  wonderful  fact ;  and  should  beware,  also,  of  drawing
the  conclusion,  that,  because  it  applies  to  one  case,  or  to
many  cases,  of  apparent  vision  at  a  distance,  it  is  therefore
sufficient  to  explain  all  cases,  or  the  only  explanation,  if  it
can  be  called  such,  that  is  admissible.

It  often  happens,  as  I  have  explained,  that  the  sleeper  or
thought-reader  is  found  right  as  to  present  facts,  where  he
has  been  supposed  to  be  wrong.  But  it  also  often  happens,
that  he  is  supposed  to  be  wrong,  and  is  not  afterwards
shown  to  have  been  right.  There' are,  in  fact,  many  sources
of  error  on  both  sides,  which  are  often  difficult  of  detection.

Thus,  the  thought-reader  may  be  dwelling  on  some  past
event,  and  be  persuaded  that  it  is  present.  The  impressions
of  past  and  of  present  events  are  of  equal  vividness  in  his
mind,  being,  in  both  cases,  internal  and  indirect  impressions.
Hence  he  cannot  readily  distinguish  between  them,  and  may
be  quite  correct,  if  we  could  discover  the  precise  time  to
which  his  sensations  refer.  This  must  be  carefully  attended
to,  and  our  experiments  regulated  accordingly.

Or  he  may  receive  erroneous  impressions  from  suggested
ideas.  So  powerful  is  his  sympathy  with  other  minds,  that
an  idea,  directly  suggested,  or  indirectly  introduced,  as,  for
example,  by  a  leading  question,  may  often  produce  on  his
mind  an  impression  as  vivid  as  that  caused  by  the  thoughts
or  memory  of  his  questioner,  and  all  three  may  become  mixed
together.

For  this  reason,  all  suggestions  and  leading  questions
should  be  carefully  avoided,  and  the  sleeper  encouraged  -to
tell  his  own  story.  Nor  is  the  danger  of  error  equally  great
in  all  cases.  Many  can  readily  distinguish  the  different
kinds  of  impression,  and  steadily  reject  suggested  ideas,  even
while  some  of  them  have  a  difficulty  in  distinguishing  present
from  past  events.  Some,  again,  can  do  the  latter  also,  and
these,  of  course,  are  the  best  subjects.

It  often  happens,  that  in  early  experiments,  the  operator
is  so  excited  by  the  novelty  and  interest  of  the  facts,  that  he
does  not  calmly  examine,  and  involuntarily  suggests,  by  silent
sympathy,  his  own  ideas  to  his  subject.  But  after  a  few  sit-
tings he  becomes  more  collected ;  he  has  only  the  pure  de-
sire to  hear  what  the  sleeper  says;  the  sleeper  is  not  disturbed
by  involuntary  suggestions,  and  his  sensations  come  out  more
pure  and  less  confused. Besides,  his  powers  improve,  and,


112 SYMPATHY  WITH  BODILY  STATE  OF  OTHERS.

by  practice,  a  sleeper,  at  first  confused  and  often  mistaken,
may  become,  if  properly  treated,  a  very  valuable  one.

Under  the  bead  of  direct  or  immediate  clairvoyance,  I
shall  have  to  return  more  fully  to  these  considerations.

9.  Sympathy  extends  often  to  the  bodily  state  of  the  ope-
rator, or  other  person  en  rapport  with  the  sleeper.  The
latter  will  feel  and  describe  every  pain  or  ache  felt  by  the
former,  and  will  even  in  some  cases  feel,  or  intuitively  per-
ceive, the  morbid  state  of  certain  parts.  He  will  say,  that
the  other  has  a  headache,  or  a  pain  in  the  side,  or  difficulty
in  breathing ;  he  will  declare  that  the  brain,  or  lungs,  or
liver,  or  stomach,  or  heart,  &c.  &c,  are  deranged  in  such  or
such  a  manner.  And  in  many  cases  he  will  be  right.  I  do
not  speak  here  of  his  seeing  the  state  of  these  organs,  which
shall  be  hereafter  considered.  But  the  intuitive  perception
of  health  and  disease,  here  alluded  to,  is  very  often  found.

10.  This  sympathetic  intuitive  sense  of  the  state  of  body
of  another,  may  he  exerted  in  the  absence  of  the  individual,
provided  a  communication  be  established.  For  this  purpose,
a  lock  of  hair,  or  any  object  that  has  been  in  contact  with
the  person,  even  a  recent  specimen  of  handwriting,  will  suf-
fice. The  sleeper,  aided  by  this,  will  enter  into  sympathy
with  the  absent  person,  as  if  he  were  present,  and  will  often
be  found  quite  accurate.  This  I  have  seen  and  tested  re-
peatedly.

11.  It  has  been  said,  that  subjects,  having  this  degree  of
sympathy,  often  also  possess  the  power  of  indicating  the
appropriate  remedy.  I  am  always  averse  to  speak  decided-
ly on  that  which  I  have  not  thoroughly  examined.  I  shall
not,  therefore,  say,  that  such  power  is  impossible,  nor  that
it  has  never  occurred.  But  I  can  state,  that  in  all  such
cases  as  I  have  seen,  the  sleeper  uses  or  recommends  the  class
of  remedies,  or  the  plan  of  treatment,  which  he  has  picked
up,  from  having  been  treated  himself,  or  from  having  been
taught  by  some  practitioner.  Thus,  one  prescribes  hydro-
pathy, another  homoeopathic  remedies,  a  third  mesmeric
treatment,  and  so  on.  There  are  some  cases,  however,  in  which
a  peculiar  sympathy  would  seem  to  exist,  inasmuch  as  the
sleeper,  being  shown  certain  remedies,  of  the  name  or  nature
of  which  he  is  ignorant,  after  feeling  them,  will  often  select
that  which  is  really  most  appropriate  to  the  case.  But  I  have
not  yet  had  sufficient  opportunity  of  enquiring  into  this
matter,  which  may,  possibly,  depend  on  sympathy  with  the


SYMPATHETIC  WARNINGS.  113

person  who  exhibits  the  drugs  to  the  sleeper,  and  who  lias
probably  an  opinion  as  to  that  which  is  best  adapted  for
the  disease  in  question.


It  will  be  seen  that  thought-reading  includes  many  very
curious  and  beautiful  phenomena,  which  have  often  been
called  clairvoyance,  and  which  really  are  so,  but  are  not  the
only  phenomena  of  clairvoyance.  They  are  sympathetic,
indirect,  or  mediate  clairvoyance,  the  perceptions  being  de-
rived, not  from  the  objects  themselves,  but  from  their  images
in  the  mind  or  thought  of  others.  Some  observers,  having
only  met  with  this  form  of  clairvoyance,  have  rashly  con-
cluded that  there  is  no  other  ;  but  we  shall  see,  that  sym-
pathy and  thought-reading  cannot  explain  all  the  pheno-
mena of  clairvoyance,  and  that  we  must  admit  another  form
of  it.  We  shall  find,  that  it  may  be  possible  to  trace  both
forms  to  one  common  source,  and  that  a  kind  of  sympathy  ;
but  in  the  mean  time,  there  are  two  distinct  classes  of  phe-
nomena, which  must  not  be  confounded  together.

12.  Sympathy  is  widely  diffused,  as  a  natural,  sponta-
neous occurrence.  There  are  few  people  who  have  not  ex-
perienced something  of  it,  and  none  who  are  not,  by  nature,
susceptible  to  it,  although  their  susceptibility  may  be  masked
under  ordinary  circumstances.

How  often  does  an  inexplicable  something  warn  certain
persons  that  an  absent  and  dearly  beloved  friend  or  relation
is  in  danger,  or  dying  !  This  is  an  effect  of  sympathy.
Every  one  has  heard,  in  his  own  circle,  of  numerous  in-
stances of  it.  I  am  informed,  for  example,  by  a  lady  near-
ly related  to  me,  that  her  mother  always  had  such  a  warn-
ing at  the  time  when  any  near  and  dear  friend  died.  This
occurred  so  often  as  to  leave  no  doubt  whatever  of  the  fact.
It  happened,  that  this  lady  more  than  once  made  the  voy-
age to  and  from  India,  and  that  during  the  voyage  she,  on
several  occasions,  said  to  her  daughter  and  to  others,  "  I
feel  certain,  that  such  a  person  is  dead."  On  reaching  port,
these  perceptions  were  always  found  to  be  true.

It  often  happens,  that  this  spontaneous  sympathy  goes  so
far  as  to  produce  the  vision  or  appearance  of  the  dying  per-
son. But  this  phenomenon  belongs  more  properly  to  direct
clairvoyance.

10*


114  NATURAL  SYMPATHIES  AND  ANTIPATPIIES.

The  remarkable  case  of  Zschokke,  the  Swiss  romance-
writer,  who  possessed,  at  times,  and  quite  spontaneously,
the  power  of  reading,  in  the  minds  of  others,  the  whole  of
their  past  history,  is  a  proof  of  the  spontaneous  occurrence
of  thought-reading,  in  reference  to  past  events.

1 3.  Sympathy  often  produces  a  strong  attraction  between
two  persons,  who  see  each  other  for  the  first  time.  Neither
of  them  can  explain  it,  but  both  feel  it,  and  thus,  love  at  first
sight  is  no  fancy,  but  a  reality.  It  arises,  in  part,  from  a
pleasing  correspondence  between  the  magnetic  influences  of
the  parties,  and,  when  this  is  the  case,  it  is  as  durable  as
strong.  Nay,  it  is  well  known,  that  there  are  many  persons
who  frequently  quarrel  after  being  long  together,  yet  are
quite  wretched  if  separated,  and  infallibly  come  together,
till  a  new  quarrel  again  forces  them  asunder,  again  to  feel
miserable  apart.

14.  Not  only  do  such  sympathies  exist,  but  there  are
antipathies  equally  strong.  Every  one  must  have  seen  or
felt  the  repulsion  exercised  on  himself  or  others  by  certain
individuals,  which,  even  in  spite  of  reason,  often  continues
for  life.  But  Antipathy  is  still  more  atrongly  exhibited  by
persons  in  the  magnetic  sleep.  In  some  instances,  they  can-
not bear  the  approach  of  persons,  who,  in  their  ordinary  state,
produce  no  such  effect  upon  them.

Antipathy  is  frequently  very  strikingly  seen  in  regard  to
animals  or  inanimate  objects.  Thus,  many  waking  persons
cannot  endure  the  presence  of  a  cat,  others  of  a  dog,  or  of
a  mouse,  or  of  a  spider,  or  of  a  toad.  Many  such  persons
will  detect  the  presence  of  their  bete  oV  antipathie  or  bete
noire,  when  it  has  been  carefully  concealed  from  them,  and
if  it  be  not  removed,  will  be  affected  with  sickness,  fainting,
or  even  convulsions-.

Again,  many  persons  are  thus  painfully  and  disagreeably
affected  by  inanimate  objects,  even  by  such  as  are  pleasing,
or  indifferent,  to  people  in  general.  Some  cannot  endure  a
rose,  others  an  apple,  pear,  melon,  or  strawberry.  Some
object  to  sealing-wax,  others  to  resin,  some  to  salt,  some  to
bread,  many  to  less  common  articles  of  food,  or  to  objects
apparently  the  most  innocent.  All  these  antipathies  are  so
strong,  that  the  mere  presence  of  the  objects  is  sufficient,  and
cannot  be  reasoned  away,  nor  overpowered  by  any  volition.
The  smell  of  the  objects  is  sometimes  considered  offensive.


EXISTENCE  OF  A  PECULIAR  INFLUENCE.  Ill

but  frequently  it  is  not  regarded,  it  is  the  object  itself,  from
which  an  influence  felt  by  the  victim  of  antipathy  proceeds.
Rcichcnbach  has  observed  a  connection  between  Antipathy
and  Animal  Magnetism,  inasmuch  as  those  who  have  marked
and  strange  antipathies  are  usually  very  sensitive  to  magnet-
ic influence.  A  careful  study  of  the  phenomena  would  soon
enable  us  to  discover  the  laws  which  regulate  them.

We  must  conclude,  therefore,  that  there  resides  in  bodies,
animate  and  inanimate,  a  certain  force  or  influence  which  is
felt  by  certain  individuals,  who,  again,  are  more  or  less
strongly,  and  in  different  ways,  affected  by  it.  That  this
force  or  influence  is  the  same  which,  in  a  peculiar  form,  gives
rise  to  the  magnetic  phenomena,  to  the  magnetic  sleep,  and
to  magnetic  sympathy,  as  well  as  antipathy,  is  in  the  highest
degree  probable.  But  I  shall  not  here  enter  on  theoretical
questions  ;  I  wish  merely  to  point  out  and  establish  the  facts.


Having  now  briefly  considered  the  subject  of  Sympathy,
of  sympathetic  or  mediate  clairvoyance,  or  thought-read-
ing, I  shall,  in  my  next  Letter,  go  on  to  that  of  immediate
or  direct  clairvoyance,  as  distinguished  from  that  which  has
been  described.

I  have  already  stated  that  this  phenomenon,  whatever
may  be  its  essential  nature  or  true  explanation,  presents  it-
self to  the  student  of  Animal  Magnetism,  and  very  often
does  so,  quite  unexpectedly,  while  he  is  engaged  in  studying
some  other  phenomenon.

I  believe,  further,  that  it  has  often  occurred,  just  as  sym-
pathy has  done,  as  a  spontaneous,  natural  fact,  which  has
been  ascribed  to  Imagination,  or  accounted  for  by  mere  co-
incidence. Whatever  be  the  explanation — and,  as  I  have
before  observed,  to  ascribe  it  to  Imagination  is  not  to  ex-
plain it,  but  rather  to  complicate  the  phenomenon  by  adding
a  link  to  the  chain  of  causes — whatever  be  the  explanation,
the  fact,  whether  occurring  spontaneously  in  the  ordinary
state,  or  presenting  itself  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  is  worthy
of  our  most  earnest  and  careful  enquiry.

And,  as  I  have  also  before  remarked,  it  is  a  mere  fallacy
to  suppose  that,  if  it  could  be  referred  to  Sympathy  or  to
Imagination,  (using  the  latter  word  in  its  ordinary  accepta-
tion, but,  of  course,  not  implying  that  the  fact  is  imaginary


116  MAGNETIC  VISION  OF  NEAR  OBJECTS,

or  unreal,)  it  would  be  more  easily  understood  or  explained
than  before.

Let  us,  therefore,  calmly  enquire  into  the  facts,  and  hav-
ing ascertained  what  we  can  about  them,  we  shall  then  be
in  a  better  position  for  enquiring  into  their  causes,  and  for
giving  such  an  explanation  as  may  be  found  attainable.

Many  persons,  on  hearing  of  Animal  Magnetism,  or  of  a
case  in  which  its  phenomena  are  said  to  occur,  at  once  sup-
pose that  clairvoyance  is  meant ;  and  it  is  often  difficult  to
persuade  those  who  have  not  examined  the  matter  for  them-
selves, that  clairvoyance  is  merely  one  of  a  long  series  of
phenomena,  and  that  many  cases  occur,  in  which  many
beautiful  phenomena  may  be  observed,  without  any  thing
that  can  properly  be  called  clairvoyance.  Others,  again,
by  clairvoyance,  understand  the  foreseeing  or  prediction  of
future  events,  which  is  said  to  occur  in  a  still  smaller  num-
ber of  cases.  But  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  that,  even  if
clairvoyant  prevision  had  never  occurred,  nor  ever  should
occur,  yet  the  existence  of  clairvoyance,  that  is,  the  direct
perception,  without  the  use  of  the  eyes,  of  absent  or  distant
objects,  may  be  perfectly  true.

To  this  point,  therefore,  I  shall  proceed  in  the  next
Letter.


LETTER  VII.

Clairvoyance,  or  what  I  have  defined  as  direct  or  imme-
diate clairvoyance,  or  the  direct  and  immediate  perception
of  absent  or  distant  objects,  without  the  use  of  the  eyes,
has  been  noticed  by  the  earliest  authors  on  Animal  Magnet-
ism in  modern  times.  But  I  shall  not  here  dwell  on  its
history ;  I  shall  proceed  at  once  to  describe  it,  in  the  vari-
ous forms  in  which  it  occurs,  as  described  by  those  who
have  seen  it,  and  as  I  have  had  opportunities  of  observing
it.

1.  The  first  form  in  which  the  power  of  clairvoyance,  or
direct  perception,  called,  by  the  sleeper,  seeing,  but  without
the  use  of  the  external  eye,  occurs,  is  usually  that  of  no-


WITHOUT  THE  USE  OF  THE  EYES.  117

ticing  the  hand  of  the  operator,  while  the  eyes  are  firmly
closed.  This  is  often  observed  in  the  very  beginning,  when
the  magnetic  sleep  is  first  induced,  and  is  commonly  pointed
out  by  the  sleeper,  who,  without  questions  being  asked,  calls
out,  that  he  sees  the  hand,  and  very  frequently  describes
light  as  flowing  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  He  sees  the
hand  either  when  held  before  his  firmly  closed  eyes,  or,  in
many  cases,  when  held  to  the  side  of  his  head,  or  above  it,
or  behind  it ;  and  it  is  quite  easy  to  assure  ourselves  that
he  does  not,  and  cannot,  use  his  eyes,  without  the  clumsy
expedient  of  blindfolding  him,  which,  to  judge  by  the  mani-
pulations sometimes  resorted  to,  would  seem  to  be  a  very
difficult  matter,  and  often  causes  great  annoyance  and  loss
of  power  to  the  clairvoyant.  The  truth  is,  nature  adopts  a
far  more  effectual,  and  indeed  a  double  process  of  blindfold-
ing ;  since,  as  in  those  cases  of  spontaneous  sleep-walking
in  which  the  eyes  are  open,  the  pupil  is  usually  found  to  be
fixed,  and  insensible  to  light,  when  by  forcing  open  the  eye-
lids, we  can  see  it ;  while,  in  a  large  proportion  of  cases,
the  pupil  is  not  only  fixed  and  insensible,  but  is  also  turned
upwards,  so  that  it  cannot  be  seen  at  all,  when  the  eyelids
are  forcibly  opened.  In  addition  to  all  this,  we  can  place
the  hand  above  or  behind  the  head,  positions  in  which  the
most  sensitive  and  moveable  eye  cannot  possibly  see  any
thing.

The  sleeper  makes,  at  first,  great  efforts  to  look  at  the
hand,  and  instinctively  exhibits  the  pantomime  of  intent
looking,  but  with  closed  eyes.  He  has  the  appearance  of
looking  (if  his  eyes  were  open)  before  him,  in  all  cases,  even
when  the  hand'  is  above  or  behind.  It  is  evidently  the
"  mind's  eye,''  the  internal  vision,  which  is  strained  to  catch
the  image  of  the  hand;  and  it  is  often  described,  especially
at  first,  as  dim,  enveloped  in  a  thick  mist,  or  faintly  visible.
By  degrees  the  mist  clears  off,  that  is,  when  a  deeper  or
higher  stage  of  sleep  is  reached,  and  the  hand  is  seen,  with-
out an  effort,  plain  and  distinct,  in  its  natural  color.  At
first,  it  is  often  grey,  or  devoid  of  color.

2.  When  the  sleeper  has  reached  a  certain  stage,  he  will
often  notice  the  objects  which  happen  to  be  placed  behind
him,  and  in  such  positions  that,  were  his  eyes  open,  he  could
not  see  them  without  turning  round  ;  and  he  will  describe
them,  without  ceasing  for  a  moment  to  look  straight  for-


118

ward,  or  downward,  towards  his  knees,  as  he  very  often
does,  his  eyes  being  firmly  closed.  If  anything  he  done,
however  quietly,  in  any  part  of  the  room,  he  will,  if  not
absorbed  in  internal  contemplation,  detect  it.  This  fact,  as
well  as  those  concerning  the  hand  of  the  operator,  or  of  others,
I  have  very  often  seen. They  are  of  daily  occurrence.

Now  we  have  here,  distinctly,  the  fact  of  perception,  in
the  shape  of  vision,  without  the  use  of  the  external  organs
of  vision.  This  is  the  essential  fact,  and  it  is  as  difficult  to
understand  or  explain,  as  any. other  form  of  clairvoyance
whatever.  The  question  is,  by  what  means  is  the  image  of
the  object  conveyed  to  the  internal  organ  of  vision,  and  to
the  sensorium  ?  That  the  brain  is  vitally  concerned  in  this
species  of  vision,  no  one  can  doubt ;  but,  by  what  kind  of
influence  or  emanation  is  it  affected  ?  Common  vision,  by
ordinary  light,  it  cannot  be,  for  the  eyes  are  closed,  and  the
rays  from  the  object  do  not,  in  most  cases,  fall  even  on  the
closed  eyelids,  while,  as  before  stated,  the  pupil  is,  or  may
be  insensible  to  light.

We  must,  therefore,  admit  the  existence  of  some  other
force  or  influence,  exerted  by  bodies,  and  capable  of  reach-
ing the  brain  without  passing  through  the  eye.  When  the
sleeper  finds  his  vision  not  clear,  or  misty,  as  he  calls  it,  he
will  very  often,  in  order  to  see  better  an  object  which  is
shown  to  him,  apply  it  to  his  forehead,  to  the  coronal  region,
or,  in  some  rare  cases  to  the  occiput,  and  forthwith  perceive
it  more  distinctly.  It  would  appear,  then,  that  this  influ-
ence, like  heat,  can  traverse  the  cranium  and  its  membranes,
and  reach  the  brain.  And  it  is  probable  that,  when  the
sleeper  perceives  objects  not  in  contact  with  his  head,  their
emanations  still  fall  on,  and  pass  through,  his  cranium.

Some  who  admit,  as  all  who  examine  the  matter  for  them-
selves must  do,  that  the  eyes  are  not  used,  have  endeavored
to  account  for  this  kind  of  perception  by  assuming  an  ex-
treme degree  of  acuteness  of  all  the  other  senses;  and  re-
fer to  the  case  of  the  blind,  who,  they  tell  us,  perceive  and
avoid  objects  by  means  of  an  extreme  degree  of  acuteness
of  hearing,  touch,  and  smell.  They  point  also  to  sleep-
walkers, who  are  supposed  to  be  warned  of  the  presence  or
proximity  of  solid  bodies  by  the  action  of  these  on  the  air,
perceived  by  their  sense  of  touch,  morbidly  acute  as  it  is  said
to  be.


WITHOUT  THE  USE  OF  THE  EYES.  119

But  the  latter  is  not  only  an  assumption,  but  a  complete
petitio  principii ;  since  it  is  much  more  probable,  and  at  all
events  possible,  that  sleep-walkers  are  awake  to  impressions
which  are  so  far  new,  that  they  are  not  usually  noticed  in
the  waking  state ;  and  the  assumed  acuteness  of  touch  has
never  been  proved.  As  to  hearing,  it  is  enough  to  say,  that
clairvoyants  are  far  more  frequently  deaf  to  the  loudest
sounds,  save  the  voice  of  the  operator,  or  of  those  with
whom  they  sympathise,  than  they  are  possessed  of  extreme
acuteness  of  hearing.  And  in  regard  to  smell,  not  only
have  the  objects  frequently  no  smell,  but  their  color,  form,
transparency,  &c,  as  well  as,  in  most  cases,  luminous  ema-
nations from  them,  are  minutely  described;  matters  which
are  surely  out  of  the  province  of  the  olfactory  nerves  ;  or,
at  least,  if  they  have  come  within  it,  this  amounts  to  a
transference  of  a  sense,  one  of  the  most  striking  phenomena
of  Animal  Magnetism.

As  to  the  precise  nature  of  the  influence,  or  force,  or
emanation,  by  which  this  kind  of  interior  visual  perception
is  caused,  this  is  not  the  place  for  the  discussion  of  that
question.  But  I  may  here  point  to  the  very  frequent,  in
some  cases  universal,  occurrence  of  luminous  emanations
from  all  objects  thus  seen  by  the  sleeper,  nay,  often  seen
by  him  while  awake,  (as  in  the  case  of  the  light  from  the
tips  of  the  fingers  of  the  operator,  or  of  other  parties  pre-
sent,) first,  as  indicating  that  an  emanation  of  some  kind,
whether  it  be  called  a  force,  a  motion  among  the  particles
of  air.  or  of  a  supposed  ether,  or  a  fluid,  as  we  speak,
vaguely,  of  the  electric  or  magnetic  fluids,  really  does  pro-
ceed from  bodies  in  general  ;  and,  secondly,  as  confirming
the  results  of  the  researches  of  Baron  von  Reichenbach,  who
has  proved,  independently  of  all  experiments  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  the  existence  of  a  peculiar  influence  (force,  fluid,
or  imponderable  agent,)  in  all  forms  of  matter,  and  pervad-
ing the  universe,  the  action  of  which  is  perceived,  in  various
forms,  by  a  large  proportion  of  mankind,  and  always  very
distinctly  by  spontaneous  somnambulists.  It  is  in  this  di-
rection, that  we  shall  most  probably  find  the  explanation  so
eagerly  sought  after.

When  we  have  seen,  in  several  independent  cases,  these
first  manifestations  of  the  power  of  clairvoyance,  which
embrace  the  essential  parts  of  the  phenomenon,  and  compel
us  to  admit  some  new  mode  of  access  to  the  interior  vision,


120  VISION  THROUGH  OPAQUE  BODIES.

we  are  no  longer  astounded  at  the  further  manifestations  of
the  same  power.  We  feel,  that  he  who  can  see  an  object
behind  him,  while  his  eyes  are  closed,  and  who  sees  it  best
when  applied  to  his  head,  has  some  means  of  perceiving
objects,  which  is  either  not  possessed  in  the  ordinary  wak-
ing state,  or,  if  possessed,  is  not  attended  to,  but  its  impres-
sions are  overpowered  by  the  stronger  impressions  of  the
ordinary  senses.  We  easily  conceive  that,  in  highly  sus-
ceptible cases,  distance  may  be  a  matter  of  no  moment ;  that
our  new  force  or  influence  may,  like  light,  traverse  the  uni-
verse without  difficulty,  while,  like  heat,  it  may  be  able  to
penetrate  through  all  objects,  even  through  walls  of  brick
or  stone.  And  such,  precisely,  is  the  character  of  Baron
von  Eeichenbach's  Odyle,  save  that  it  moves  with  less
volocity  than  light,  and  passes  through  solid  bodies  much
more  easily  than  heat,  as  we  shall  explain  hereafter.

3.  The  next  observation  is,  that  the  clairvoyant  can  often
perceive  objects,  which  are  wrapped  up  in  paper,  or  enclosed
in  boxes  or  other  opaque  receptacles.  Thus,  I  have  seen
objects  described,  as  to  form,  color,  surface,  markings,  down
to  minute  flaws  and  chipped  edges,  when  enclosed  in  paper,
cotton,  pasteboard  boxes,  wooden  boxes,  boxes  of  papier
mache,  and  of  metal.  I  have  further  known  letters  minute-
ly described,  the  address,  post  marks,  seal,  and  even  the
contents,  read  off  when  the  letters  were  enclosed  in  thick
envelopes  or  boxes.  No  fact  is  better  attested  than  this  ;
Major  Buckley,  who  would  seem  to  possess,  in  an  unusual
degree,  the  power  of  producing  in  his  subjects  this  peculiar
form  of  clairvoyance,  has  brought,  I  believe,  upwards  of  140
persons,  many  of  them  of  high  character  and  education,  and
89  of  these  even  in  the  conscious  state,  to  the  point  of  read-
ing, with  almost  invariable  accuracy,  although  with  occa-
sional mistakes,  printed  mottoes,  enclosed  in  boxes  or  in
nutshells.  He  causes  some  friends,  who  wish  to  see  and  test
the  fact,  to  purchase  a  number  of  these  nuts,  in  different
shops,  and  to  seal  them  up  in  a  bag,  from  whence  they  are
taken  by  the  clairvoyant  by  chance,  read,  noted,  and
opened.  It  is  physically  impossible  for  any  of  the  parties
concerned  to  know  the  contents  of  any  one  nut;  at  the
utmost,  a  clairvoyant,  who  has  had  much  practice,  may,
after  reading  the  first  few  words,  guess  the  remainder  of  a
motto  previously  deciphered.  But  out  of  a  certain  number,
the  majority,  sometimes  all, have  been  found  new, and


MAJOR  BUCKLEY'S  CASES.  121

besides,  new  clairvoyants  constantly  succeed  in this  well-
devised  experiment.

In  regard  to  this  particular  form  of  clairvoyance,  I  would
observe,  first ;  that  only  a  certain  proportion  of  sleepers
possess  this  power,  so  that  any  one  may  very  probably  not
have  it.  Secondly ;  that  the  same  clairvoyant  may  succeed
at  one  time,  and  fail  at  another,  from  causes  explained  in
the  first  section.  Thirdly ;  that  it  occurs  more  frequently
in  the  experience  of  some  magnetisers  than  in  that  of  others.
Major  Buckley,  for  example,  is  very  successful,  while  there
are  some  magnetisers  who  never  produce  it  at  all,  but  who
call  forth,  perhaps,  other  equally  wonderful  phenomena.
No  one,  therefore,  is  entitled  to  deny  the  fact,  because  he
does  not  meet  with  it  in  his  own  cases,  or  in  any  given  case,
or  on  any  one  given  occasion.

I  have  already  mentioned  that  there  are  some  clairvoyants
who  cannot  thus  read  or  see,  unless  some  one  be  present
who  knows  that  which  is  to  be  read  and  seen,  and  that  in
these  cases,  it  is  performed  by  sympathetic  clairvoyance,  or
thought-reading.  I  would  here  add,  that  it  would  appear
that  some  clairvoyants  can  thus  read  at  one  time  directly,
at  another  only  sympathetically,  and  at  a  third,  perhaps
not  at  all.  This  is  an  additional  reason,  why  a  failure,  or
even  a  few  failures,  do  not  entitle  us  to  reject  the  fact,  save
as  a  speciality  in  the  individual  cases  in  which  the  failure
occurs.

I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  say  more  than  I  have  al-
ready said  on  the  subject  of  attempted  imposture  in  such
cases.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  render  all  deceit  impossi-
ble ;  and  I  regard  Major  Buckley's  method  as  entirely
satisfactory ;  but  we  must  never  forget  that  even  a  genuine
and  good  clairvoyant,  if  exposed  to  the  close  proximity  and
the  involuntary  magnetic  influence  of  a  vigorous  person,  or
of  several  such  persons,  more  vigorous,  perhaps,  than  his
magnetiser,  penetrated  with  the  conviction  that  deceit  is
practised  by  him,  and  eagerly  bent  on  detecting  it,  may
easily  be  deprived  of  all,  or  the  greater  part  of  his  power.

4.  Proceeding  onwards,  we  next  find  our  sleeper  perceiv-
ing objects  in  the  next  room,  or  in  that  overhead,  or  in  that
below.  This  is  a  frequent  phenomenon,  requiring  no  special
preparation,  and  usually  brought  to  light  by  the  sleeper,  of
his  own  accord,  remarking  what  takes  place  there.  It  can-
11


122  VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.

not  be  referred  to  ordinary  sympathy  with  the  operator,
for  the  latter  often  does  not  know  the  room  described  ;  and
when  he  does,  changes  or  events  in  it,  taking  place  at  the
moment,  and  unknown  to  the  operator,  are  noticed.  I  have
myself  seen  it  frequently.

It  often  happens,  that  when  the  operator  knows  the  room
described,  he  and  the  clairvoyant  will  dispute  about  some
trifling  matter,  in  which  he  declares  the  clairvoyant  to  be
wrong,  just  as  I  have  explained  under  the  head  of  sympathy.
But  it  also  frequently  occurs,  that  the  clairvoyant  proves
to  be  right,  some  change  having  been  made  since  the  ques-
tioner last  saw  it,  or  even  during  the  experiment.  It  is
needless  to  quote  cases,  for  this  is  one  of  the  very  commonest
phenomena,  and  there  is  none  which  more  forcibly  impresses
us  with  the  fact,  that  the  clairvoyant  really  sees  that  which
he  describes.  But  again  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  that
only  some  clairvoyants  exhibit  this  power,  and  that  those
who  possess  it,  do  not  possess  it  at  all  times,  nor,  when
they  do,  at  all  times  in  the  same  degree.

5.  The  next  step  is,  that  the  sleeper  can  see  into  another
house,  as  it  were,  mentally,  and  describe  it  in  every  part,
just  as  he  does  in  the  case  of  the  house  in  which  he  is.
This  I  have  often  seen,  and  have  had  opportunities  of  satis-
fying myself,  that  his  vision,  at  least  in  some  cases,  is  not
determined  by  sympathy  with  the  operator's  mind.

In  the  first  place,  his  description  is  that  of  a  person  seeing
and  examining,  for  the  first  time,  what  he  describes.  He
attends  to  the  minutest  details  of  the  objects  he  looks  at,
but  often  omits,  till  his  attention  is  called  to  them,  objects
on  which  the  mind  of  the  operator  is  dwelling  at  the  time.
Secondly,  he  observes  the  persons  who  may  be  in  the  room,
and  what  they  are  doing,  the  whole  of  which  may  be,  and
often  is,  unknown  to  his  questioner,  but  is  afterwards  ascer-
tained to  be  correct.  Thus,  in  one  case  which  I  exam-
ined, the  clairvoyant  found  my  house,  which  he  had  never
seen  nor  heard  of,  and  the  situation  of  which  he  was  not  told.
He  first  noticed  the  number  of  steps  at  the  door,  (which  I
could  only  have  guessed  at,)  correctly  ;  he  then  entered,
described  the  lobby-table  and  the  piece  of  furniture  beyond
it,  on  which  coats  and  hats  are  hung ;  but  omitted  to  notice,
till  I  urged  him  to  look,  a  pillar  in  the  middle  of  the  lobby.
He  then  described  the  situation,  direction,  and  shape  of  the


VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  123

stair,  but  stopped  to  scrutinize  the  stair-carpet  and  "queer
brass  fenders"  (carpet  rods)  which  were  new  to  him,  but  of
which  I  never  thought  for  a  moment  ;  then  entered  the
drawing-room,  minutely  and  accurately  described  the  furni-
ture and  ornaments,  as  far  as  time  was  given  him  to  do  so  ;
noticed  various  striking  peculiarities  ;  saw,  at  one  time,  a
man  sitting  in  the  room,  (the  man-servant  at  the  hour  of
prayers,)  and,  at  a  later  time,  only  a  lady,  in  a  particular
arm-chair,  engaged  in  reading  a  new  book,  (which  turned
out  quite  correct.)  I  give  this  as  a  recent  specimen  of  a
fact  often  observed.

In  another  recent  case,  a  lady,  who  became  clairvoyant
at  the  first  sitting,  having  been  magnetised  by  Mr.  Lewis,
described  the  same  house,  and  also  saw.  in  another  room,  a
certain  lady  and  gentleman,  quite  unknown  to  her,  as  was
the  house  also ;  the  lady,  in  a  particular  dress  and  head-
dress, sitting  on  a  sofa  with  other  persons,  the  gentleman
standing  at  a  large  round  table,  on  which  he  leaned  his  hand  ;
on  the  little  finger  of  the  hand  was  a  ring,  and  he  was  con-
versing with  a  short  dark-haired  gentleman.  All  of  which
was  correct  at  that  moment,  save  that  she  called  the  hand
on  which  she  saw  the  ring  the  right,  instead  of  the  left.
This  is  a  frequent,  but  by  no  means  an  uniform  blunder  of
clairvoyants.  Some  of  them  always  put  right  for  left,  south
for  north,  east  for  west,  and,  in  the  sleep,  adhere  immoveably
to  this  error,  which  is  an  additional  proof  that  they  do  not,
in  those  cases,  sympathise  with  the  mind  of  the  operator,
who  of  course  knows  the  truth.  Thus,  in  a  third  clairvoy-
ant, magnetised  by  myself,  I  was  at  first  much  puzzled  by
his  apparent  blunders  of  this  kind  ;  but  on  comparing  my
notes,  and  asking  a  few  questions,  I  discovered  that  the
error,  in  his  case,  was  invariable.  He  told  me,  for  example,
that  the  houses  in  Prince's  Street,  which  he  saw,  looked
north  ;  that  the  Castle  was  to  the  north  of  Prince's  Street ;
that  the  fire-place  in  my  drawing-room  was  on  the  east,  and
the  door  on  the  west  side,  whereas  the  former  is  on  the
west,  the  latter  on  the  east,  side  of  the  room;  and  he  dis-
dainfully rejected  all  suggestions  to  the  contrary,  declaring
that  he  saw  it  quite  plain,  and  that  I  must  surely  be  making
a  fool  of  him.  I  cannot  pretend  to  explain  this,  which,  as
I  have  said,  is  only  an  occasional,  although,  I  am  told  by
experienced  magnetisers,  a  tolerably  frequent  phenomenon.


124  VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.

6.  The  next  fact  is,  that  the  sleeper,  at  the  request  of  the
operator,  and  frequently  of  his  own  accord,  visits  distant
places  and  countries,  and  describes  them,  as  well  as  the
persons  in  them.  This  may,  as  I  have  already  said,  be
done,  in  some  cases,  by  sympathy,  but  there  are  many  cases
in  which  ordinary  sympathy  will  not  explain  it.

Thus,  the  clairvoyant  will  often  see  and  describe  accu-
rately, as  is  subsequently  ascertained,  places,  objects,  and
people,  totally  unknown  to  the  operator,  or  to  any  one  pre-
sent :  and  he  will  likewise,  in  describing  such  as  are  known
to  the  operator,  notice  details  and  changes  which  could  not
be  known  to  him.

The  clairvoyant  appears,  as  it  were,  mentally  to  go  to  the
place  named.  He  often  finds  himself,  first,  in  no  flace,  but
floating,  as  it  were,  on  air,  or  in  space,  and  in  a  very  short
time  exclaims,  "Now,  I  am  there."  The  place  named  is
the  first,  as  a  general  rule,  that  presents  itself  to  him.  But
whether  it  be  so,  or  whether  he  see,  first,  some  other  place,
a  certain  internal  feeling  tells  him  when  he  is  right.  If  it
be  a  distant  town,  and  no  house  be  specified  to  him,  he
will  either  see  a  general  panoramic  view  of  it,  as  from  a
neighboring  hill,  or  from  a  height  in  the  air,  and  describe
this  as  he  would  a  map  or  bird's-eye  view,  or  he  will  find
himself  in  some  street,  place,  square,  or  promenade,  which,
although  not  specified  to  him,  is  at  once  recognised  from  his
account  of  it.  He  sees  and  describes  the  trees,  roads,
streets,  houses,  churches,  fountains,  and  walks,  and  the
people  moving  in  them,  and  his  expressions  of  delight  and
surprise  are  unceasing.  If  sent  thither,  to  use  his  almost
invariable  phrase,  a  second  or  a  third  time,  the  sleeper  will
see  the  same  objects,  but  remarks  the  change  on  the  living
part  of  the  picture.

For  example,  Mr.  D.,  a  clairvoyant,  magnetised  by  my-
self, when  in  an  early  and  imperfect  stage  of  lucidity,  was
asked  by  me  to  go  to  Aix-la-Chapelle,  he  never  having  left
Scotland.  He  agreed,  and  after  a  very  short,  apparently
an  aerial  voyage,  said  he  was  there.  He  was  in  a  beautiful
walk,  bordered  with  trees,  saw  green  turf,  and  the  walk
stretched  on  both  sides,  till  lost,  at  either  end,  by  a  turn-
ing, not  sharp,  but  gradual.  This  was  evidently  the  boule-
vard. Another  time,  I  specified  the  Friedrich  Wilhelm-
splatz,  where  he  saw  houses  on  one  side,  and  at  both  ends,


VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  lZO

some  much  higher  than  others,  the  place  itself  of  irregular
oblong  form,  wider  at  one  end  than  the  other,  and  partly
shrouded  in  a  mist,  of  which  he  long  complained  ;  on  the
other  side  a  long  building,  not  a  house.  In  the  middle,  a
road,  with  small  trees,  having  no  branches  till  the  stem  rose
rather  higher  than  a  man,  and  then  a  number,  but  the  top
obscured  by  mist.  Another  time,  he  saw  the  door  of
Nuellen's  Hotel,  large  enough,  he  thought,  to  allow  a  car-
riage to  enter,  but  not  more,  if  that ;  people  were  going  in
and  out ;  and  a  man  stood  at  the  door,  with  a  white  neck-
cloth and  vest,  and  no  hat ;  as  he  thought,  a  waiter.  In
the  saloon,  he  saw  tables,  all  brown,  no  one  there.  Another
time,  some  tables  were  white,  and  people  sat  at  them  eat-
ing, while  others  moved  about.  According  to  the  hours  of
experiment,  he  was  most  likely  right  both  times,  although
their  dinner  hour  differs  so  much  from  ours.  One  day,  I
sent  him  to  Cologne.  There  he  noticed,  from  a  bird's-eye
position,  a  large  building,  seen  rather  misty,  but  much
higher  than  the  houses.  He  got  into  a  street  near  it,  and
described  its  long  pointed  windows,  showing  with  his  fingers
their  form,  and  its  buttresses,  which  he  described,  but  could
not  name.  In  the  street,  he  saw  people,  indistinctly,
moving;  but  he  saw,  pretty  clearly,  one  "old  boy,"  as  he
called  him,  fat  and  comfortable,  standing  in  his  shop-door,
and  idling.  He  had  no  hat,  and  wore  an  apron.  Mr.  D.
was  much  surprised,  without  any  question  being  asked,  at
the  fact  that  about  half  of  the  men  he  saw,  both  in  Aix
and  Cologne,  wore  beards,  and  he  described  different
fashions  of  beards  and  moustaches.  One  time,  when  I  sent
him  to  Bonn,  he  gave  a  beautiful  account  of  the  view  from
the  hills  to  the  west  of  it,  of  the  town,  and  the  Rhine,
stretching  out  and  winding  through  the  plain,  with  the
rising  grounds  on  the  other  side,  such  as  the  Ennertz.  But
it  was  remarkable  that  he  stoutly  maintained,  that  the  hill
on  which  he  stood  was  to  the  east  of  the  town,  the  town  to
the  east  of  the  Rhine,  between  the  hill  and  the  river,  and
the  Rhine  running  towards  the  south  ;  whereas  I  knew
every  one  of  these  directions  to  be  reversed.

The  same  subject  has  often  spontaneously  visited  other
places,  unknown  to  me,  but  has  given  such  minute  and
graphic  accounts  of  the  localities,  the  people,  houses,  dress,
occupations,  and  topography  of  these  places,  that  I  should

11*


126  VISION  AT  A  DISTANCE.

recognise  them  at  once,  were  I  to  see  them.  I  intend  to
give,  in  Part  II.,  some  instances  of  this.

It  often  happens,  that  a  clairvoyant,  who. can  see  and  de-
scribe very  well  all  that  is  in  the  same  room,  or  the  next
room,  or  even  in  the  same  house,  cannot  thus  travel  to  a
distance,  without  passing  into  a  new  stage.  This  generally
occurs  spontaneously,  but  may  sometimes  be  effected  by
passes,  or  by  the  will  of  the  operator.

The  new  or  travelling  stage,  in  such  cases,  is  marked  by
peculiar  characters.  Thus,  in  one  very  fine  case,  which  I
had  the  opportunity  of  studying,  the  clairvoyante,  in  her
first  lucid  state,  could  tell  all  that  passed  behind  her,  or  in
the  next  room,  and  could,  by  contact,  perceive,  and  accu-
rately describe,  the  state  of  body  of  other  persons.  She
could  hear,  and  she  very  readily  answered,  every  question
put  to  her  by  any  one  present,  but  could  not  go  to  a  distant
place.  Yet,  as  I  saw,  she  would  often  spontaneously,  pass
from  that  state  or  stage  into  another,  in  which  she  was  deaf
to  all  sounds,  even  to  the  voice  of  her  magnetiser,  unless  he
spoke  with  his  mouth  touching  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  her
right  hand.  Any  one  else  might  also  converse  with  her  in
this  way,  but  when  first  addressed,  she  invariably  started.
And  now,  not  only  could  she  go  to  a  distance,  and  see  very
plainly  what  passed,  but  she  was  already  in  some  distant
place,  and  much  occupied  with  it.  She  called  this  going
away,  or,  when  it  was  done  by  her  magnetiser,  being  taken
away,  and  when  tired,  would  ask  him  to  bring  her  back,
which  he  did  by  some  trifling  manipulations.  She  then  re-
membered (in  her  first  state,  to  which  she  came  back,)  what
she  had  seen  on  her  travels.  I  shall  have  to  return  to  this
case  hereafter,  and  some  of  her  visions  will  also  be  given  in
Part  II.,  in  order  not  to  interrupt  the  current  of  the  de-
scription of  the  phenomena. I  shall  designate  her  as  E.

7.  Allied  to  the  preceding  manifestation,  is  that  of  seeing
any  person  asked  for,  by  the  operator  or  others.  The
sleeper,  in  certain  stages,  sees  the  person  asked  for,  not  in
any  locality,  but,  like  himself,  floating  in  air,  or  in  space.
He  describes  the  figure,  face,  hair,  complexion,  eyes,  gesture,
dress,  &c.  with  great  accuracy,  and  that  when  the  operator
has  never  seen  the  individual  described.  In  other  stages,
the  sleeper  sees  the  person  in  his  house,  or  in  the  street,  or
in  a  road  or  walk,  or  at  his  occupation,  whatever  that  may  be.


SYMPATHY  AND  CLAIRVOYANCE.  127

It  may  happen,  that  he  is  seen,  either  as  he  is  at  the  moment
jor  as  he  has  been  at  some  former  period.  The  clairvoyant
generally  expresses  a  decided  liking  or  dislike  for  the  person
seen.  If  the  person  be  at  a  great  distance,  and  his  actual
locality  not  known  to  the  enquirer,  it  may  often  be  ascer-
tained by  the  clairvoyant's  description ;  and  it  is  a  very
general  remark,  that  clairvoyants  have  a  great  difficulty  in
naming  persons  or  places  known  to  them,  and  are  often  very
averse  to  doing  so,  while  they  willingly  describe  them,  and
of  course,  in  regard  to  unknown  persons,  places,  and  objects,
we  must  be  confined  to  description  alone.

Experiments  of  this  kind  are  among  the  most  beautiful
and  interesting  in  Animal  Magnetism.  They  may  be  varied
in  a  thousand  ways,  and  admit,  very  frequently,  of  the
easiest  and  most  complete  verification.  Some  instances  will
be  given  in  Part  II.

8.  •  Some  clairvoyants  possess  the  power  of  sympathizing
with  the  absent  or  unknown  persons  seen  and  described  by
them,  so  as  to  read  their  thoughts,  to  know  their  past  actions,
at  least  in  part,  and  even  to  perceive  their  intentions.  E.
often  exhibits  this  power,  and  I  shall  have  occasion  to  men-
tion several  instances  of  it,  both  in  some  of  the  subsequent
sections,  and  in  Part  II.

9.  The  powers  mentioned  in  the  two  preceding  sections,
are  not  only  exercised  when  the  person  asked  for  is  named
by  the  operator  or  other  enquirer,  but  also,  when  some  ob-
ject, formerly  in  contact  with  the  person,  such  as  a  ring,
a  piece  of  dress,  a  lock  of  hair,  or  even  a  letter,  or  piece  of
writing  without  the  name,  all  information  being  withheld.
This  power  is  very  highly  developed  in  E.,  and  I  have  very
frequently  tested  it.  A  lock  of  hair,  or  the  hand-writing  of
the  person,  the  more  recent  the  better,  seem  to  answer  best,
and  are,  at  least,  the  most  convenient  means  for  doing  so.
I  shall  give  several  instances  in  Part  II.,  and  I  shall  here
describe  her  mode  of  proceeding,  and  the  results,  in  a
general  form.  She  crushes  the  letter  or  envelope,  or  hair,
in  her  hands,  and  if  the  person  do  not  at  once  appear,  she
will  often  lay  it  on  her  head,  on  the  upper  part  or  coronal
surface,  and  this  she  calls  putting  it  straight  before  her
eyes,  which  are  closed.  She  then  describes  the  person,  and
his  occupation,  which  is  often,  not  always,  that  of  the  mo-
ment of  the  experiment,  sometimes  that  of  the  time  when


128  SYMPATHY  AND  CLAIRVOYANCE

the  letter  was  written,  or  of  some  former  time. This  must
be  attended  to,  or  else  E.  may  be  supposed  to  fail,  when,  in
truth,  she  succeeds  perfectly  ;  and  she  is  one  of  those  who
cannot  at  all  times  distinguish  the past  from  the  present,
in  the  images  which  present  themselves,  although she  is
often  quite  clear  on  this  point. E.  will  often  trace  the  his-
tory of  the  person  for  a  considerable  period,  down  to  the
present  moment. This  she  did,  for  example,  in  the  case  of
Mr.  Willey,  and  of  another  gentleman  who  had  gone  from
Liverpool  to  California,  and  were  then  in  San  Francisco,
most  correctly,  as  attested -by  Mr.  Willey,  publicly,  on  his
return  to  England. She  has  often  done  the  same  thing  in
other  cases. (See  Part  ll.) E.  sympathizes  to  a  remark-
able extent  with  persons thus  seen, so as  to  read  their
thoughts. But  what  is  most  remarkable,  is  this,  that  she
holds  conversations  with them,  asking questions,  and  re-
ceiving (of  course  inaudible)  answers,  as  appears  from  her
remarks,  which  are  chiefly  addressed,  in  an easy,  familiar
tone,  to  the  individuals. She  will  often  scold  them,  for  ex-
ample, because  they  have  not  written  to  their  friends,  and
will listen to, and admit or  reject their excuses. She
maintains  that  she  speaks  to  them,  and  that  she  can  suggest
thoughts  or  even  dreams  to  their  minds. Nay,  she  told  one
person,  seen  from his  hand-writing,  that  at  a certain  pe-
riod, when  confined  to  bed  from  illness,  he  had  had  a  vision
of  his  wife  coming  to  see  him. This  she  spoke  of,  as  if  he
had  just  informed  her  of  it ;  and  it  appeared,  subsequently,
that  he  had  such  a  vision  as  she  described. She  added  nu-
merous  other  details,  for  which  I  refer  to  Part  II. She
takes  likings  to  some  of  her  new  acquaintances  thus  formed,
and dislikings to  others,  and  is  much annoyed,  and  ren-
dered angry,  by  anything  mean  or  bad. In  one  case,  where
she  traced  a  stolen  watch,  and  described  the  thief,  who  was
not  habitually  such,  she  spoke  to  the  thief  of  that  thief's
feelings,  fears,  and  intentions,  and  scolded  her  severely  for
her  theft  and  hypocrisy,  stating  that  she  was  afraid  of  what
she  had  done,  and  intended  to  return the  watch,  and  say
that  she  had  found  it. "  But  you  took  it  !  you  know  you
did  !"  said  she  with  angry  energy. Before  the  account  of
this  sitting  reached  the  proprietor  of  the  watch,  it  had  been
returned  by  the  person  indicated,  who  said  she  had  found
it. (See  Part  II.) E.  has  frequently  discovered  lost  and


IN  REGARD  TO  ABSENT  PERSONS.  129

stolen  property,  when  put  in  communication  with  it,  or  with
its  proprietor.  She  has  also  frequently  discovered  missing
papers  of  value  in  the  same  way.  Another  clairvoyante
lately  recovered  fifteen  bales  of  cotton,  which  had  been
stolen  from  a  ship  in  New  Orleans,  and  traced  it  thence  in
another  ship  to  Havre,  where  it  was  found ;  and  the  fact  is
attested  by  the  captain  of  the  former  vessel,  who  thus  es-
caped the  loss  of  a  large  sum  of  money.  I  have  myself
tested  E.  with  various  hand-writings  and  other  objects,  and
found  her  power  to  be  most  remarkable.  For  some  details,
see  Part  II.

10.  Another  very  striking  fact  is,  that  some  clairvoyants
will  accurately  indicate  the  time  of  the  places  they  thus
mentally  visit.  E.,  who  is  one  of  these,  does  this  with  great
accuracy.  It  is  sometimes  said  by  the  clairvoyant  to  be
done  by  observing  the  appearance  and  position  of  the  sun,
and  is  probably  a  guess,  more  or  less  accurate,  as  in  the
case  of  many  of  us  in  the  ordinary  state.  But  E.  declares
that  she  does  it  by  reading  the  clocks  of  a  place,  or  the
watch  of  the  individual  seen  by  her.  And  it  is  found  that
she  will  give,  for  the  same  place,  at  any  hour  of  the
day,  invariably  the  same  difference  of  time,  so  that,  where
both  watches  are  correct,  the  difference  of  longitude  may
be  ascertained.  For  some  very  well-devised  and  satisfac-
tory experiments,  made  with  her  at  the  request  of  my
honored  friend,  Sir  W.  C.  Trevelyan,  on  this  point,  I  again
refer  to  Part  II.

11.  Not  only  do  clairvoyants  see  persons  asked  for,  and
such  as  are  not  asked  for,  but  whose  hair,  writing,  &c.  are
put  into  their  hands,  but  they  also  see,  in  the  same  ways,
persons  who  are  no  longer  alive.  Mr.  D.  has  described  to
me,  possibly  by  thought-reading,  persons  long  dead,  of
whose  death,  and  even  of  whose  existence,  he  was  not  aware,
when  I  have  asked  for  them  by  name.  They  usually  ap-
peared to  him  as  if  alive,  or,  as  he  expressed  it,  like  us;
while  he  saw  his  own  brother,  dead  five  years,  not  like  us,  but
quite  different.  E.  has  the  same  power  of  seeing  dead  peo-
ple, but  she  also  will  not  speak  of  them  as  dead ;  they  are
shelled.  In  one  or  two  very  curious  experiments,  she  was,
spontaneously,  or  by  some  obscure  inducement,  while  on  her
way  to  visit,  mentally,  a  lady  in  a  distant  town,  led  to  enter


130  VISIONS  OP  DEAD  PERSONS,  ETC.'

another  house,  where  she  saw  a  lady,  who  turned  out  to  be
shelled,  and  rather  frightened  her  at  first,  till  she  found  that
out.  She  is  never  frightened,  nor  are  clairvoyants  in  gene-
ral, by  seeing  those  who  are  dead.  They  rather  like  to  see
them.  Mr.  D.  delights  in  contemplating  his  dead  brother,
although  he  is  moved  and  saddened  at  the  sight.  E.  also  likes
to  see  shelled  persons.  Both  instinctively  feel  a  difference,
but  never  use  the  word  death  or  dead,  and  will  use  the  most
ingenious  circumlocutions  to  avoid  it,  till  they  hit  on  some
peculiar  term.

12.  Clairvoyants  can  only  see,  not  only  dead  persons,
but  those  of  former  ages,  and  the  events  in  which  they  are
concerned.  I  have  heard  of  some  very  striking  instances
of  this,  in  reference  to  historical  personages,  which  I  may.
afterwards  mention,  and  in  which,  all  that  could  be  verified
was  found  to  be  correct.  One  clairvoyant,  for  example,
traced  the  history  of  a  ring  for  about  800  years,  and  was
found  to  be  accurate  for  70  or  80  years  back  or  more.  The
shelled  lady,  seen  by  E.,  as  mentioned  in  the  preceding
paragraph,  was  in  the  costume,  and  the  room  had  the  fur-
niture, of  280  to  300  years  ago.  She  saw  various  events
connected  with  this  shelled  lady,  and  when  asked  what  she
had  died  of,  started  back  in  surprise,  and  with  a  very  sig-
nificant gesture,  said,  that  she  died  of  having  her  head  cut
off.  See  Part  II.  I  have  some  reason  to  think,  that,  by
means  of  very  lucid  clairvoyants,  many  obscure  points  in
history  might  be  cleared  up,  and  that,  by  the  discovery  of
documentary  evidence.

This  power  of  seeing  the  past  is  truly  remarkable,  and
deeply  interesting.  It  would  appear  to  indicate,  that  what
has  once  existed,  or  happened,  leaves  a  trace  of  some  kind,
perceptible  to  the  inner  vision  and  soul  of  man,  when  no
longer  obscured  or  overpowered  by  the  coarser  impressions
conveyed  to  the  sensorium  by  the  external  senses.  This
idea,  which  has  often  been  entertained  by  philosophers  and
thinkers,  we  shall  again  refer  to,  in  its  proper  place.

13.  Another  power,  exhibited  by  the  clairvoyant,  is  that
of  seeing  the  structure  and  interior  of  his  own  frame.  The
most  eloquent  descriptions  ever  given  of  the  wonders  of  the
human  body,  never  produced  half  the  effects  on  the  mind
which  is  caused  by  the  simple,  but  graphic  words  of  the
clairvoyant,  who  is  perhaps  altogether  ignorant  of  anatomy,


INTRO  VISION.  181

and  yet  sees,  in  all  their  beauty  and  marvellous  perfection,
the  muscles,  vessels,  bones,  nerves,  glands,  brain,  lungs,  and
other  viscera,  and  describes  the  minutest  ramifications  of  nerves
and  vessels,  with  an  accuracy  surpassing  that  of  the  most  skil-
ful anatomist.  He  will  trace  any  vessel  or  nerve  in  its  most
complex  distribution  ;  the  whole,  to  him,  is  transparent,
bathed  in  delicate  light,  and  full  of  life  and  motion.  Some,
at  first,  are  terrified  on  seeing  these  wonders,  but  soon  learn
to  admire  and  delight  in  them.  But  it  is  only  a  certain
proportion  of  clairvoyants  who  pass  into  that  particular
stage,  and  as  experiments  are  most  frequently  made  on  the
uneducated,  or  half  educated,  they  are  often  at  a  loss  for
words  to  describe  what  they  see.  I  cannot  doubt  that,
when  intelligent  medical  men  shall  be  themselves  rendered
clairvoyant,  some  useful  information  will  be  derived  from
the  exercise  of  this  power.

It  is  easy  to  understand,  that  when  the  sleeper  sees
his  frame  in  this  perfect  way,  he  can  detect  disorder
and  disorganisation  in  it.  This,  indeed,  he  very  readily
does,  and  his  diagnosis  is  often  confirmed  by  that  of
the  physician  who  attends  him  when  he  is  suffering  from
illness.

14.  The  clairvoyant,  in  some  cases,  possesses  the  same
power  in  reference  to  the  bodies  of  those  en  rapport  with
him.  He  describes  their  structure,  and  its  derangements;
and  I  have  good  reason  to  believe,  that  in  some  instances,
when  the  disease  is  of  an  obscure  nature,  his  diagnosis  has
proved,  and  has  been  acknowledged  to  be,  correct.

The  clairvoyant  who  possesses  this  power,  can  often  ex-
ercise it  at  a  distance,  with  the  help  of  the  hair  or  of  the
hand-writing.  I  have  seen  it  done  both  ways,  and  repeat-
edly with  very  great  minuteness  and  accuracy.  The  obser-
vations of  the  clairvoyant  have  always  corresponded  to  the
opinion  of  the  physician  who  knew  and  treated  the  case,
but  have  often  gone  further,  and  in  the  subsequent  opinion
of  the  physician,  correctly,  in  the  cases  I  have  studied.

I  have  already,  in  treating  of  sympathy,  alluded  to  this,
and  stated  my  opinion,  that  the  treatment  recommended  by
the  clairvoyant  is  almost  always  a  reflection  of  that  which
he  has  himself  experienced,  or  learned  from  some  medical
man.  It  has  generally,  in  each  prescribing  clairvoyant,
one  unchanging  character. It  is  homoeopathic,  or  hydro-


132  CLAIRVOYANT  PREVISION.

pathic,  or  mesmeric,  &c,  &c.  But  some  clairvoyants  do
appear  to  have  an  instinctive  power  of  selecting  unknown
remedies,  although  I  have  had  no  opportunities  of  seeing
this  done.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted,  that  some  persons,  not  at  all
qualified  for  the  task,  use  genuine  or  possibly  spurious  clair-
voyants, who  are  made  to  examine  and  prescribe,  for  the
object,  exclusively,  of  pecuniary  profit  to  their  employers.
This  ought  to  be  discouraged;  but  on  the  other  hand,  where
a  well  qualified  medical  man,  of  good  character,  is  fortunate
enough  to  meet  with  a  good  clairvoyant,  he  does  rightly  in
availing  himself  of  the  power,  to  assist  his  diagnosis.  I
rejoice  to  know  that  this  is  done,  in  more  than  one  instance,
by  medical  gentlemen  of  character  and  standing.

I  shall  here  close  this  Letter,  and,  in  the  next,  I  shall  go
on  to  some  other  phenomena,  connected  with  the  subject  of
direct  or  true  clairvoyance.


LETTER  VIII.

We  now  come  to  a  part  of  the  subject  which,  to  some,  is
the  most  interesting;  nay,  which,  in  some  minds,  swallows
up  all  the  rest,  so  that  when  Animal  Magnetism,  or  Mes-
merism, but  especially  Clairvoyance,  is  spoken  of,  this  phe-
nomenon, namely,  Clairvoyant  Prevision,  or  the  power  of
predicting  future  events,  is  alone  understood.

I  would,  in  the  first  place,  remark,  that  whether  Prevision
exist  or  not,  we  have  now  what  I  consider  sufficient  evidence
that  clairvoyants  do  possess  the  power  of  seeing  contem-
porary or  present  events,  as  well  as  that  of  seeing  past
events.  And  even  if  it  should  turn  out,  that  all  alleged
cases  of  prevision  are  founded  on  some  fallacy,  this  would
not  affect  these  other  phenomena,  which  must  rest  on  their
own  evidence.  I  premise  this,  because  I  have  often  heard
the  alleged  impossibility  of  prevision,  or  its  absence  on  a
particular  case,  employed  as  an  argument,  or  rather  a  proof,
against  the  possibility  of  clairvoyant  vision,  introvision,  and


DURATION  OF  SLEEP  PREDICTED.  133

retrovision. Now,  I  cannot  consent  that  these  should  be,
in  any  way,  made  to  depend  on  the  other.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  these  things,  vision,  introvision,
and  retrovision,  being,  as  I  think,  established  as  facts,
though  not  explained  or  understood  as  occurring  under  any
known  laws,  furnish  undoubtedly  an  additional  argument  for
the  possibility  of  prevision.  If,  in  some  way,  to  us  at  pre-
sent unaccountable,  present  and  past  events  are  presented
to  the  mind's  eye,  may  not  future  events  be  also  thus  per-
ceptible ?  If  past  occurrences  leave  a  trace  behind  them,
may  not  "coming  events  cast  a  shadow  before?"  If  the
latter  is  inconceivable,  the  former,  had  we  not  seen  them,
would  be  equally  so,  and,  whether  conceivable  or  not,  the
one  is  as  easy,  or  rather  as  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
explain  as  the  other.

1.  We  have  already  seen  that  many  somnambulists  can
predict,  to  the  second,  how  long  they  have  to  sleep ;  and
they  will  do  so,  however  often  they  may  be  asked,  at  differ-
ent intervals  of  the  same  sleep,  and  always  name  the  same
minute.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  they  are  never  wrong,
for  some  known  interferences  may  derange  the  phenomena,
while  some  unknown  ones  seem  also,  at  times,  to  operate.
But  in  those  who  possess  the  power,  failure  is  the  exception.
Thus,  in  a  set  of  observations  I  made  on  this  point  in  one
case,  where  this  power  was  early  developed,  out  of  thirty-
five  sittings,  the  time  of  waking  was  precisely  predicted  in
thirty-one,  in  many  of  these  three  or  four  times,  at  different
intervals;  in  all,  more  than  once.  Of  the  remaining  four,
in  two  the  time  was  not  asked  at  all;  in  the  other  two,  dis-
turbance occurred,  as  I  shall  explain  beloAV.

The  form  of  prediction  varies.  Some  subjects  name  the
hour  and  minute,  usually  by  the  watch  of  the  operator,
without,  however,  its  being  shown  to  them;  or  by  some
clock,  to  which  they  are  accustomed  to  refer.  They  say,
for  example,  "I  shall  sleep  till  eight,"  or,  "I  shall  wake  at
thirty-four  minutes  past  nine,"  &c.  Others,  among  whom
is  the  person  referred  to  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  name
the  number  of  hours  or  minutes  they  have  to  sleep.  That
person,  for  example,  would  say,  "I  have  fifty-three  minutes
to  sleep;"  (I  never  caused  him  to  sleep  more  than  an  hour
in  these  trials;)  and,  if  I  asked  again,  after  twenty-one
minutes  by  my  watch,  he  would  say,  after  a  moment's  at-
12


184  DURATION  OF  THE  SLEEP

tention,  "I  have  still  thirty-two  minutes  to  sleep."  When
I  again  enquired,  after  an  interval  of  fourteen  and  a  half
minutes,  he  said,  "I  have  to  sleep  eighteen  minutes,  no!
only  seventeen  and  a  half,"  and  so  on.

It  would  appear  that  these  two  modes  of  fixing  the  time
of  waking  depend  on  the  form  of  that  which  presents  itself
to  the  interior  vision.  The  former  class  see  the  hour  on
some  imagined  clock  or  watch,  or  possibly  look  by  their
lucidity  at  the  house  clock,  or  at  the  operator's  watch.  I
know  that  some  have  said  that  they  saw  a  watch  or  time-
piece of  some  kind  before  them  when  asked  the  question,
and  that  some  internal,  inexplicable  feeling  showed  them
the  point  at  which  the  hands  would  be  at  the  moment  of
their  awaking.  The  individual  above  referred  to,  on  the
other  hand,  spontaneously  told  me  of,  and  most  minutely
described,  a  sort  of  apparatus  that  enabled  him  to  answer
the  question.  He  saw  a  kind  of  scale,  or  measuring  rod,
which  accompanied  him,  and  seemed  to  pass  before  his  eyes,
moving  from  left  to  right,  slowly,  so  that  while  certain
marks  or  divisions,  at  one  time  to  the  left  of  his  eye, "when
they  seemed  to  advance  out  of  a  dark  cloud  or  mist,  moved
towards  his  eye,  others  came  into  view  on  that  part  of  the
rod  formerly  shrouded  from  his  sight.  On  the  right,  the
portion  of  rod  (the  ends  of  which  he  never  saw)  which  had
passed  his  eye,  at  a  certain  distance  entered  a  similar  cloud.
He  was  very  intelligent,  and  compared  it  to  an  endless  re-
volving tape,  of  which  only  a  small  portion,  and  that
straight,  was  at  any  one  time  visible  to  him,  extending  to
a  variable  distance  on  each  side  of  his  eye,  and  constantly
advancing.  It  had  marks  or  divisions,  representing  minutes,
and  at  every  ten  there  was  either  a  longer  mark,  or  the
mark  was  broader,  so  that  he  could  instantly  distinguish  it ;
but  he  said  this  was  not  necessary.  Indeed,  I  think  he
occasionally  spoke  as  if  the  marks  were  all  alike,  and  at  all
events  he  counted  them  by  an  instinctive  and  instantaneous
process.  He  did  not  always  notice  this  scale,  that  is,
attend  to  it,  while  looking  at  other  objects ;  but  he  had  a
sense  of  its  constant  presence,  even  when  not  attending  to
it.  When  asked  how  long  he  had  to  sleep,  he  had  only  to
look,  and  there  it  was.  There  were  no  numbers  on  the
scale,  but  he  could  always  see  as  far  as  was  required  (in  his
case  never  more  than  sixty  minutes  or  degrees  of  the  scale.


PREDICTED  BY  CLAIRVOYANTS.  135

to  the  left  of  his  eyes).  The  degree  right  in  front  of  his
eye  he  knew  to  he  that  of  the  present  minute,  and  a  pecu-
liar feeling,  which  he  spontaneously  compared  to  the  con-
science of  right  and  wrong,  told  him,  on  looking  towards
the  cloud  on  the  left,  the  degree  which,  at  waking,  would
be  found  opposite  his  eye.  He  was  also  quite  sensible  that
the  degrees  to  the  right  represented  past  minutes,  as  those
to  the  left  represented  future  minutes.  He  could  apparently
recognise,  after  it  had  passed  on  towards  the  right,  the  de-
gree which  was  present  when  he  first  fixed  the  time,  and
found  it  easiest  to  count  how  many  degrees  it  had  moved  to
the  right,  and  deduct  this  number  from  that  originally  fixed,
when  he  was  again  asked.  But  he  could  answer  either  way.
The  whole  of  this  description  was  given  as  nearly  as  possi-
ble in  the  words  and  order  here  set  down;  and  I  asked  no
questions  until  he  had  finished  his  account  of  it,  which  he
had  spontaneously  offered  to  give  me.

I  should  observe,  that  in  about  one  half  of  the  trials  made
with  him,  I  first  commanded  him  to  sleep  30,  40,  45,  50,  55,
or  60  minutes  ;  and  in  the  remainder  I  allowed  him,  when
first  asked,  to  fix  his  own  time,  which  he  did  instantly,  by
looking  at  his  scale,  and  which  was  not  copied  from  my  ex-
periments, inasmuch  as  he  varied  from  7  or  8  to  12,  14,  15,
20,  22,  34,  35,  40,  41,  43,  47,  50,  and  52  minutes.  One
reason  why  he  never  exceeded  the  hour,  any  more  than  my-
self, was  doubtless  the  fact  that  our  time,  on  both  sides,
was  limited,  and  that  he  retained  this  impression  in  his
sleep.

From  the  variation  in  the  times  fixed  by  himself  from
those  fixed  by  me,  and  from  his  invariably,  as  he  told  me,
looking  first  at  his  scale,  before  he  could  specify  the  time,  I
conclude,  that  the  length  of  the  sleep  was  not,  in  those  in-
stances in  which  he  fixed  it,  the  result  of  suggestion.  But,
granting  that  it  was  so,  surely  the  fact,  that  he  could  see
the  moment  fixed  upon,  when  asked,  visible  as  a  future
point,  advancing  to  the  present,  and  subsequently  fading
into  the  past,  is  truly  remarkable.  I  am  not  aware  that
this  curious  phenomenon  has  been,  in  other  cases,  so  minutely
enquired  into.  I  had  the  great  advantage  of  having  a  sub-
ject highly  educated,  of  great  natural  ability,  and  able  to
express  his  feelings  and  observations  in  good  and  precise
language. But  I  have  no  doubt,  that  if  other  cases  were


136  A  NEW  STATE  INTEKPOLATED.

fully  investigated,  we  should  arrive  at  very  interesting  re-
sults in  reference  to  this  subject.

In  the  two  instances  in  which  the  prediction  of  the  time
of  waking  was  not  precisely  fulfilled  in  this  case,  the  sub-
ject slept  about  fifteen  minutes  longer  than  the  allotted
period.  The  first  time,  I  observed  some  symptoms  of
change  in  his  face  and  manner,  but  was  not  aware,  till  he
awoke,  that  the  time  had  been  exceeded.  Next  day,  I  ob-
served him  more  closely,  and  saw  the  same  signs  of  some-
thing unusual.  He  became  silent,  and,  after  a  time,  told
me,  that  he  was  in  no  place,  but,  as  it  were,  in  air,  and  then
he  said,  he  was  in  a  different  world, — not  meaning  by  this,
as  I  ascertained,  more  than  that  he  was  in  a  different  coun-
try, and  among  strange  people.  He  also  saw  better.  At
this  time  he  was  in  a  progressive  state,  the  power  of  pre-
dicting the  time  of  waking  having  appeared  in  him  very
early,  before  he  saw  plainly.  This  change  occurred  about
seven  or  eight  minutes  before  the  time  he  had  named  for
waking.  He  continued  to  describe  the  new  scene  for  about
fifteen  minutes,  which,  as  I  was  busy  noting  what  he  said,
seemed  to  be  a  shorter  time.  All  at  once,  he  became  again
silent,  and  then  spoke  of  the  things  he  had  been  alluding  to
before  the  change.  I  then  asked  him  how  long  he  had  to
sleep,  and  he  said  seven  minutes,  which  proved  correct.
Here,  being  in  a  progressive  state,  he  had  spontaneously
passed  into  another  stage,  the  fifteen  minutes  passed  in
which  did  not  count  in  his  first  state,  but  had  been,  as  it
were,  interpolated.  It  is  highly  probable,  that  many  in-
stances of  inaccuracy  in  the  time  fixed  as  the  duration  of
the  sleep,  especially  in  the  early  stages,  may  admit  of  a
similar  explanation.  I  think  it  also  very  probable  that,  oc-
casionally, the  interference  of  a  third  party,  especially  if  he
should  touch  the  sleeper,  may  derange  the  result,  either  by
confusing  his  sensations,  or  by  temporarily  inducing  a  dif-
ferent stage  of  sleep.

2.  The  next  form  in  which  prevision  appears,  is  that  in
which  the  somnambulist  predicts  changes  in  his  own  state
of  health.  This,  of  course,  is  observed  in  those  affected  with
diseases,  and  chiefly  in  such  as  suffer  from  attacks  of  a
spasmodic  nature,  or  from  fits  of  neuralgic  pain,  migraine,
fainting,  &c.  They  will  often,  quite  spontaneously,  predict
the  precise  time  of  one  or  more  attacks ;  they  will  describe


LUCIDITY  PRODUCED.  137

tlieir  intensity,  and  specify  their  duration  ;  and  they  fre-
quently do  so  long  before  their  occurrence,  so  that  the  neces-
sary precautions  may  be  taken.

They  further  announce,  and  not  unfrequently,  especially
when  under  magnetic  treatment,  that  the  first,  second,  third,
or  other  attack,  to  take  place  on  a  certain  day,  at  an  hour
and  minute  named,  will  be  the  last.  And  all  these  predic-
tions are  very  frequently  fulfilled,  quite  independently  of
any  regularity,  nay,  along  with  the  utmost  irregularity,  in
the  recurrence  of  the  attacks.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,
that  the  patients  are  very  often,  perhaps  always,  in  perfect
ignorance  of  their  own  prediction,  having  no  recollection  of
what  occurs  in  their  sleep,  so  that  it  is  often  difficult,  with-
out causing  alarm,  to  keep  them  under  our  eyes,  and  within
reach  of  assistance,  when  the  predicted  fit  approaches.
Such  cases  have  been  recorded  in  great  numbers,  but  I  have
no  personal  experience  of  them,  my  experiments  having  been
chiefly  made  with  healthy  subjects.

3.  The  somnambulist  often  predicts,  in  his  own  case,  the
precise  period  when  lucidity  is  to  appear,  or  when  it  is  to
reach  its  highest  degree.  He  says,  on  such  a  day,  I  shall
be  light,  or  I  shall  see,  or  I  shall  be  able  to  see  such  a  per-
son, or  such  a  place,  or  to  fix  the  time  when  I  shall  become
so,  or  the  time  when  I  shall  have  a  fit.  He  will  often  pre-
scribe the  peculiar  form  of  magnetism,  which  will  bring  about
the  result,  whether  gazing,  or  laying  the  hand  on  the  head,
or  passes  downward  in  front,  or  behind,  or  passes  round  the
head,  or  breathing  over  the  head  or  forehead,  or  over  the
heart  or  epigastrium,  or  holding  the  hands,  &c.  He  tells  us,
how  many  times  he  must  be  magnetised,  and  for  how  long
each  time.  And  when  he  predicts  the  result,  and  prescribes  a
method,  it  is  generally,  perhaps  always,  found  that  he  is  right.

In  the  case  above  referred  to,  when  I  asked  the  subject,
who  had  begun  to  show  imperfect  lucidity,  but  could  predict
the  duration  of  his  sleep,  whethor  he  should  become  lucid,  he
said  he  should ;  but  must  first  be  magnetised  many  times.
When  I  enquired  how  many,  he  looked  intently,  and  then  said
that  he  could  not  specify  the  number  of  times ;  that  he  saw
the  figures  (Arabic)  so  dimly,  that  he  could  only  say  there
were  two  of  them,  and  that  these  were  not  only  shrouded  in  a
thick  mist,  of  which  at  this  period  and  long  after  he  bitterly
complained,  but  were  also  in constant  motion,  so  that  he

12*


138  PREDICTIONS  CONCERNING

could  not  fix  them.  The  next  time  I  asked,  he  saw  two  figures,
no  longer  obscured  by  mist,  but  of  a  red  color,  dazzling  his
eyes,  and  whirling  round  with  such  rapidity,  that  he  could
only  distinguish  that  the  first  of  them  was  a  6  or  a  9,  and  the
second  a  6,  a  9,  or  possibly  a  0.  I  had  thus,  at  this  period,
the  agreeable  choice  of  the  numbers  60,  66,  69,  90,  96,  99.
This  referred  to  his  highest  lucidity ;  but  I  soon  found  that
he  improved  rapidly  in  clearness  of  vision,  as  far  as  his
power  extended,  and  that  the  high  degree  or  stage  to  which
he  looked  forward,  was  one  in  which  he  expected  to  possess
powers  at  this  time  not  observable  at  all.  I  shall  give  more
details  of  this  case,  which  is  that  already  referred  to  as  Mr.
D.,  in  Part  II.  Many  instances  of  the  same  kind  of  pre-
vision are  on  record,  and  while  I  write,  I  am  awaiting,  in
the  case  of  E.  formerly  mentioned,  the  fulfilment  of  a  very
remarkable  prediction  concerning  a  trance  or  extasis,  the
time  of  which  she  has  fixed.

I  should  here  add,  that  Mr.  D.,  in  his  waking  state,  has
no  idea  either  of  what  he  predicted  as  to  his  attaining  a
high  lucidity,  nor  the  slightest  recollection  of  his  remarkable
scale  of  time,  of  which  he  will  be  informed,  for  the  first
time,  by  reading  these  letters.  I  believe  that  E.  is  equally
unaware  of  having  predicted  a  trance.  And  this  happens
generally,  if  not  uniformly,  in  such  cases.

4.  The  somnambulist  will  often  predict  the  course  of  dis-
ease and  its  termination,  in  those  persons  with  whom  he  is
en  rapport,  or  sympathy.  This  phenomenon  has  been  fre-
quently recorded,  but  I  have  not  hitherto  had  an  opportunity
of  personally  examining  or  verifying  it.  I  may  allude,  how-
ever, to  one  remarkable  case  of  this  kind,  in  which  Adele,
the  somnambulist  of  M.  Cahagnet,  predicted  his  death  at
the  end  of  six  years ;  and  I  am  informed,  on  good  authority,
that  he  died  at  the  time  specified,  from  natural  causes.
There  exists  also  a  very  striking  case  of  a  similar  prediction,
made  by  a  sorceress  or  divineress  in  Venice,  concerning
the  death,  at  different  periods,  fixed  by  her,  of  three  gen-
tlemen, friends,  who  together  consulted  her.  They  all  died
at  the  times  predicted ;  one  from  an  accident ;  the  other  from
acute  disease ;  and  the  last,  who  died  of  fever,  was  so  far
from  laboring  under  the  depressing  influence  of  the  pre-
diction, that  he  was,  not  long  before  his  death,  full  of  his
hopes  of  recovery,  and  of  his  plans  for  the  enjoyment  of


OTHER  PERSONS.  1-39

fStes  about  to  occur.  I  would  not  allude  to  this  case,  were
it  not  that  I  have  it  on  the  best  authority,  and  that  it  must
be  regarded  as  perfectly  attested.  The  divineress,  it  is  in
the  highest  degree  probable,  was  in  the  state,  either  spon-
taneous or  artificially  produced,  of  waking  clairvoyance.

Another  case  illustrates  the  power  of  predicting  illness,
and  shows  that  clairvoyants  do  really  perceive  changes  in
the  state  of  health  of  others,  before  the  persons  examined
do  so  themselves.  A  gentleman,  highly  distinguished  by  his
acquirements,  his  vast  abilities,  and  his  position,  happened,
when,  as  far  as  he  knew,  in  perfect  health,  to  visit  a  re-
markable clairvoyant,  who  told  him  he  felt  a  chill  in  his
limbs,  and  a  severe  pain  in  his  side.  As  he  felt  nothing  of
the  kind,  he  regarded  the  statement  as  a  mere  blunder.
But  not  many  hours  after,  he  was  attacked  by  a  violent  pain
in  the  side  indicated,  and  soon  afterwards  felt  a  chill  in
his  limbs ;  he  then  recollected  that,  just  before  seeing  the
clairvoyant,  he  had  gone  out  in  a  biting  wind,  with  very  thin
trowsers,  and  had  felt  much  chilled  at  the  time,  but  had
forgotten  the  fact  till  he  perceived  the  invasion  of  illness.
It  appears  to  me  clear,  that  the  clairvoyant  here  perceived
a  change  in  the  part,  and  its  nature,  before  it  had  advanced
so  far  as  to  be  sensible  to  the  patient.  And  thus  the  acute
observation  of  the  present  fact  amounted  to  a  prediction,
unless  we  suppose  that  the  future  state  of  the  patient  ap-
peared to  the  clairvoyant  to  be  present,  in  which  case  it  was
a  case  of  real  prevision.

5.  Other  cases  are  recorded,  and  not  unfrequently,  in
which  the  clairvoyant  has  predicted  an  accident  which  was
to  befal  him,  and  perhaps  to  cause  a  fit  of  fainting  or  of
epilepsy.  This  I  have  not  seen,  but  it  appears  to  be  well
authenticated,  and  is  remarkable  for  the  prevision  of  some-
thing external  to  the  subject,  and  with  which  he  has  no
direct  sympathy,  or  means  of  communication,  save  the  un-
known or  obscure  one  to  which  these  phenomena  are  usually
referred.  The  accident  is  often  predicted  vaguely  as  to  its
nature,  but  precisely  as  to  the  time  of  occurrence,  and  the
effects  produced  by  it.  It  may  be  a  fright  from  a  rat  or
mouse,  or  other  cause,  or  it  may  be  a  fall  or  stumble,  &c.

6.  In  other  cases,  again,  the  clairvoyant  is  said  to  have
accurately  predicted  events,  altogether  unconnected  with
himself. He  has  told  the  operator  of  a  letter  to  be  received


140  SPONTANEOUS  CLAIRVOYANCE.

next  clay,  or  several  days,  or  even  weeks  after,  and  the  name
of  the  writer,  as  well  as  the  contents  of  his  letter.  I  know
of  one  very  remarkable  case,  in  which  a  clairvoyant,  whom
I  afterwards  saw,  and  found  to  possess  considerable  lucidity,
(although  he  was,  when  I  examined  him,  in  a  different,  and
lower  stage  of  lucidity,  which  had  spontaneously  super-
vened,) predicted  to  his  magnetiser  the  arrival  of  a  letter
from  a  distance,  on  a  particular  day,  with  other  details  of  a
private  nature,  which  were  found  to  be  correct.  Not  having
had  personal  experience  of  this  form  of  prevision,  I  shall
not  dwell  further  upon  it.

The  same  degree  of  prevision  has  been  alleged,  as  occur-
ring in  reference,  not  only  to  letters,  but  to  events  of  various
kinds ;  but,  for  the  reason  above  given,  I  shall  not  here  enter
into  further  details,  as  enough  has  been  said  to  illustrate  the
nature  of  the  alleged  facts.  And  it  appears  to  me,  -that  as
the  facts  of  prevision,  in  regard  to  the  duration  of  the  sleep,
to  the  course  of  the  somnambulist's  illness,  or  of  his  fits,  and
in  regard  also  to  the  time  when  certain  powers  or  stages  of
lucidity  are  to  occur,  must  be  admitted,  we  must  pause  before
rejecting  those  phenomena  of  prevision,  in  reference  to  per-
sons and  things  unconnected  with  the  sleeper^  which,  often
on  the  very  same  authority,  and  that  good  authority,  are
likewise  recorded.

Those  who  have  the  opportunity,  which  I  have  not  at  pre-
sent, should  particularly  investigate  this  part  of  the  subject;
and  as  cases  of  this  kind,  though  somewhat  less  frequent  than
others,  are  yet  said  to  occur  pretty  often,  there  is  every  rea-
son to  hope  that  £he  question  will,  if  this  be  done,  be  very
soon  and  satisfactorily  settled.


Does  clairvoyance,  using  the  term  in  a  general  sense,  occur
spontaneously  ?  When  we  consider,  that  the  state  of  natural
or  spontaneous  somnambulism  is,  in  all  probability,  or  rather
certainly,  identical  with  the  artificial  magnetic  sleep,  we  are
prepared  to  expect  that,  as  in  some  cases  of  the  latter  sym-
pathy and  clairvoyance  occur,  so  also  will  these  phenomena
be  sometimes  present  in  the  former.  And  when  we  further
reflect,  that  sympathy  and  even  clairvoyance  may  and  do
occur,  when  produced  artificially,  in  the  ordinary  waking  or
conscious  state,  that  is,  in  a  state  the  consciousness  of  which


REMARKABLE  CASK.  141

is  continuous  with  our  ordinary  consciousness,  we  may  look
for  their  occurrence,  naturally,  in  tin;  ordinary  state.  Indeed,
as  to  sympathy,  this  is  a  we'll- known  fact,  although  there  is
good  reason  to  believe  that  the  state  of  reverie  or  abstrac-
tion, as  might  be  expected,  is  the  most  favorable  to  their
production.

Now  when  we  enquire,  we  find,  that  facts  are  known,  and
have  been  recorded,  which  prove  the  occurrence  of  sponta-
neous clairvoyance  in  reference  to  present  or  passing  events.
Every  one  has  heard  of  such  examples,  which,  however,  are
generally  noticed  as  freaks  of  imagination  and  strange  coin-
cidences. If  they  be  coincidences,  they  are  indeed  most
strange,  for  the  chances  against  them  as  such,  must  have
been  almost  infinitely  great.

I  have  been  informed,  on  what  I  consider  perfectly  good
authority,  of  the  following  case,  which  is  not  generally  known.
A  lady  was  subject,  occasionally,  not  to  illness,  but  to  a  cer-
tain state  of  mind,  possibly  connected  with  a  tendency  to
reverie  or  abstraction,  in  which  she  became  aware  of  what
the  persons  she  thought  of  were  doing  at  the  moment,  even
at  very  considerable  distances.  She  did  not  know,  at  least
so  far  as  I  am  informed,  any  cause  which  produced  this  state.
On  one  occasion,  residing  at  some  distance  from  town,  she
had,  in  this  way,  while  fully  awake,  but  late  in  the  evening,
a  vision  of  her  son's  chambers  in  town,  such  as  I  believe  she
had  often  had  before.  She  saw  the  porter  of  the  chambers
leave  his  own  room,  with  a  candle  in  one  hand  and  a  knife
in  the  other,  and  proceed  to  her  son's  bed-room,  which  he
entered  softly,  and,  going  to  the  bed-side,  ascertained  that
his  master  was  asleep.  He  then  took  from  the  clothes  of
that  gentleman  a  key  or  set  of  keys,  went  to  the  other  end
of  the  room,  opened  a  trunk  or  box,  took  out  a  pocket-book,
and  from  it  a  £50  Bank  of  England  note.  The  thief  then
returned  to  the  bed,  replaced  the  key,  and  once  more  look-
ing, to  ascertain  that  the  sleeper  still  slept,  retired  to  his  own
room.  The  lady  was  naturally  much  alarmed,  and  next  day
drove  to  town,  and  saw  her  son.  Without  letting  him  know
her  vision,  she  contrived  to  ascertain  that  he  had  placed  in
his  box  a  bank-note  for  £50,  and  begged  him  to  look  whether
it  was  still  there.  The  note  was  gone;  the  lock  uninjured.
She  now  told  her  story,  and  after  consultation  with  her  son,
who  agreed  with  her  that  he  could  not,  on  this  evidence,


142  SPONTANEOUS  CLAIRVOYANCE.

accuse  any  one  of  the  theft,  the  note,  the  number  of  which
was  known,  was  stopped  at  the  bank,  and  the  fact  advertised.
It  was  never  presented  for  payment.  The  porter  soon  left
the  chambers,  and  there  the  matter  would  have  ended;  but
some  time  afterwards  he  was  taken  up  for  some  other  rob-
bery. And  when  his  lodgings  were  searched,  there  was
found  the  very  identical  note,  rolled  up  hard  into  a  small
bulk,  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  criminal's  purse.

This  remarkable  vision  was  told  me  by  a  gentleman  of
great  acquirements  and  of  the  highest  character,  who  him-
self had  it  from  the  lady,  and  told  me  that  I  might  entirely
rely  on  its  authenticity.  It  was  no  dream,  but  a  waking
vision.  And  had  it  been  a  dream,  this  would  only  prove  that
the  clairvoyant  state  had  this  time  occurred  during  sleep,
which  had  often  occurred  in  the  waking  state  to  the  same
lady.  The  fact  would  not  be  less  striking  nor  less  valuable.
I  shall  return  to  this  case.

I  cannot  entertain  a  doubt,  that  many  dreams,  which  are
found  afterwards  to  have  been  true  and  exact,  depend  on
the  same  cause ;  nay,  I  think  it  probable,  d  priori,  that  the
state  of  spontaneous  clairvoyance,  like  natural  somnambu-
lism, occurs  much  more  frequently  in  the  sleeping  than  in
the  waking  state.  We  all  know  how  heterogeneous  dreams
often  are ;  but  it  is  very  far  from  being  impossible,  or  even
improbable,  that,  in  certain  persons,  many  of  their  dreams
are  the  result  of  true  clairvoyance.  Baron  von  Reichenbach
has  observed,  that  not  only  those  who  walk  in  their  sleep,
but  those  who  talk  much  in  their  sleep,  are  uniformly  sensi-
tive to  the  odylic  influence ;  and  we  know  that  the  highly
sensitive,  in  this  sense,  are  found  to  be  most  easily  thrown
into  magnetic  sleep  and  clairvoyance.

The  striking  case  of  Zschokke,  the  celebrated  and  amiable
Swiss  novelist,  proves  that  sympathetic  retrovision  is  also
a  spontaneous  occurrence.  He  frequently  found  himself,
as  he  has  described  it  in  his  works,  possessed  of  a  perfect
memory  of  the  past  life  of  the  person  he  was  speaking  to ;
and,  on  one  occasion,  he  confounded  a  sceptic  who  defied  him,
by  declaring  to  him  certain  passages  of  his  past  life,  known
to  himself  alone,  and  such  as  he  could  not  have  wished
to  be  known  to  others. This  was  done  in  a  large  company.

With  regard  to  clairvoyant  prevision,  I  have  already
spoken  of  its  occurrence  in  the  Venetian  sorceress,  as  possi-


SPONTANEOUS  RETROVISION  AND  REVISION.  143

bly  induced  by  artificial  means.  But  I  have  no  information
on  this  point,  and  it  is  at  least  possible,  that,  in  her  case,  it
may  have  been  spontaneous.

But  there  are  numerous  recorded  instances  of  spontane-
ous prevision,  and  among  them  that  of  M.  de  Cazotte,  which,
as  it  is  far  from  being  so  well  known  as  it  deserves,  I  shall  give
in  Part  II.  In  his  case,  as  in  that  of  the  lady  above  men-
tioned, the  occurrence  of  the  peculiar  state  was  frequent,
and  it  was  always  observed  that  he  was,  when  lucid,  in  a
peculiar  sleep,  not  ordinary  sleep.  There  was,  very  pro-
bably, in  his  case,  divided  consciousness.  Persons  of  the
highest  character  are,  or  lately  were,  yet  alive,  who  heard
his  remarkable  prophecy  spoken  of  and  often  ridiculed,  be-
fore the  events  to  which  it  refers  took  place.

Moreover,  we  have  the  recorded,  and  in  many  cases,  well
attested  instances  of  second  sight,  to  prove,  if  not  the  ex-
istence of  spontaneous  prevision  of  coming  events,  at  least
the  firm  conviction  of  its  existence,  impressed  on  the  popu-
lar mind  in  many  countries.  I  am  disposed  to  think,  that
no  such  general  belief  ever  prevailed,  without  a  natural
truth  for  its  origin  or  foundation,  apart  altogether  from  the
precise  nature  of  that  truth,  and  of  the  true  explanation,
which  is  matter  for  enquiry.  I  shall  return  hereafter  to
the  subject  of  popular  predictions.


I  have  now  to  mention  a  few  circumstances,  connected
with  the  magnetic  sleep,  which  I  have  either  not  hitherto
noticed,  or  only  briefly  alluded  to,  because  they  do  not  occur
so  frequently  or  uniformly  as  those  which  I  have  discussed.
It  is  possible,  and,  in  some  instances,  probable,  that  these
also,  when  the  matter  is  carefully  investigated,  may  be
found  to  be  present  in  most  or  in  all -cases,  and  to  present
themselves  in  particular  stages,  so  that  they  may  often
have  been  overlooked.  Observers  should  therefore  attend
to  them.

1.  The  first  is,  the  occurrence  of  a  very  great  unwilling-
ness to  name  any  person,  place,  or  object.  The  sleeper  will
often  take  a  minute  or  two  to  describe,  rather  than  use  the
appropriate  name.  He  seems  often  to  labor  under  a  diffi-
culty in  finding  the  name,  but  still  oftener,  his  manner  in-
dicates that  he  will  not  use  the  name. Thus,  while  he  often,


144  PECULIARITIES  OF  SPEECH.

if  urged,  gives  himself  a  wrong  name,  very  often  that  of  his
magnetiser,  he  will  not  address  his  magnetiser,  or  speak  of
him,  under  his  name,  but  will  use  a  circumlocution.  He
will  not  speak  of  being  lucid,  or  clairvoyant,  in  some  cases,
but  will  say  he  is  light,  or  bright,  or  warm,  or  sent  or  taken
away,  and  so  on.  And  very  many  clairvoyants  will  not
speak  of  death,  but  will  use  the  most  laborious  circumlocu-
tions rather  than  do  so,  whether  it  be,  that  the  dead  do  not
appear  as  dead  to  them,  or  that  the  idea  of  death  is  repug-
nant to  them ;  and  I  have  not  had,  as  yet,  sufficient  oppor-
tunities to  enable  me  to  speak  confidently  on  this  matter.
When  they  adopt  a  word  or  phrase,  they  usually  adhere  to
it,  for  the  person  or  object  to  which  they  have  applied  it ;
and  hardly  any  very  lucid  subject  is  without  some  peculiar
form  of  expression.  Thus,  E.  always  speaks  of  a  dead  per-
son as  shelled,  and  of  being  magnetised  as  being  warmed;
and  I  have  heard  of  various  similar  examples.  In  other
respects,  the  language  of  clairvoyants  is  generally  improved,
and  often  remarkably  distinct  and  energetic  in  its  character.
This  point  is  well  worthy  of  study.  Many  cases,  however,
at  least  in  the  stages  observed,  either  exhibit  no  peculiari-
ties, or  such  as  have  been  overlooked.

2.  I  have  already  alluded  to  the  difficulty,  in  some  cases,
of  ascertaining,  at  the  moment,  whether  a  clairvoyant  is
describing  a  past  or  a  passing  scene.  It  would  appear  that
the  impressions  of  both,  being  alike  peculiar,  are  of  so
equal  a  vividness  as  to  be  liable  to  be  confounded  together.
I  think  it  right  here  again  to  point  out,  that  this  often
causes  an  appearance  of  doubt  and  of  failure,  where  all  is
true,  and  is  found  so,  when  we  are  enabled  to  trace  the  im-
pressions to  their  source.  It  often  happens,  that  the  sub-
ject, if  his  attention  be  called  to  the  point,  finds  the  means
of  distinguishing  past  from  present  things,  but  this  appears
not  to  be  always  the  case.

3.  Although  the  clairvoyant  has,  naturally,  no  recollec-
tion whatever  of  his  magnetic  sleep,  yet,  in  many  cases,  he
may  be  made  to  remember  the  whole,  or  part,  of  what
passes,  by  the  will,  and  at  the  command  of  the  magnetiser.
In  many  cases,  in  which  this  has  not  been  observed,  I  believe
it  has  not  been  tried.  But  I  have  myself  often  desired  the
subject  to  remember,  when  awake,  any  fact  or  statement,  or
the  whole,  of  what  he  has  seen  and  described  ;  and,  on  wak-


DIFFERENT  STATES  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS.  145

ing,  lie  has  done  so,  just  as  we  sometimes  remember  the
whole,  or  part  of  a  dream,  and  at  other  times  remember
only  that  we  have  dreamt,  but  not  the  subject  of  our  dream,
which  yet  was  very  vivid  at  the  time.

The  influence  of  the  command of  the  magnetiser  is so
great,  that  we  can  even  affect  the  feelings  by  a command
given  in  the  sleep. We  can  cause  the  sleeper  to  awake  with
a  pleasant sensation,  even when  he  has  seemed  like one
under  a  nightmare ;  and  although I  should  be  sorry  to  do
it,  I  am  sure  that  in  some  cases  I  could  cause  the  sleeper,
when awake,  to  feel  uneasy  and  wretched  by  a  command
given  in  the  sleep. I  have  already  mentioned  the  power  we
have  of  impressing  the  sleeper's  mind  so,  that,  when  awake
or  long  after,  he  shall,  without  knowing  why,  feel  compelled
to  perform  some  act,  although  it  may  have no object,  and
can  only  cause  him  to  be  laughed  at. But  I  repeat,  that
we  do  not  find  it,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  easy  to  do  this,  when
the  act  required  appears  to  the  sleeper  improper  or  wrong.
4.  I  would  here  mention  a  fact,  which  has  several  times  pre-
sented itself  to  me,  and  which  I  suspect  is  much  more  fre-
quent than  is  generally  supposed. I  mean,  the  occurrences,
during  the  magnetic  sleep,  or  rather  during  the  existence
of  a  certain  consciousness  separate  from  the  ordinary  one,
of  a  third  consciousness  separate  from  both,  which  spon-
taneously occurs,  and  is,  as  it  were,  interpolated. If  this
happen  on  several  successive  occasions,  I  observe  that  the
sleeper  does  not  mix  up  any  of  the  three  consciousnesses,  but
when  his  ordinary  magnetic state  is  present,  has no  more
recollection  of  what  has  passed  in  the  more  unusual  one,  than
he  has  of  the  former  in  his  waking  state ;  nor  is  there  any
connection  between  the  waking  state  and  the  second  magnetic
consciousness,  any  more  than  the  first. Whichever  of  the
three  states  he  is  in,  he  remembers  the  previous  periods  in
that  state  alone. In  one  case,  that  in  which  I  first  noticed
it,  (the  fact  has,  I  believe,  been  often  recorded,  but  I  had
forgotten  it, when  it  was  forced  on  my attention,) the
sleeper  all  at  once  changed  his  manner,  and  spoke  of  a  new
vision,  which  was clearer  than  any  previous  one,  and  was
preceded  by  a  comparatively  long  journey  through  space  or
air,  to  the  scene  of  it. He  was much  delighted  with the
distinctness  of  what he  saw,  and,  although he had  never
been within perhaps thousands  of  miles  of  the  place,  he
13


146  OCCURRENCE  OF  PECULIAR  STATES

described  it,  down  to  the  minutest  details,  exactly  as  if  he
were  on  the  spot,  pointing  out  the  features  of  a  landscape,
and  attracted  by  a  thousand  minute  beauties.  Nay,  he
identified  himself  with  the  scene  to  such  an  extent,  that  he
spoke  of  every  hill,  tree,  house,  man,  and  beast,  as  if  they
were  old  friends,  and  insisted  that  he  was  born  there,  and
had  lived  there  a  long  time,  when  a  boy.  I  thought  he
had  passed,  permanently,  into  a  higher  stage  of  lucidity
than  before,  and  that  thenceforward  I  should  always  obtain
the  same  state ;  but  I  was  mistaken ,  for  when  I  asked  him  how
long  he  had  to  sleep,  the  time  he  had  fixed  being  past,  he
strenuously  denied  that  he  was  asleep,  and  when  I  told  him
his  eyes  were  shut,  declared  they  were  wide  open,  even
after  feeling  them  at  my  request.  As  this  had  never  hap-
pened before,  I  saw  he  was  in  a  new  stage,  and  I  was  cal-
culating on  its  permanence,  when  I  observed  a  change  come
over  him,  and  when  I  again  spoke  to  him,  he  had  returned
to  the  place  in  which  he  had  been  before  his  first  change.
He  now  not  only  admitted  being  asleep,  but  fixed  the  time
of  waking,  when  it  appeared,  that  the  new  state,  which  had
lasted  about  fifteen  minutes,  had  been  interpolated  merely.
He  had  now  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  that  new  state,
or  of  his  erroneous  idea  of  having  been  born  and  having
spent  his  early  years  in  that  country ;  and  when  awake,  he
had  quite  forgotten  both  the  magnetic  states.

It  may  appear  to  many,  that  the  remarkable  vision  above
alluded  to,  was  simply  a  vivid  dream,  and  I  am  not  disposed
to  quarrel  with  the  name.  But  then,  what  is  a  dream  ?  The
truth  is,  we  know  so  little  of  the  matter,  that  it  is  quite
possible,  nay,  more  than  possible,  that  all,  or  at  least  many
dreams  are  clairvoyant  visions,  the  fine  and  subtle  influences
by  which  clairvoyance,  if  it  exist  at  all,  must  be  produced,
being  noticed  in  their  impressions  on  us,  better  during
sleep,  natural  or  magnetic,  because  the  disturbances  caused
through  our  external  senses  are  then  shut  out.  And  when
we  find  the  dreamer  describing  not  only  localities,  but  the
occupations  of  people  in  those  localities,  correctly,  as  then
passing  events,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  dreams  may  often  be
true,  and  to  understand  how  it  is,  that  we  sometimes  re-
member, and  sometimes  forget  them.  When  our  dreams
are  obviously  only  imaginary,  as  concerns  ourselves,  we
may  be  mixing  up  various  impressions,  and  sympathizing


OF  CONSCIOUSNESS  IN  CLAIRVOYANTS.  147

»

with  others,  in  their  actions,  or  in  their  thoughts,  and  the
sudden  transitions  of  our  dreams  are  matters  of  daily  expe-
rience in  Animal  Magnetism.

5.  It  sometimes  happens,  strange  as  it  may  appear,  that
a  person  is  seen  to  be,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  in  two
distinct  states,  and  to  possess,  at  once,  two  consciousnesses.
Thus,  while  he  is  conversing  rationally  with  you,  and  ob-
serving all  that  goes  on,  he  will  suddenly,  and  without  ceas-
ing to  follow  the  current  of  talk,  see  before  him  scenes  and
objects  and  persons  of  which  he  has  no  recollection,  but
which  his  magnetiser  instantly  recognises  from  the  descrip-
tion. Thus  E.,  formerly  alluded  to,  while  awake  and  per-
fectly collected,  will  suddenly  see  persons  whom  she  has
formerly  seen  and  described  in  the  sleep,  but  does  not  re-
member, the  magnetic  consciousness,  which,  in  the  full
sleep,  would  enable  her  to  remember  them  as  seen  in  a
former  sleep,  being  apparently  overpowered  by  the  stronger
ordinary  consciousness.  When  told  that  the  persons  she
sees  are  not  present,  but  only  visions,  she  is  puzzled  and
alarmed.

I  am  not  given  to  accounting  for  facts,  especially  when
they  have  not  been  fully  studied ;  I  am  satisfied  to  observe
and  to  verify  them;  but  I  cannot  refrain  from  here  saying,
that  this  strange  phenomenon  of  double  and  simultaneous
consciousness  may  not,  after  all,  be  so  very  strange.  It
seems  to  be  caused  by  the  circumstance,  that  the  two  halves
of  the  brain,  which  are  equal  and  alike,  so  that  we  have
two  brains,  as  we  have  two  hands,  or  two  eyes,  are  not
acting  together,  so  that  while  the  one  half  is  in  the  ordinary
waking  state,  (and,  like  one  eye,  it  suffices  for  most  purposes,)
the  other,  probably  by  some  derangement  of  health,  has
passed  into  the  magnetic  state,  spontaneously.  It  recals
the  visions  of  a  former  magnetic  sleep,  or  rather,  it  repeats
the  act  of  clairvoyance  on  objects  formerly  seen.

Every  one  has  felt  the  strange  sensation  of  knowing
beforehand  what  is  about  to  be  said  or  done.  I  have  often
perceived  it  myself,  so  that  I  felt  as  if  I  could  say,  "  Now
you,  Mr.  A.,  are  going  to  say  so  and  so,  to  which  Mr.  B.
will  answer  so  and  so,  and  then  you  will  reply  so  and  so,"
&c.  But  I  never  could  actually  force  myself  to  say  this,
till  too  late,  nor,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  any  one  else  been
able  to  do  so. I  am  inclined  to  believe,  that  this  sensation


148  TRANSFERENCE  OF  SENSES.

*

also  depends  on  the  unequal  action  of  the  two  brains ;  that
while  we  are,  with  the  one,  in  a  reverie,  which  is  a  close
approach  to  the  magnetic  state,  we  are,  with  the  other,
drinking  in  what  passes,  but  not  attending  to  it  at  the  time,
and  that  on  suddenly  coming  out  of  our  abstraction,  we
notice  at  a  glance,  and  a  lightning  glance,  all  that  has
passed,  which,  by  some  confusion  of  two  consciousnesses,
appears  future ;  but  it  may  also  be,  that  with  one  brain,  we
have  unconsciously  exercised  a  certain  degree  of  clairvoyant
prevision.  This  confusion  is  always  of  short  duration.  I
do  not  pretend  that  I  have  here  explained  it;  I  merely  wish
to  show,  that  it  may  be  connected  with  unequal  action  of
the  two  brains,  and  that  a  careful  study  of  similar  facts  in
Animal  Magnetism,  will  probably  enable  us  to  explain  it.

6.  I  have  not  hitherto  noticed,  save  in  passing,  a  phe-
nomenon which  occasionally  presents  itself,  but  which  is  not
by  any  means  uniformly  present  in  a  marked  form;  I  mean,
transference  of  the  senses  to  some  special  part  of  the  body.
I  have  already  stated,  that  the  clairvoyant  sees,  without  his
eyes,  by  means  of  peculiar  emanations,  we  shall  say,  which
reach  his  sensorium  by  another  path.  I  have  also  men-
tioned, that  he  will  often  place  an  object  on  his  head  to  see
it  better.

But  it  sometimes  happens,  that  the  power  of  seeing,  not
the  ordinary  sense  of  sight,  but  the  clairvoyant  power,  is
located  in  some  special  part.  It  has  been  observed  to  be
located  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,
in  the  occiput  as  well  as  in  the  forehead,  or  on  the  top  of
the  head,  and  in  one  case  which  I  heard  of  from  a  scientific
gentleman  who  tested  it,  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.  The
books  and  journals  which  treat  of  Animal  Magnetism  teem
with  similar  facts;  and  the  head,  hand,  and  epigastrium,
seem  to  be  the  usually  selected  parts,  probably  from  the
proximity  to  the  brain  in  the  first,  the  great  development
of  the  nerves  of  touch  in  the  second,  and  the  presence  of
the  great  sympathetic  plexus  of  nerves  in  the  third.  The
fact  itself  is  beyond  all  doubt,  and  it  is  quite  unnecessary
to  accumulate  cases.  In  one  form  or  other,  the  power  of
dispensing  with  the  eyes,  and  yet  perceiving  color,  &c.
quite  plainly,  is  found  in  every  good  subject.

The  same  thing  frequently  happens  with  hearing.  Thus
E.,  when  on  her  travelling  state  or  stage,  is  utterly  deaf  to


TRANSFERENCE  OF  PAIN.


149


all  sounds,  save  those  -which  are  addressed  to  her  by  speak-
ing with  the  mouth  in  contact  with  the  tips  of  her  fingers.
This  fact  I  have  myself  verified.  I  believe  she  would  not
hear  a  pistol  fired  at  her  ear,  in  that  state.

Cases  are  also  recorded,  in  which  the  sense  of  taste  was
transferred  to  the  epigastrium;  and,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,
although  I  cannot  find  the  reference  to  it,  the  sense  of
smell  has  also  been  located  there.  As  for  touch,  being
already  present  in  all  parts,  it  cannot  of  course  be  trans-
ferred.

In  all  these  instances,  it  is  not  that  the  part  acquires  the
peculiar  properties  of  the  regular  external  organ  of  the
sense  transferred :  but  that  the  nerves  of  the  part  serve  as
conductors  of  the  subtle  (probably  odylic)  influence  to  the
cerebral  organ  of  the  internal  sense.  The  fingers  do  not
collect  and  transmit  the  rays  of  light,  so  that  they  shall
fall  on  the  retina,  and  the  image  there  formed,  according  to
the  laws  of  optics,  be  conveyed  by  the  optic  nerve  to  the  sen-
sorium ;  but  the  nerves  of  the  fingers  convey  to  the  sensorium,
directly,  an  influence,  which  there  produces  an  image  of  the
object.  At  least,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  trace  it,
such  appears  to  be  the  process.

7.  Another  curious  phenomenon,  frequently  witnessed,  is
the  apparent  transference  of  pain  from  the  subject  to  the
magnetiser.  If  the  subject  have  a  headache,  or  a  tooth-
ache, or  a  neuralgic  or  rheumatic  pain,  it  often  happens
that  the  magnetiser,  who  does  not  perhaps  know  of  its  exist-
ence, finds  himself  affected  with  it.  And,  at  the  same  time,
the  patient  is  partially  or  entirely  relieved.  I  am  not  satis-
fied that  the  two  facts  are  related  to  each  other  necessarily,
as  cause  and  effect ;  for  a  pain  is  often  relieved  wThen  the
magnetiser  perceives  no  pain  himself;  and  he  may  suffer,
without  sensibly  relieving  the  patient.  But  it  does  occur,
especially  where  the  object  has  not  been  to  relieve  the  pain,
that  he,  as  it  were,  catches  it ;  and,  in  many  instances,  it
is  also  relieved  in  the  patient,  not,  however,  as  I  conceive,
so  much  because  the  magnetiser  has  got  it,  as  because  he
has  magnetised  the  patient.

I  had  once,  in  my  own  experience,  a  striking  poof  that
the  magnetiser  may  suffer.  I  was,  however,  in  that  case
the  patient.  I  have  for  years  suffered  from  weakness,  swell-
ing and  pain  of  the  limbs,  arising  from  a  chronic  affection  of


150  TRANSFERENCE  OF  PAIN.

the  lymphatics.  Of  late  the  pain  has  been  nearly  altogether
removed,  so  as  only  to  appear  when  I  walk  or  stand  too  long,
and  the  limbs  have  become  much  stronger  than  before,  by  the
use  of  the  mineral  waters  of  Aix-la-Chapelle.  On  one  occa-
sion, Mr.  Lewis  tried  to  act  on  my  right  leg,  with  the  view
of  showing,  to  an  audience,  that  he  could  paralyse  the  mus-
cles by  his  influence,  in  those  who  were  susceptible  to  it.  I
was  but  slightly  susceptible,  this  being  the  first  trial ;  and
Mr.  Lewis,  before  he  succeeded,  which  he  did,  in  paralysing
the  limb  so  that  I  could  not  move  it  from  the  floor,  had  to
exert  all  his  power  for  a  considerable  time.  He  also  made
passes  over  the  limb,  but  not  with  the  intention  of  relieving
pain,  of  which  I  had  not  complained,  as  at  the  time  I  had  lit-
tle or  none.  Next  day,  and  even  the  day  followng,  Mr.  Lewis
suffered  so  much,  although  otherwise  perfectly  well,  from
weakness,  swelling,  and  some  little  pain,  but  especially  weak-
ness of  his  leg  and  ankle,  that  he  was  compelled  to  put  on  a
bandage.  He  informed  me,  that  similar  things  had  often
occurred  to  him,  as  he  is  of  an  exceedingly  susceptible  and
sensitive  temperament;  but  that,  had  he  known,  or  thought
of,  the  state  of  my  limb,  he  could  have  prevented  the  effect
on  himself.  All  this,  from  what  I  have  seen,  I  believe  to  be
true.

I  may  here  allude  to  a  fact,  which  I  cannot,  however,
vouch  for  as  having  seen  it,  or  tested  it,  but  which  I  have
on  what  I  regard  as  the  unexceptionable  testimony  of  a
gentleman  much  experienced  in  these  matters,  and  of  a  truly
philosophical  turn  of  mind,  that  a  magnetiser  may  thus  be
affected  with  the  aches  of  his  patient,  even  at  a  great  dis-
tance, if  some  objects,  such  as  a  glove  or  a  handkerchief,  be
used  ;  which,  being  placed  on  the  suffering  part,  is  then  sent
to  him,  and  will  often  produce  in  him  the  same  pain.  I  may
return  to  this,  when  treating  of  the  magnetisation  of  inani-
mate objects.

It  also  occasionally  happens,  if  the  magnetiser  be  suffer-
ing from  pain,  and  if  he  magnetise  a  healthy  but  susceptible
person,  that  the  pain  is  transferred  from  the  former  to  the
latter.  This  does  not,  of  course,  occur  frequently,  because
it  is  a  general  rule,  not  to  magnetise,  unless  the  magnetiser
be  in  good  health.  But  I  have  seen  a  headache  thus  trans-
ferred, so  that  the  patient  had  it  for  the  remainder  of  the
day,  while  the  magnetiser  was  instantly  and  entirely  relieved.


NAMES  GIVEN  TO  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.  151

Many  such  cases  have  been  recorded,  and  have  led  to  the
adoption  of  the  rule  above  mentioned.

In  my  next  Letter,  I  shall  consider  the  phenomena  pro-
ducible in  the  conscious  state,  that  is,  without  going  so  far
as  to  induce  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  which  have  often  been
supposed  to  be  radically  distinct  from  those  of  Animal
Magnetism,  and  have  made  much  noise,  both  in  America
and  in  this  country,  under  various  new  names,  such  as
Electro-biology,  Electro-psychology,  &c.  &c.  I  shall  also
bring  before  you  that  peculiar  method  of  inducing  the  mag-
netic sleep,  or  at  least,  a  magnetic  sleep,  which  is  preferred
by  Mr.  Braid,  and  by  him  called  Hypnotism.


LETTER  IX.

As  I  am  now  about  to  discuss  matters  to  which  various
names  have  been  given,  I  think  it  is  best  to  remind  you  that
I  use  the  term  Animal  Magnetism,  not  as  theoretically  per-
fect, nor  as  quite  satisfactory,  but  because  it  is  established,
known,  and  generally  used  in  Europe ;  and  is,  theoretically,
at  least  as  good  as  any  other  that  has  been  at  all  generally
employed.  Mesmerism  has  come,  in  this  country,  to  have
a  meaning  limited,  in  some  instances,  to  the  sleep,  and  its
phenomena,  in  others,  to  the  curative  agency.  Electro-
biology  signifies  vital  electricity,  or  the  electric  -theory  of
life ;  electro-psychology  signifies  the  electric  theory  of
thought  or  of  mind.  Both  proceed  on  the  assumption,  now
generally  regarded  as  fallacious,  that  that  wThich  we  call  life,
or  vitality  and  thought,  mind,  or  soul,  are  essentially  elec-
trical, or  depend  on  electricity  as  one  of  their  conditions.
Now  it  is  impossible  to  deny,  that  the  view  which  regards
the  nerves,  whether  of  motion  or  sensation,  as  wires  con-
ducting electric  currents,  is  very  tempting  to  the  speculative
enquirer,  and  can  appeal  to  some  very  striking  analogies.
Mr.  Smee's  work  will  explain  what  I  mean.  Nay  more,
Matteucci  and  Dubois  Reymond  have  proved  that  electric
currents  do  take  place  in  the  body,  and  especially  during
muscular  action. But  then,  there  are  many  points  which


152  PHENOMENA  OF  SUGGESTION

electricity  cannot  clear  up ;  the  analogies  are  partial  only ;
and  the  presence  of  electric  currents  does  not  prove  these
to  be  the  causes  of  muscular  action.  They  may  be  its
effects.  Indeed,  since  we  know  that  at  every  moment,  in
every  motion,  in  every  sensation,  in  every  thought,  a
chemical  change  is  concerned,  we  might  deduce  from  this,
a  priori,  the  probability  of  electric  currents  in  the  body.
But  we  are  not  entitled,  on  that  account,  to  say  that  the
vital  phenomena  are  electrical,  more  than  we  are,  perhaps
not  so  much  as  we  are,  to  say  that  they  are  chemical.
Chemico-biology  is  a  better  founded  name  than  electro-
biology  ;  but  yet  it  is  not  to  be  recommended.  It  may  be
urged,  and  truly,  that  Animal  Magnetism  places  magnetism
where  the  other  names  place  electricity  and  chemical  action.
But  then  this  name  is  established;  and  the  analogies  be-
tween vital  and  magnetic  phenomena  are  quite  as  strong  as
in  the  other  cases.  Besides,  the  magnet,  in  addition  to
Ferro-magnetism,  does  actually  possess  a  force  capable  of
producing  the  phenomena  in  question,  such  as  the  magnetic
sleep.  And  if  we  use  the  term  Animal  Magnetism,  as  dis-
tinguished from  Ferro-magnetism,  to  designate  simply  this
unknown  force  or  influence,  we  do  not  thereby  attribute  life
to  Ferro-magnetism  as  its  cause,  as  the  name  might  possibly
seem  to  indicate,  if  not  explained.  In  this  sense,  then,
Animal  Magnetism  is  synonymous  with  the  odyle  of  Baron
von  Reichenbach;  it  is  generally  received;  and  it  embraces
the  whole  series  of  phenomena.  When  I  come  to  treat  of
the  cause  or  of  the  explanation  of  these  phenomena,  I  shall
endeavor  to  show,  that,  if  we  are  to  have  a  new  name,  that
of  odyle  is  unexceptionable.

I  have  already  stated,  that  many  remarkable  phenomena
may  be,  and  daily  are,  produced  on  persons  in  the  ordi-
nary conscious,  or  waking  state,  by  the  usual  magnetic
processes  of  gazing,  with  or  without  contact,  or  passes,
when  not  pushed  so  far  as  to  cause  the  magnetic  sleep,  or
when  the  operator  wills  that  the  sleep  shall  not  be  pro-
duced.

These  phenomena  are  chiefly  such  as  exhibit  the  control
acquired  by  the  magnetiser  over  his  subject's  movements,
sensations,  perceptions,  memory,  will,  &c.  &c.  I  need  not
here  recapitulate  them  in  detail,  because  they  have  been
already  mentioned,  each  in  its  place,  and  because  I  shall


IN  THE  CONSCIOUS  STATE.  153

presently  have  to  describe  them,  as  produced  in  a  different
way.  I  shall  merely  remind  you,  tliat  every  one  of  them
may  be  produced  in  the  sleep,  as  well  as  in  the  waking  state,
by  the  ordinary  processes,  and  that  I  have  myself  often,  by
that  process,  produced  them  in  both  states.

But  they  may  also  be  produced,  or  rather  the  state  favor-
able to  their  production  may  be  induced,  in  a  manner  some-
what different,  without  the  necessity  of  the  influence  which
is  exerted  by  the  magnetiser,  in  the  usual  method,  over  his
patient,  and  rather  by  the  subject's  action  on  himself ;  and
this  is  what  has  been  called,  in  America,  electro-biology  or
electro-psychology.

I  have  recently  had,  and  most  fully  availed  myself  of,
the  best  opportunities  of  witnessing  and  studying  these  phe-
nomena, both  as  produced  in  the  usual  method,  by  Mr.
Lewis,  and  as  produced  in  the  other  way,  by  Dr.  Darling.
I  have  also,  as  above  stated,  produced  them  myself  in  both
ways.  I  cannot  allude  to  these  gentlemen  without  recording
my  grateful  sense  of  their  extreme  kindness  in  enabling  me
to  see  and  study  their  operations,  both  in  public,  and  on
very  numerous  occasions  in  private.  Both  of  them  have
been  honorably  anxious  to  promote  the  progress  of  science,
and  have  spared  no  trouble  to  assist  me  in  my  investiga-
tions. It  is  quite  impossible  for  any  one  to  be  more  ready
and  willing  than  they  are,  to  explain  and  communicate  all
they  know ;  and  their  extended  experience  renders  their
communications  exceedingly  valuable.

1.  The  first  observation  I  would  make  is,  that  there  is
not  the  slightest  shade  of  difference  between  the  phenomena
produced  by  Dr.  Darling,  who  is  a  singularly  neat  operator,
on  persons  in  the  conscious,  waking  state,  by  the  peculiar
process  he  employs,  and  those  produced  by  Mr.  Lewis,  on
the  same  persons,  in  the  same  state,  by  the  usual  process.

It  may  happen,  and  it  does  happen,  that  at  one  time  Dr.
Darling  exhibits  certain  forms  of  experiment,  which  Mr.
Lewis  has  not  on  a  given  occasion  exhibited,  but  which  he
could,  if  he  tried,  produce.  And  I  have  also  seen,  in  the
same  cases,  things  done  by  Mr.  Lewis,  which  Dr.  Darling
had  not  tried  in  these  cases,  but  could  have  shown,  had  he
tried,  and  which  he  has  shown  perhaps  in  other  cases.  This
is  the  only  difference  I  have  been  able  to  detect,  and  it
depends  on  the  circumstance,  that  the  time  is  limited,  and


154  DR.  darling's  method.

tliat  commonly,  some  particular  form  of  experiment,  which
comes  out  well,  is  dwelt  upon  so  long,  that  no  time  is  left
to  try  others.  But  I  have  seen  no  one  form  of  experiment
tried  by  either,  which  has  not,  at  some  time,  been  also  ex-
hibited by  the  other,  in  the  same,  ordinary  waking  state  of
consciousness.

2.  The  process  followed  by  Dr.  Darling,  which,  he  informs
me,  he  has  never  made  a  secret,  is  to  cause  a  certain  number
of  persons,  willing  to  try,  to  gaze  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes
steadily  at  a  small  coin,  or  double  convex  mass  of  zinc  with
a  small  centre  of  copper,  placed  in  the  palm  of  the  left
hand.  The  other  conditions  are,  perfect  stillness,  entire
concentration  of  the  mind  on  the  object,  and  a  perfectly
passive  will,  or  state  of  mind.  Dr.  Darling  does  not  profess
to  affect  those  who  sit  down  with  an  active  determination
to  resist ;  nor  such  as  come  with  an  eager  desire  to  detect
the  imposture  which  they  politely  attribute  to  him;  nor
such  as  gaze,  not  on  the  coin,  but  on  their  neighbors,  to  see
how  they  get  on ;  nor  such  persons  as  an  ingenious  gentle-
man, who,  after  descending  from  the  platform,  declared,  in
the  hearing  of  my  informant,  that  he  had  given  the  thing  a
fair  trial ;  for  that  he  had  looked  steadily  at  the  coin,  keep-
ing his  eyes  shut  (!  ?),  and  had,  besides,  occupied  himself,
the  whole  time,  in  solving  a  problem !  Truly  it  would  have
been  wonderful  indeed  had  he  been  affected.

Of  the  persons  tried  as  above  described,  a  certain  pro-
portion, and  of  those  who  really  fulfil  the  conditions,  and
are  not  agitated  or  alarmed,  a  much  larger  proportion,  are
found,  on  examination,  to  be  more  or  less  subject  to  Dr.
Darling's  will.  He  ascertains,  in  the  first  instance,  which
of  them  have  been  affected,  by  desiring  them,  singly,  to  close
the  eyes,  when  he  touches  the  forehead  with  his  finger,
makes  a  few  passes  over  the  eyes,  or  rather  presses  the
eyelids  down  with  a  rapid  sideward  motion,  and  then  tells
them  that  they  cannot  open  their  eyes.  If,  in  spite  of  him,
they  can  do  so,  he  generally  takes  hold  of  one  hand,  and
desires  them  to  gaze  at  him  intently  for  a  moment,  he  also
gazing  at  them,  and  then  repeats  the  trial.  If  it  fail,  he
tries  no  further  at  that  time,  but  goes  on  to  the  next  case.
In  me,  he  succeeded  in  this  on  the  second  trial — I  could  not
open  my  eyes.  Seeing  this,  he  said  ".Now  you  can,"  and
I  could  instantly  do  it.


EFFECTS  PRODUCED.  155

I  have  seen,  especially  in  private,  a  considerable  propor-
tion found  to  be  thus  affected,  and  I  have  never  seen  the
experiment  tried  on  even  a  small  number,  without  at  least
one  being  affected  to  that  extent.  Those  thus  discovered
to  be  susceptible  are  requested  to  remain  and  to  keep  their
eyes  shut,  the  others  are  dismissed.

3.  He  now  takes  one  of  them,  and,  having  repeated  the
trial  with  the  eyelids,  to  make  sure  that  the  effect  continues,
tells  him  to  close  his  mouth ;  and  then,  after  pressing  the
lips  together  with  his  hands,  and  making  a  pass  under  the
jaw,  tells  him  he  cannot  open  it,  which  in  many  instances
proves  to  be  true,  but  was  not  so  in  my  case.  He  then,
perhaps,  causes  the  subject  to  stretch  out  his  hands  and
place  palm  to  palm,  presses  the  hands  strongly  together  by
a  rapid  motion  of  his  own,  and  defies  him  to  separate  them.
This  also  he  cannot  do.  Or  he  makes  him  place  one  or  both
hands  on  his  (the  subject's  own)  head,  strikes  them  rapidly
down  on  the  head,  and  defies  him  to  remove  them,  which,
again,  he  finds  it  impossible  to  do,  till,  as  in  all  these  cases,
Dr.  Darling  says,  "Now  you  can,"  or  "All  right."

In  the  same  way,  Dr.  Darling  proceeds  to  show  his  power
over  the  sensations  of  his  subject.  For  example,  he  deprives
one  hand,  or  one  arm,  of  all  feeling,  and  renders  it  utterly
insensible  to  the  most  acute  pain;  or  he  makes  his  subject
feel  a  cold  pencil-case  burning  hot,  or  himself  freeze  with
cold,  or  taste  water  as  milk,  brandy,  or  any  other  liquid,
as  I  shall  illustrate  by  a  case  or  two,  in  Part  II.

In  like  manner,  he  controls  the  will,  so  that  the  subject
is  either  compelled  to  perform  a  certain  act,  to  fall  asleep
in  a  minute,  or  to  whistle,  &c.  &c,  or  is  rendered  unable  to
perform  any  act,  as  to  jump  on  a  handkerchief,  which  if  he
tries  to  do,  he  is  sure,  according  to  the  volition  of  Dr.  Dar-
ling, either  to  come  down  straddling  over  it,  or  to  come  down
on  one  or  other  side  of  it ;  or  he  may  hit  out  straight  at  Dr.
Darling's  face,  but  cannot  touch  it,  &c.  &c.

Dr.  Darling  further  controls  the  memory.  He  causes  the
subject  to  forget  his  own  name,  or  that  of  any  other  indivi-
dual ;  or  to  be  unable  to  name  a  single  letter  of  the  alphabet,
&c.  &c.

Moreover,  he  causes  him  to  take  any  object  to  be  what
Dr.  Darling  says  it  is,  a  watch  for  a  snuff-box,  a  chair  for
a  dog,  &c.  &c,  or  to  see  an  object  named,  where  nothing


156  DR.  darling's  method.

really  is,  as  a  book  in  Dr.  Darling's  empty  hand,  or  a  bird
in  the  room,  where  none  is.  The  illusion  is  often  absolutely
perfect.

Again,  he  will  cause  the  subject  to  imagine  himself  another
person,  such  as  Dr.  Darling,  Father  Matthew,  Prince  Al-
bert, or  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  and  to  act  the  character
to  the  life;  to  lecture  on  biology  or  on  temperance,  &c,  or
if  he  imagine  himself  an  officer,  to  drill  imaginary  troops,
and  so  on  ad  infinitum.

Lastly,  Dr.  Darling  can  control,  perfectly,  the  emotions.
If  the  subject  be  laughing,  he  causes  him  first  to  stop  laugh-
ing, then  to  feel  serious,  sad,  and  miserable,  and  to  burst
out  in  tears  and  lamentations,  or,  if  that  appear,  as  it  often
does,  too  painful,  he  will  make  him  feel  intensely  happy,  or
laugh  incessantly,  without  being  able  to  assign  a  cause  for
his  mirth.

Every  one  of  these  forms  of  influencing  the  subject  I  have
seen,  varied  in  a  hundred  details.  The  effect  is  usually,
but  not  always,  instantly  produced,  and  as  instantly  removed
by  the  operator's  simple  word.  And  there  is  no  mystery,  no
secret,  nothing  supernatural  in  it.  It  is  a  perfectly  natural
phenomenon,  and  any  one  who  tries,  may  do  it,  not  indeed
so  well  or  so  successfully,  at  first,  as  Dr.  Darling,  who,  as  I
said  before,  operates  with  extreme  neatness,  and  has  vast
experience  to  aid  him.  But,  with  practice,  even  this  may
be  attained;  and  Lord  Eglinton,  Col.  Gore  Browne,  and
other  gentlemen,  as  well  as  myself,  have  found  no  difficulty,
when  we  lighted  on  a  susceptible  subject.

Good  subjects  are  easily  found,  if  we  only  make  the  trial.
Dr.  Darling  showed  his  power,  on  three  different  occasions,
to  large  parties  at  my  house.  On  the  first,  he  was  entirely
and  most  beautifully  successful  with  a  gentleman  whom  he
had  never  before  seen,  but  whom  Col.  Gore  Browne  had
just  ascertained  to  be  susceptible.  On  the  second,  he  was
equally  successful  with  a  gentleman  whom  he  had  himself
discovered  to  be  susceptible,  on  the  preceding  day,  at  the
house  of  a  lady  well  known  in  literature.  On  the  third,  he
was  again  equally  successful  with  a  young  gentleman,  who,
at  my  request,  consented  to  be  tried,  and  who  had  never
been  even  tried  by  any  one;  and  on  a  fourth  gentleman,
the  secretary  of  a  public  institution,  whom  Dr.  Darling  had


MR.  LEWIS'S  METHOD  YIELDS  SIMILAR  RESULTS. 157

himself  discovered,  at  his  lecture  the  day  before,  to  be  sus-
ceptible. These  cases,  all  utterly  indisputable,  and  which
were  seen  by  many  persons  of  high  standing,  both  in  society
generally,  in  literature,  in  art,  and  in  science,  will  be  given
in  Part  II.  I  can  testify  to  the  exactness  of  all  the  details.
I  could  multiply  similar  cases  without  end,  but  that  would
be  superfluous.  Every  one  who  saw  the  facts  exhibited  in
these  cases,  was  thoroughly  satisfied  of  their  genuineness.

4.  Now,  when  we  enquire  into  the  cause  or  the  explanation
of  these  facts,  the  first  point  to  be  borne  in  mind  is,  that
the  subjects,  in  order  to  be  successfully  operated  on,  must
not  only  be  susceptible,  but  must  be  brought  into  a  certain
state.  This,  in  Dr.  Darling's  process,  is  done  chiefly  by
themselves,  by  steadily  gazing  at  the  coin,  which,  according
to  Dr.  Darling,  has  not,  as  some  imagine,  a  direct  electric
or  galvanic  action,  but  simply  assists  in  enabling  the  subject
to  concentrate  his  thoughts,  and  thus  to  bring  himself  into
a  state  of  abstraction  favorable  to  the  further  operations.

Mr.  Lewis  produces  the  same  state,  by  gazing  for  five
minutes  only,  with  extreme  earnestness  and  concentration,
at  the  subject,  while  the  latter  gazes  either  at  him,  or  at  an
object  in  the  same  direction.  The  other  conditions  are  the
same  as  those  of  Dr.  D.  He  adds  certain  gestures  and
passes,  all  of  which  are  most  deeply  imbued  with  that  ener-
getic concentration  of  will,  which  I  have  never  seen  so
strongly  developed,  nor  sO  beautifully  exhibited  in  the  natu-
ral language,  as  in  Mr.  Lewis.

The  same  state,  I  say,  is  produced ;  that  is,  the  same  in
this,  that  the  subject  is  now,  if  susceptible,  under  the  con-
trol of  the  operator.  But  I  conceive  that  there  may,  nay,
must  be,  a  difference  in  the  two  states,  inasmuch  as  we  can
hardly  suppose  the  effect  to  be  the  same  when  the  powerful
and  often  strongly  felt  influence  of  another  is  added,  and  is
indeed  the  chief  agent  in  disturbing  the  equilibrium  of  in-
fluence, as  when  the  subject  acts  on  himself,  without  ex-
ternal aid.

I  have  not  observed  that  a  greater  proportion  of  persons
is  affected  one  way  than  the'other.  Sometimes  one  method
appears  more  successful,  at  other  times  the  other.  But  this,
so  far  as  I  have  seen,  depends  on  the  more  or  less  strict  ful-
filment of  the  conditions.  I  believe  that  if  ten  persons  were
tried  singly,  tete-a-iete  with  the  operator,  and  with  a  sincere
14


158  EFFECTS  OF  SUGGESTION.

wish  to  fulfil,  fairly,  the  conditions,  seven  or  eight  would  be
affected  in  either  way ;  and  if  more  time  were  allowed,  I  have
little  doubt  that  all  would  be,  sooner  or  later,  influenced  in
some  degree.

It  must  be  at  once  obvious  to  every  person  acquainted
with  physiology,  that  the  peculiar  phenomena  now  under
consideration,  and  which  occur  in  the  conscious  ordinary
waking  state,  depend  on  the  principle  of  suggestion.  This
principle  has  often  been  noticed ;  but  it  was  reserved  for
modern  times,  and  for  the  cultivators  of  Animal  Magnetism,
to  show  how  the  phenomenon  could  easily  be  produced,  in
the  utmost  perfection,  in  a  very  large  proportion  of  man-
kind, and  thus  to  compel  the  universal  admission  of  the
truth.

If  we  try  to  produce  these  effects  on  any  one,  by  sugges-
tion alone,  we  shall  in  all  probability  fail,  unless  we  happen
to  light  on  a  singularly  susceptible  subject.  There  are  some,
who,  especially  after  having  been  once  operated  on,  as  above,
can  be,  at  any  subsequent  time,  and  without  preparation,  in-
fluenced by  the  same  operator.  I  am  not  aware  that  any
are,  or  have  been,  so  influenced  for  the  first  time,  without
the  preliminary  process  ;  but  I  consider  it  very  probable,  in
certain  cases.  As  a  general  rule,  however,  the  preparation
or  preliminary  process  is  required,  at  all  events  the  first
time,  although  it  may  now  and  then  be  afterwards  dispensed
with.

The  cause  which  produces  the  state  in  which  suggestion
becomes  efficient,  is,  I  think,  identical,  in  the  ordinary  pro-
cess, with  the  magnetic  influence ;  for,  if  pursued  a  little
longer,  it  will  cause  the  sleep,  with  its  phenomena.  I  shall
have,  by  and  bye,  to  treat  of  this  cause,  and  shall  not  here
dwell  on  it.

In  Dr.  Darling's  preliminary  process,  the  chief  part  of  the
work  is  done  by  the  subject  himself,  through  intense  gazing
at  an  object.  Now  we  know,  that  in  Mr.  Braid's  process,
even  the  sleep  is  produced  by  the  gazing  of  the  subject  at
an  object  rather  above  and  a  little  before  his  eyes.  This
gazing,  therefore,  since  it  produces  the  greater  effect,  natu-
rally also  produces  the  less,  and  thus  Dr.  Darling's  process
also  is  essentially  the  same  as  the  ordinary  one.

But  there  is  this  difference,  that  both  in  Dr.  Darling's  and
Mr.  Braid's  method,  the  operator  does  not,  in  producing  the


THE  IMPRESSIBLE  STATE.  159

state  in  which  suggestion  acts,  in  the  former,  and  the  sleep
in  the  latter  case,  direct  his  own  magnetic  or  vital  influence,
on  the  subject,  as  is  done  in  the  ordinary  method.  I  speak
here  only  of  producing  an  impressible  state  ;  for  Dr.  Dar-
ling also  uses  to  a  certain  extent,  passes,  touch,  and  gazing,
the  ordinary  means,  apparently  to  heighten  the  impression
at  first  produced.

Now,  if  we  suppose,  hypothetically,  the  peculiar  state  in
any  degree  to  consist  in  a  disturbance  of  the  natural  equili-
brium in  the  distribution  of  the  nervous,  vital,  magnetic,  or
odylic  force  or  influence  in  the  patient's  system,  it  plainly
cannot  be  a  matter  of  indifference  how  that  equilibrium  is
disturbed.  When  the  amount  of  force,  natural  to  the  indi-
vidual, is  by  his  own  act  otherwise  distributed  than  usually
happens,  if  more  be  sent  to  the  brain,  or  to  any  part  of  it,
and  less  to  the  muscles  or  to  the  other  viscera,  or  to  the
skin,  the  equilibrium  is  indeed  disturbed,  but  no  force  is
added.  Whereas,  when  a  foreign  influence  is  thrown  into
the  brain  or  any  part  of  that  organ,  the  equilibrium  is  also
disturbed,  but  the  other  parts,  while  having,  relatively,  less
of  the  influence,  have,  absolutely,  as  much  as  before.

Hence  the  two  states  are  not  identical,  although  they
agree  in  this,  that  in  both,  suggestion  has  the  force  of  fact.
And  we  shall  see,  that  in  the  self-produced  sleep  of  Mr.
Braid  there  are  very  marked  differences  from  that  of  ordi-
nary Animal  Magnetism.

The  phenomena  of  suggestion,  then,  whether  produced
by  the  usual  method  of  Animal  Magnetism,  or  by  that  of
what  is  called  electro-biology,  are  the  same ;  while  there  is,
in  all  probability,  a  considerable  difference  in  the  state  of
the  subject,  according  to  the  method  employed ;  which  dif-
ference becomes  more  marked  in  the  sleep  and  higher
stages.

The  subject  having  been  brought  into  the  state  above
mentioned,  is  found  to  be  under  the  control  of  the  operator.
He  is  accessible  to,  and  so  deeply  influenced  by,  any  sug-
gestion made  by  the  latter,  that  he  finds  it  impossible  to
resist  or  counteract  it.  He  is  told  that  he  cannot  perform
a  certain  act,  and  he  forthwith  loses  the  power  of  doing  so.
The  muscles  are  so  far,  and  no  farther  paralysed,  as  is
necessary  for  the  act.  If  that  be,  for  example,  to  open  the
clenched  fist,  and  drop  an  object  which  is  grasped,  he  can


160  CONTROL  EXERCISED  BY  THE  OPERATOR.

move  the  arm  up  or  down,  backwards,  forwards,  and  late-
rally; he  can  bend  or  extend  it,  &c. ;  but  his  will  no  longer
acts  on  the  extensors  of  the  fingers,  and  is  powerless  on
these  alone.  Or,  if  he  cannot  tell  his  own  name,  it  is  not
that  he  cannot  speak,  nor  yet  that  he  cannot  tell  any  other
name,  but  that  he  has  lost  the  power  of  recalling  that  one
object  of  memory.  When  he  drinks  water,  and  tastes  it  as
if  it  were  the  strongest  brandy,  it  is  that  the  suggested  im-
pression quite  overpowers  the  real  natural  one.  Just  as  he
can,  at  certain  times,  recall,  by  memory,  the  taste  of  brandy,
or  any  other  taste,  although  his  mouth  be  empty,  and  many
can  do  this  very  vividly,  so  when  brandy  is  suggested  to
him,  a  similar,  but  still  more  vivid,  secondary  impression  is
excited,  and  overpowers  the  evidence  of  his  palate.  As  I
have  already  stated,  the  singular  power  of  suggestion  has
long  been  known  as  a  fact  rarely  occurring,  and  presented,
no  doubt,  when  some  patient  had  spontaneously  fallen  into
the  impressible  state.  But  it  is  only  of  late  years  that  we
know,  that  this  state  may  be  produced  at  will,  in  a  few
minutes,  on  a  large  proportion  of  mankind ;  and  it  is  highly
probable  that  all  persons,  with  a  little  patience  and  perse-
verance, may  be  brought  into  that  state.  We  have,  in  this
phenomenon,  an  additional  proof  of  what  I  formerly  stated,
namely,  that  every  leading  fact  in  Animal  Magnetism  has
occurred  spontaneously,  just  because  these  facts  depend  on
natural  causes.

5.  It  would  appear,  that  many  persons  may  be  brought
into  the  impressible  conscious  state,  who  cannot,  or  who
cannot  without  great  difficulty,  be  brought  into  the  magnetic
sleep.  If  this  be  so,  then  the  process  followed  by  Dr.  Dar-
ling and  others,  becomes  at  once  of  great  practical  value.
For  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  curative  agency  of  mag-
netism, even  in  the  sleep,  depends  on  the  impressibility,
which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  common  to  the  sleep,  and  to  the
ordinary  state  of  consciousness.  This  explains  the  often
recorded  fact,  that  many  magnetic  cures  are  performed  with-
out the  occurrence  of  the  sleep,  or  indeed  of  any  very
marked  or  unusual  sensations.  The  patient  is,  to  use  a  most
barbarous  expression,  which  I  only  do,  in  order  to  protest
against  it,  biologised  ;  that  is,  he  is  only  so  far  magnetised,
as  to  be  thrown  into  the  impressible  state.

When  we  have  seen  the  soundest  natural  sleep  thus  pro-


BLEEP  CAUSED  BY  GAZING.  161

duced,  in  one  minute,  in  persons  who  were  actually,  at  the
beginning  of  the  minute,  in  convulsions  of  laughter,  and  in
others  who  did  their  utmost  to  keep  themselves  awake ;
when  we  have  seen,  in  a  person  so  perfectly  conscious  as  to
direct  and  dictate  the  experiments,  one  arm  rendered,  in-
stantaneously, absolutely  insensible  to  the  most  severe  pain ;
nay,  when  we  have  ourselves  obtained  these  results,  as  I
have  done,  we  cannot  possibly  hesitate  as  to  the  practical
value  of  the  facts  above  described.

6.  Let  us  now  attend,  for  a  moment,  to  the  hypnotism  of
Mr.  Braid.  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  that  gentle-
man operate,  and  I  most  willingly  bear  testimony  to  the
accuracy  of  his  description,  and  to  the  very  striking  results
which  he  produces.

Mr.  Braid  causes  his  patients  or  subjects  to  gaze  steadily
at  an  object,  such  as  the  knob  of  a  pencil  case,  held  a  little
above  the  eyes,  and  in  front  of  the  upper  part  of  the  fore-
head. It  would  seem,  that  gazing  in  this  strained  position,
very  soon  and  easily  produces  the  necessary  disturbance  of
equilibrium  in  the  peculiar  influence,  vital  or  magnetic,  con-
cerned in  the  result  (to  use  the  merely  hypothetical  term
above  employed).  In  a  short,  but  variable  time,  a  large
proportion  of  the  persons  tried  are  not  only  affected,  but
put  to  sleep.  Nay,  there  is,  as  I  have  proved  on  my  own
person,  no  plan  so  effectual  in  producing  sleep  when  we  find
ourselves  disposed,  in  spite  of  our  wish  to  sleep,  to  remain
awake  in  bed.  Some  persons  have  found  reading,  espe-
cially the  reading  of  certain  tomes,  the  contents  of  which
have  a  ponderous  character,  to  possess  a  powerful  soporific
agency;  and,  in  addition  to  the  narcotic  influence  of  the
style  or  matter,  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  concentration
of  mind  necessary  to  penetrate  through  the  copia  verborum
to  the  meaning,  if  any,  contained  in  these  literary  anodynes,
tends  to  produce  a  sleep,  very  likely  magnetic.  But  let
these  persons  try  the  experiment  of  placing  a  small  bright
object,  seen  by  the  reflection  of  a  safe  and  distant  light,  in
such  a  position  that  the  eyes  are  strained  a  little  upwards
or  backwards,  and  at  such  a  distance  as  to  give  a  tendency
to  squinting,  and  they  will  probably  never  again  have  re-
course to  the  venerable  authors  above  alluded  to.  A  sweet
and  refreshing  slumber  steals  over  the  senses;  indeed,  the
sensation  of  falling  asleep  under  these  circumstances,  as  I

14*


162

have  often  experienced,  is  quite  delightful ;  and  the  sleep  is
calm  and  undisturbed,  though  often  accompanied  by  dreams
of  an  agreeable  kind.  Sir  David  Brewster,  who,  with  more
than  youthful  ardor,  never  fails  to  investigate  any  curious
fact  connected  with  the  eye,  has  not  only  seen  Mr.  Braid
operate,  but  has  also  himself  often  adopted  this  method  of
inducing  sleep,  and  compares  it  to  the  feeling  we  have,  when,
after  severe  and  long-continued  bodily  exertion,  we  sit  or
lie  down,  and  fall  asleep,  being  overcome,  in  a  most  agree-
able manner,  by  the  solicitations  of  Morpheus,  to  which,  at
such  times,  we  have  a  positive  pleasure  in  yielding,  however
inappropriate  the  scene  of  our  slumbers.

To  return  to  Mr.  Braid.  His  subjects,  as  I  have  seen,
fall  indeed  into  sleep;  but  if  tried,  are  found  to  be  in  a
state  of  somnambulism,  or  magnetic  sleep.  This  would  pro-
bably also  be  found  to  be  the  case  when  we  put  ourselves
to  sleep  as  above  explained ;  but  we  do  not  have  it  tried,
our  wish  being  to  sleep.  It  is  not,  in  fact,  that  the  mag-
netic sleep  differs  from  ordinary  sleep,  as  far  as  mere  sleep-
ing or  restoration  of  the  machine  is  concerned;  but  that
the  internal  senses  are  awake,  while  the  external  senses  and
the  bodily  frame  are  drowned  in  oblivion.  It  is  totally  un-
necessary to  recapitulate  here  all  the  phenomena  which  are
observed  in  the  hypnotic  sleep.  Up  to  a  certain  point,
they  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  ordinary  magnetic  sleep,
so  often  already  referred  to.  There  is  divided  conscious-
ness, closing  of  some  of  the  senses,  and,  above  all,  subjec-
tion to  the  will  of  the  operator,  or  the  impressible  state,  in
which  suggestion  or  command  from  him  are  omnipotent.
Questions  are  readily  answered,  without  the  sleeper  being
awakened;  and  finally  the  curative  effects  are  strongly
manifested.  So  great  is  the  power  exercised  by  Mr.  Braid,
that  feeble  women,  wTho  were,  moreover,  in  a  great  measure,
deprived  of  the  use  of  their  limbs,  can  be  made,  while  in
the  sleep,  readily  to  walk,  and,  by  frequent  repetitions,  are
often  restored  to  activity.  In  some  cases,  aided,  I  doubt
not,  by  the  energetic  volition  of  Mr.  Braid,  the  effects  pro-
duced in  the  first  sitting  continue,  more  or  less,  in  the  wak-
ing state.  In  other  cases,  slender,  delicate  men,  of  small
natural  power,  are  made,  in  the  sleep,  to  exert  a  muscular
force  superior to  that  of  strong  men;  to  raise,  with  one


HAS  NOT  TRODUCED  CLAIRVOYANCE.  163

finger,  weights  which,  if  awake,  they  could  not  move  with
both  hands,  &c.  &c.

7.  But  it  is  remarkable  that  Mr.  Braid  has  not  produced,
in  his  subjects,  what  are  called  the  higher  phenomena,  espe-
cially clairvoyance,  so  often  met  with  by  those  who  employ
the  ordinary  magnetic  process.

Two  hypotheses  may  be  proposed  to  explain  this  fact.
The  first  is,  that  Mr.  Braid  may  be  one  of  those  persons
who  cannot  produce  these  phenomena.  There  are  mag-
netisers,  very  successful  in  the  treatment  of  disease,  who
produce  profound  sleep,  yet  never  see  clairvoyance  in  their
own  subjects.  I  have  heard  of  some  magnetisers  who  are
in  this  predicament,  although  they  have  produced  others  of
the  higher  phenomena.  There  is  a  great  variety  in  the  in-
fluence of  different  magnetisers,  insomuch,  as  I  have  already
stated,  that  the  impressions  caused  by  some,  on  certain  pa-
tients, is  distressing  and  intolerable,  while  that  of  others  is
pleasant  and  soothing.  In  like  manner,  it  often  happens  that
one  operator  can  produce  effects  which  another  cannot  suc-
ceed in  producing,  and  vice  versd.

The  second  is,  that  Mr.  Braid's  process,  being  one  of  self-
magnetisation  or  auto-magnetism,  as  it  has  been  called,  may
not  produce  certain  powers,  which  would  perhaps  appear  in
the  same  cases  under  the  influence  of  a  different  operation,
even  if  performed  by  Mr.  Braid  himself.  A  series  of  com-
parative trials  can  alone  determine  this  point,  and  I  hope
that  such  trials  may,  ere  long,  be  made.

Mr.  Braid,  not  having  produced  or  seen  clairvoyance,  has
gone  so  far  as  to  deny  its  existence.  I  entertain  the  highest
respect  for  Mr.  Braid ;  but  I  cannot  help  thinking  he  has
here  been  too  hasty  in  his  conclusion.  It  was  long  before
I  myself  saw  the  higher  phenomena,  and,  on  more  than  one
occasion,  I  have  mentioned  this,  when  writing  on  the  subject.
But  I  did  not  feel  warranted  in  rejecting  the  prodigious  mass
of  evidence,  much  of  it,  to  all  appearance,  unexceptionable,
of  their  occurrence.  My  opportunities  were  limited,  as  I
never  had  it  in  my  power  at  all  to  study  this  subject  either
in  London  or  in  Paris  ;  while  in  Aberdeen  and  Edinburgh,
in  which  cities  I  have  lived  since  1889,  no  clairvoyance
occurred,  for  some  years,  within  my  reach.  I  was  further
under  the  impression,  that  I  possessed  little  or  no  magnetic
power,  although  I  had  frequently,  in  persons  who  had  been


164  IMPORTANCE  OF  PERSEVERANCE.

already  magnetised,  and  in  some  very  susceptible  subjects
who  had  not  previously  been  operated  on,  produced  the  sleep,
insensibility  to  pain,  and  various  forms  of  sympathy.  I  did
not  then  know,  practically,  how  much  depended  on  patience
and  perseverance  in  these  matters,  and,  not  at  once  meeting
with  the  higher  phenomena,  I  hastily  concluded  that  I  could
not  produce  them.  I  am  now  convinced,  that  had  I  perse-
vered for  a  short  time,  some  of  these  cases  would  have  ex-
hibited the  finest  phenomena,  and  I  can  only  regret  that  I
lost,  through  ignorance,  opportunities  so  valuable.

More  recently,  however,  I  have  not  only  been  enabled  to
see  and  study  these  phenomena  as  produced  by  others,  but
also  to  produce  them  myself;  and  I  can  only  urge  once  more,
on  all  enquirers,  the  importance  of  time,  patience,  and  per-
severance in  these  researches.  "Without  these,  few  will  be
fortunate  enough  to  succeed;  with  them,  no  one,  of  average
power,  need  fail,  (unless  by  nature  incapable,  as  a  few  are,
of  producing  certain  results,)  in  obtaining  evidence  of  very
wonderful  facts,  and  in  acquiring  a  conviction  of  their  in-
terest and  value,  and  of  the  necessity  of  thoroughly  investi-
gating them.

That  Mr.  Braid  has  not  met  with  clairvoyance  is  to  be
regretted ;  but  I  entertain  the  confident  hope,  that  even  if
he  should  not  succeed  in  producing  it  himself,  he  will  yet  be
enabled  to  see  it  produced  by  others.  He  has,  I  believe,
produced  the  state  of  trance,  and  has,  at  all  events,  written
a  very  interesting  work  on  that  subject.  Now  trance  or  ex-
tasis  is,  in  the  opinion  of  all  writers,  so  far  as  I  know,  a
higher  stage  of  the  phenomena  than  clairvoyance,  and  many
have  not  met  with  it  in  their  own  experience.  But  we  must
not  forget  that  it  is  possible,  that  Mr.  Braid's  method  may
not  induce  the  state  of  clairvoyance  at  all,  a  point  which
can  only  be  decided  by  experiment.  For  my  own  part,  I
find  it  difficult  to  conceive  that  a  person,  who,  when  put  into
the  magnetic  sleep  in  the  usual  way,  becomes  clairvoyant,
will  not  present  that  power,  if  put  to  sleep  by  hypnotism.
But  an  experiment  of  this  kind,  on  a  subject  previously
magnetised  in  the  old  way,  would  not  be  perfectly  satisfac-
tory, since  many  of  them  can  be  put  into  the  full  sleep  by  a
variety  of  means,  in  a  few  seconds,  without  any  notable  ex-
ertion of  influence  on  the  part  of  the  operator,  beyond  tell-
ing them  to  go  to  sleep  in  a  certain  way  and  in  a  certain


THE  FACTS  OF  MAGNETISM  MUST  BE  INVESTIGATED. 165

time,  and  thus  we  should  run  the  risk  of  producing  the  ac-
customed state,  when  we  rather  wished  to  see  the  new  one.
In  fact,  the  facility  with  which  many  subjects,  after  hav-
ing been  brought  fully  under  the  influence,  may  be  sent  into
the  deepest  sleep,  is  one  of  the  most  striking  facts  of  the
whole  subject;  and  must  be  borne  in  mind  when  we  would
make  such  experiments.

It  appears,  then,  from  what  has  been  stated,  that  Electro-
biology,  Electro-psychology,  and  Hypnotism,  are  essentially
the  same  with  Animal  Magnetism,  although  there  is  proba-
bly some  difference  in  the  precise  characters  of  the  states
produced.  The  former  may,  indeed,  be  regarded  more  pro-
perly as  parts  of  the  latter,  than  in  any  other  way.  But  it
is  nevertheless  probable,  that  each  may  have  some  advan-
tages and  disadvantages,  peculiar  to  itself.  All  of  them
should  be  diligently  and  carefully  studied  and  investigated,
with  the  firm  conviction,  that,  like  all  other  natural  truths,
they  must  prove  beneficial  to  mankind ;  and  the  more  so,
the  better  they  are  known.  The  danger,  if  danger  there  be,
and  I  cannot,  for  my  part,  conceive  the  existence  of  a  dan-
gerous truth,  lies,  we  may  be  assured,  in  ignorance,  not  in
knowledge.  "  A  little  knowledge"  has  been  said  to  be  "a
dangerous  thing;"  but  why?  because  it  is  little.  Make  it
more,  and  the  danger  diminishes ;  if  we  could  make  it  per-
fect, no  danger  could  possibly  exist.

You  would  do  me  great  injustice,  if  you  supposed  that  I
propounded  the  facts  contained  in  these  Letters,  as  truths
fully  ascertained,  or  duly  investigated,  so  as  to  be  under-
stood. On  the  contrary,  I  give  them,  simply,  as  facts,  so
attested  and  authenticated,  that  we  cannot  disregard  them,
least  of  all  on  the  ground  that  they  are  incredible,  or  that
they  cannot  be  explained.  They  never  can  be  either  under-
stood as  facts,  or  explained  in  the  way  and  degree  in  which
other  natural  facts  are  explained  or  understood,  unless  they
are  thoroughly  and  scientifically  investigated.  When  this
shall  have  been  done — and  it  is  no  easy  task,  no  matter
for  an  idle  hour,  or  for  an  evening's  entertainment,  but  a
serious,  important,  and,  above  all,  laborious  work — we  shall
find  that,  in  proportion  as  we  advance  in  knowledge  of  these
phenomena,  they  will  lose  the  character  of  strangeness  and


166  THE  SUBJECT  BEGINS  TO

supernaturality  which  to  the  ignorant  they  exhibit.  They
will  arrange  themselves  under  natural  laws,  whether  known,
or  yet  to  be  discovered,  as  the  law  of  gravitation,  which  had
acted  from  the  creation,  was  discovered  only  about  200
years  ago  by  Newton.  And  they  will  be  found,  like  all
other  natural  facts,  even  those  at  first  sight  most  unpromis-
ing in  this  respect,  to  admit  of  a  multitude  of  useful  appli-
cations. Man  will  benefit  by  this,  as  he  has  done  by  all
other  knowledge ;  but  we  cannot  expect,  in  this,  the  empiri-
cal stage  of  the  enquiry,  when  we  are  groping  in  the  dark
to  find  the  facts,  and  can  as  yet  discover  no  order  or  beauty
in  them,  to  be  able  to  appreciate,  worthily,  the  purpose  of
the  Creator  in  giving  to  us  that  power  of  influencing  each
other,  which  is  the  essence  of  Animal  Magnetism.

My  sole  object  is  to  convince  those  who  still  entertain
doubts  on  the  subject,  that  certain  facts  exist,  which  are
worthy  of  the  best  and  most  earnest  study  we  can  bestow
on  them.  My  own  observations  have  been  directed  solely
to  the  ascertaining  of  some  of  these  facts,  and  I  make  no
pretensions  to  account  for  them.  My  desire  is  to  promote
scientific  enquiry  into  the  subject,  not  to  present  it  as  al-
ready exhausted.  And  I  shall  feel  amply  rewarded  for  my
labor,  if  one  qualified  person  shall  be  induced,  by  what  I
have  said,  to  devote  his  energies  to  the  scientific  prosecu-
tion of  the  enquiry  into  Animal  Magnetism.


I  have  still  to  allude  to  the  state  of  Trance  or  Extasis,
one  of  the  most  striking,  but  of  the  rarer  phenomena  con-
nected with  this  subject.  I  have  not  hitherto  done  this,
because  I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  personally  examining
the  fact,  and  I  wished,  in  the  first  instance,  to  confine  my-
self to  such  phenomena  as  I  had  been  enabled  for'the  most
part  to  see,  and  in  many  instances  to  produce.  But  many
phenomena  remain,  which  I  have  not  yet  had  the  good  for-
tune to  meet  with ;  and  no  doubt  can  be  entertained,  if  we
may  judge  from  the  results  of  other  scientific  investigations,
such  as  those  of  Astronomy,  Geology,  Physiology,  Optics,
and  Chemistry,  that  a  rich  harvest  of  new  observations  will
reward  those  who  devote  themselves  to  the  cultivation  of
this  boundless  field  of  enquiry,  with  the  means  and  appli-
ances of  scientific  training,  with  the  genuine  and  sincere


ATTRACT  ATTENTION.  167

desire  for  truth,  and  a  matter  of  almost  equal  importance,
the  leisure  necessary  for  the  full  investigation  of  any  branch
of  so  extensive  a  subject.  While  I  rejoice  m  having  boon
early  trained  to  habits  of  scientific  study,  and  while  I  have
endeavored,  to  the  best  of  my  power,  to  look  at  the  subject
of  Animal  Magnetism  in  the  light  of  scientific  research ;
while,  moreover,  I  may  claim  to  have  approached  the  subject
with  a  due  dense  of  its  importance,  and  as  in  other  sciences,
with,  I  trust,  an  earnest  longing  after  the  truth ;  yet,  occu-
pied as  I  have  ever  been,  with  the  cultivation  and  the
teaching  of  a  science  which  I  chose  from  preference,  and  to
which  I  daily  feel  more  and  more  attached,  I  have  not,  and
cannot  expect  to  have,  command  of  the  requisite  leisure  for
such  an  investigation  as  this.  Had  it  been  otherwise,  I
should  long  ago  have  done  my  utmost  to  prosecute  the  en-
quiry ;  and  it  is  only  by  means  of  observations,  made  chiefly
during  the  vacations,  or  when  opportunities  presented  them-
selves occasionally  at  other  times,  that  I  have  been  able
even  to  jot  down  these  imperfect  sketches.  All  I  can  hope
to  accomplish,  is  to  aid  in  stirring  up  to  active  research
those  who  possess,  and  in  a  far  higher  degree  than  rnyself,
the  necessary  qualifications ;  and  perhaps  to  assist  younger
observers  in  their  efforts  to  advance ;  to  enable  them  to
know  what  to  look  for,  and  how  to  recognise  the  different
phenomena.

It  is  very  gratifying  to  me  to  be  able  to  say,  that  men  of
the  highest  ability,  and  already  distinguished  in  various
difficult  branches  of  science,  are  now  turning  their  atten-
tion to  this  hitherto  neglected  subject ;  and  I  have  had  the
greatest  pleasure  in  placing  it  in  the  power  of  some  of  these
gentlemen  to  see  phenomena,  which  I  was  sure,  once  seen,
would  never  cease  to  interest  them.  And  as  Austria  has
produced  a  Reichenbach,  who,  by  five  years'  incessant  labor,
has  shed  a  flood  of  light  on  the  phenomena  of  that  influence
which  we  must  regard  as  the  cause  of  vital  magnetic  effects,
so  we  may  hope,  that  Scotland,  the  country  which  first
adopted  and  taught  the  doctrines  of  Newton,  when  he  had
no  adherents  in  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  may  also  produce
men  who  shall  raise  the  veil  which  conceals  the  truths  of
Animal  Magnetism.

When  men  such  as  Sir  David  Brewster,  Sir  W.  0.  Tre-
velyan,  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  Dr. Simpson,  Professor  Forbes,


168  TEANCE  AND  EXTASIS.

Professor  Bennett,  and  Professor  Goodsir, — when  men  like
these,  veterans  in  science,  though  some  of  them  are  young
in  years,  besides  many  others,  have  not  only  seen  the  facts,
more  or  less  extensively,  but  admit  their  importance,  and
have  personally  investigated  into  some  of  them,  the  time
cannot  be  distant,  when  the  subject  of  Animal  Magnet-
ism shall  assume  a  truly  scientific  form.  If  I  cannot  con-
tribute, in  any  degree,  however  small,  to  hasten  that  most
desirable  consummation,  I  shall  ever  feel  grateful  that  I  was
led  to  devote  a  part  of  my  spare  time  to  the  subject.


LETTER  X.

I  now  proceed  to  describe,  briefly,  that  state,  or  rather
those  states,  which  are  often  included  under  the  name  of
Trance,  or  Extasis.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  go  very  fully
into  them,  because  I  have  not  had  an  opportunity,  such  as
I  have  had  in  regard  to  most  of  the  phenomena  hitherto
described,  either  of  seeing  them,  as  produced  by  others,  or
of  producing  them  myself;  and,  consequently,  have  not
been  enabled  to  compare  with  my  own  observations,  the  ac-
counts given  of  the  phenomena  by  those  who  have  seen
them.  But  as,  in  all  cases  in  which  I  have  thus  been  able
to  test  the  published  accounts  of  magnetic  phenomena,  I
have  found  a  very  great  degree  of  accuracy  and  truthful-
ness in  the  accounts  given  of  the  facts  by  the  best  observers
and  authors  on  the  subject,  I  consider  it  but  just  to  regard
their  account  of  the  phenomena  as  accurate,  until  it  shall
be  shown  to  be  otherwise.

1.  The  first  observation  I  would  make  is,  that  it  is  neces-
sary to  distinguish  two  states;  one  in  which  we  have  the
appearances  of  death,  and  which  may  be  compared  to  the
hybernation  or  torpid  winter  sleep  of  some  animals  ;  the
other,  in  which  the  subject  enters,  apparently,  into  a
higher  state  or  phase  of  existence,  and  is  deeply  interested,
nay  often  absorbed  by  his  contemplation  of  visions,  or
scenes  of  beauty  and  happiness  so  perfect,  that,  in  compa-
rison, the  world,  with  all  its  luxuries,  appears  utterly  worth-


NATURAL  TRANCE.  169

less  and  insignificant.  These  two  states  have  been  con-
founded by  some  writers,  and  the  term  trance  applied  to
both,  indiscriminately.  And  it  cannot  be  denied  that  there
is  some  analogy  between  them,  and  that,  in  one  sense,  both
may  be  called  trance,  because,  in  both,  the  subject,  as  it
were,  leaves  the  world,  or  indeed  may  be  said  to  leave  life,
for  a  time.  We  shall  call  the  first  state  Trance,  the  other
Extasis.

2.  Trance,  or  a  torpid,  apparently  dead  state,  occurs
spontaneously,  and  has  been  often  recorded.  In  one  re-
markable case  described  in  an  early  volume  of  the  Philoso-
phical Transactions,  the  patient,  a  laboring  man  at  Tins-
bury,  continued  in  this  state,  with  hardly  an  interruption,
for  many  weeks.  He  took  a  little  food  only  once  or  twice
during  the  whole  time,  and  did  so  mechanically,  and,  as  it
were,  instinctively,  without  awaking.  In  the  same  way,  he
occasionally,  but  only  at  very  long  intervals,  performed
certain  bodily  functions.  In  short,  he  was,  for  almost  the
whole  period,  in  a  state  closely  resembling  hybernation,  in
which,  as  is  well  known,  the  hybernating  animal  requires,
and  indeed  can  take,  no  food,  and  the  animal  heat  is  kept
up,  though  at  a  temperature  lower  than  the  normal  one  of
the  waking  state,  by  the  consumption  of  the  fat  stored  up
in  its  tissues  by  the  waking  animal.  He  was  deaf  to  all
sounds,  and  never  spoke,  and  when  at  last  he  awoke,  he
would  not  believe  that  he  had  slept  more  than  usual  till
he  saw  the  fields,  which,  when  he  went  to  sleep,  were  green,
now  ripe  and  yellow,  ready  for  the  sickle.  Another  similar
case  is  recorded  as  having  occurred  lately  in  France.

Such  cases  have  in  all  ages  been  observed,  and  even  re-
corded ;  yet  only  a  few  years  since,  when  the  Tinsbury  case
was  brought  forward  as  a  proof  that  a  state  of  trance,  in-
cluding insensibility  to  pain,  was  possible,  some  of  those
who  seemed  resolved  not  to  believe  in  the  possibility  of  pain-
less surgical  operations,  performed  on  persons  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  declared  that  the  man  must  have  been  an  im-
postor. Yet  there  was  no  ground  for  this  assertion,  for  the
case  excited  much  interest  at  the  time,  and  was  examined  by
several  men  of  science,  members  of  the  Royal  Society,  who
could  not  detect  any  imposture.

That  such  an  unconscious,  torpid  state  is  possible,  has,
moreover,  been  proved  by  the  effects  of  accidents,  as  in  the
15


170  MAGNETIC  TRANCE.

well-known  case  of  the  man,  who,  falling  from  the  mast-
head on  the  deck  of  a  ship  of  war  on  the  Mediterranean,
fractured  his  skull,  and  lay  for  months  in  a  perfectly  uncon-
scious state,  eating  and  performing  other  necessary  func-
tions by  a  mechanical  instinct,  until  he  was  trepanned,  and
the  depression  of  the  bone  removed,  in  London,  when  his
memory  went  back  at  once  to  the  period  of  his  fall,  nor  had
he  the  slightest  idea  that  any  time  had  elapsed  since  the
accident.

We  may  see  also,  by  the  occurrence  of  such  cases,  either
spontaneously  from  some  unobserved  affection  of  the  nerv-
ous system,  or  in  consequence  of  accidents,  that  all  the
cases  of  the  alleged  power  to  do  without  food,  or  to  sleep,
for  a  long  time,  need  not  be  supposed  impostures.  It  is
much  more  probable,  that  the  occurrence  of  a  genuine  case,
and  the  curiosity  excited  by  it,  as  well  as  the  profit  derived
from  its  exhibition  to  wondering  crowds,  may  have  led  to  its
simulation,  in  some  instances,  with  a  view  to  gain.

We  may  also  see,  in  these  facts,  the  origin  of  the  oriental
tales  of  sleepers,  who,  falling  asleep  in  some  cavern,  have
found,  on  awaking,  a  new  world  around  them.  It  is  evi-
dent, that  where  one  man  had  slept,  were  it  only  for  a  week
or  a  month,  and  had  awoke,  unconscious  of  the  lapse  of
time,  this  would  infallibly  grow,  in  the  vivid  Eastern  fancy,
to  years  and  centuries  of  sleep.  Here  again  we  see,  that
the  most  incredible  stories,  if  they  have  ever  formed  an  ar-
ticle of  general  belief,  must  have  had  some  foundation  in
natural  truth.

3.  Now  the  same  state  is  said  to  occur,  and  this,  on  ap-
parently good  testimony,  as  a  result  of  magnetic  processes,
and,  at  all  events,  artificially  produced ;  as,  indeed,  we
might  naturally  expect,  if  it  occur  spontaneously.  I  need
not  here  enter  into  details,  for  the  appearances  are  the
same  as  above  described,  in  the  natural  trance.  I  would
only  say,  that  they  are  described,  by  those  who  have  seen
them,  as  occurring  in  a  high  or  deep  stage  of  the  magnetic
sleep.  The  magnetic  trance  must  be  carefully  distinguished
from  the  ordinary  magnetic  sleep,  which  has  usually  a  short
duration,  and  in  which  the  sleeper  is  conscious,  although
not  in  his  ordinary  consciousness,  and  speaks  or  thinks,  or
acts  accordingly.  But  in  the  trance,  he  is  apparently  un-
conscious, and  it  may  last  much  longer. Some  subjects


TRANCE  PRODUCED  AT  WILL.  171

would  appear  to  have  a  much  greater  tendency  to  fall  into
this  trance  than  others,  and  this,  also,  might  be  anticipated
from  analogy.  Of  the  fact  there  can  be  no  rational  doubt,
but  for  the  reasons  above  given,  I  do  not  enter  into  a  full
or  minute  description  of  it.

4.  It  has  long  been  known,  but  little  attended  to,  that
certain  persons  have  had  the  power  of  producing,  in  them-
selves, at  pleasure,  this  state  of  trance,  or  partially  sus-
pended animation.  Mr.  Braid,  in  an  interesting  little  work
lately  published,  has  collected  the  most  satisfactory  evidence
on  this  point.  He  has  quoted  the  recorded  case  of  Col.
Townsend,  who  often  threw  himself  into  this  state  of  appa-
rent death,  nay,  who  did  so  in  the  presence  of  medical  and
scientific  men,  wTho  found  his  pulse  and  respiration  to  cease,
and  were  really  alarmed,  lest  they  should  not  return,  and
real  death  ensue.  But  Col.  T.,  after  a  certain  time,  gradu-
ally awoke  to  life ;  the  heart  began  to  throb,  the  lungs  to
play,  and  full  vitality  was  soon  restored.

Mr.  Braid  has  also  given,  on  the  authority  of  Sir  C.
Wade,  and  other  gentlemen  of  the  highest  character,  who
had  seen  the  fact  in  India,  several  thoroughly  attested  cases
of  Faquirs,  who  made  a  profession,  somewhat  religious  in
its  character,  of  throwing  themselves  into  a  perfect  trance,
and  allowing  themselves,  in  this  state,  to  be  enclosed  in  a
coffin,  and  buried  for  periods  of  several  days  or  even  weeks.
These  cases  leave  no  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  fact ;  and
the  falling  asleep,  as  well  as  the  waking,  after  certain  fric-
tions and  bathings  had  been  employed,  are  described  in  a
manner  which  is  truly  natural  and  convincing.

As  we  have  seen,  that  the  action  of  a  subject  on  himself,
that  is,  the  great  concentration  of  his  mind  on  one  object,
can  produce,  not  only  the  impressionable  state,  necessary
for  experiments  on  suggestion,  but  also  magnetic  sleep,  as
in  what  are  called  Electro-biology  and  Hypnotism,  we  may
reasonably  conjecture,  that,  in  such  cases  as  those  of  Col.
Townsend,  and  of  the  Faquirs,  the  trance  also  is  produced
by  auto-magnetism,  and  by  a  rare  degree  of  the  concentra-
tive  power.  It  is  possible,  that  in  some  instances,  as  for
example  in  that  of  Col.  T.,  this  may  be  aided  by  a  peculiar
power  of  checking  the  heart's  action,  which  hardly  any  one
possesses.

Such  experiments,  notwithstanding  the  resuscitation  of


172  EXTASIS.

the  Faquirs,  eannot  be  considered  devoid  of  danger;  and,
therefore,  while  I  would  gladly  embrace  any  opportunity  of
studying  the  phenomenon,  should  it  occur  spontaneously  in
a  magnetic  case,  I  should  not  think  it  justifiable  to  try  to
produce  it.  I  have  seen  the  heart's  action  so  affected,  by  a
magnetiser,  at  the  earnest  desire  of  the  subject,  and  for  the
edification  of  certain  sceptical  gentlemen,  that  the  pulse
rose  to  200  beats  in  a  minute,  or  rather,  became  so  frequent
that  it  could  not  be  counted,  while  it  became,  as  it  rose  in
frequency,  so  feeble  as  hardly  to  be  felt.  I  have  seen  sick-
ness and  fainting  thus  produced,  and  it  is  possible  that  the
fainting  may  have  been  a  trance.  But  I  could  not  bring
myself,  either  to  try  such  experiments,  or  to  countenance
them  again,  after  seeing  the  effect  produced.

5.  With  regard  to  the  state  of  Extasis,  it  is  of  compara-
tively rare  occurrence,  and  this,  perhaps,  because  it  is  not
looked  for,  or  because  magnetisers  do  not  seek  to  produce
it.  It  agrees  with  trance,  in  the  complete  separation  from
ordinary  life,  and  even,  in  some  cases,  in  the  existence  of
danger,  if  pushed  too  far.  M.  Cahagnet  has  stated  that  he
has  seen  cases  which  convinced  him,  that  if  prolonged  a
little  longer,  death  might  have  ensued.  I  have  never  seen
this  peculiar  state,  nor  tried  to  produce  it ;  but,  as  already
mentioned,  I  have  seen,  in  the  ordinary  magnetic  sleep,  a
state  supervene,  obviously  different,  and  apparently  higher,
in  which  the  subject  was  intensely  happy,  and  complained
bitterly  of  being  brought  back  to  this  dull,  wretched,  every-
day life.  This  is  a  feature  of  Extasis,  and  therefore  it  is
probable  that,  if  we  were  to  try,  such  subjects  might  be
rendered  ecstatic.  Nevertheless,  I  should  hesitate  before
trying  the  experiment,  since  I  regard  it  as  not  altogether
free  from  danger.

6.  Extasis,  as  well  as  trance,  has  often  been  recorded  as
a  spontaneous  occurrence,  usually  in  females,  of  a  highly
excitable  temperament,  and  affected  with  hysteria  or  other
nervous  disease,  and  under  the  influence  of  intense  religious
or  devotional  excitement.  Such  a  person  is  called  an  "  Es-
tatica,"  and  many  such  "Estatice"  have  been  described.
These  stories  have  been  rejected,  off-hand,  as  mere  impos-
tures ;  but  we  must  beware  of  supposing  that  all  is  imposture
in  them,  even  where  the  patients  have  come  into  the  hands


RELIGIOUS  ECSTATICS.  173

of  persons  willing  to  use  them,  either  for  purposes  of  gain,
or  in  order  to  promote  certain  religious  opinions.

The  "  Estatice  ''  see  visions,  of  saints  or  angels,  perhaps
of  heaven,  and  describe  these  visions  in  glowing  colors.
Now,  granting  that  these  are,  as  is  probably  often  the  case,
mere  dreams,  the  nature  of  which  has  been  dictated  by  the
priest,  or  suggested  by  reading,  there  is  nothing  in  this  to
justify  the  charge  of  imposture.  A  highly  susceptible  pa-
tient, whether  in  the  magnetic  sleep  or  not,  may  be  made,
as  in  the  experiments  on  suggestion,  to  see  anything  that
the  operator,  in  this  case  the  priest,  suggests  or  commands.
He,  on  the  other  hand,  is  perhaps  aware  of  his  power ;  as
some  priests  are,  who,  from  the  study  of  forgotten  books,
and  by  tradition  in  their  monasteries,  possess  a  knowledge  of
Animal  Magnetism,  and  have  practised  it  in  secret,  since
it  is  regarded,  by  the  decree  of  the  Church,  as  allied  to
magic,  if  not  identical  with  it.  His  strong  convictions  may
lead  him,  innocently,  to  suggest  to  the  estatica  precisely
what  he  wishes  to  find  true  ;  and  she  sees  his  patron  saint,
the  holy  Virgin,  or  any  other  saint,  in  a  form  as  real  to  her,
as  are  the  fancied  objects  to  Mr.  Lewis's  or  Dr.  Darling's
subjects.  If  she  is  desired  to  see  and  describe  heaven  or
hell,  she  sees  that  of  the  priest,  or  of  her  books,  and,  of
course,  finds  in  the  former  all  the  orthodox,  in  the  latter  all
heretics,  according  to  his  or  her  own  views.

All  this,  and  a  great  deal  more,  may  occur  quite  honestly:
but  it  is  not  wonderful,  if  an  ignorant  and  superstitious
priest,  of  whatever  denomination,  engaged,  perhaps  in  a
fierce  controversy  on  some  mysterious  point,  should,  now
and  then,  avail  himself  of  his  influence  over  his  patient,  or
of  her  delusions,  in  a  way  that  indicates  more  zeal  than
honesty.

But  the  estatica  herself  is  usually  sincere.  And,  to  show
that  in  these  spontaneous  cases  we  have  to  do  with  the  same
unknown  cause  as  that  which  produces  the  more  usual  phe-
nomena of  Animal  Magnetism,  I  may  mention,  that  these
patients  are  generally  also  somnambulists,  or  exhibit,  spon-
taneously, the  other  effects,  observed  in  the  lower  stages  of
Animal  Magnetism.  It  is  highly  probable  that  their  visions
are  frequently  the  results  of  real  clairvoyance,  which  many
of  them  possess,  in  so  far,  at  least,  as  regards  the  visions
which  refer  to  natural  objects  and  persons. But  such  cases,

15*


174  LUMINOUS  EMANATIONS.

interesting  as  they  undoubtedly  are,  have  not  been  studied
scientifically.

One  of  the  statements  most  frequently  made  with  regard
to  such  cases,  is,  not  only  that  the  patients  see  luminous
appearances  proceeding  from  objects  or  from  the  persons
present,  but  that  they  themselves  exhibit  a  luminous  appear-
ance, often  described  as  a  halo  or  glory  round  the  head.  I
am  not  prepared  to  reject  this  as  altogether  imaginary.
Baron  von  Reichenbach  has  proved,  that  luminous  pheno-
mena, visible  in  the  dark  to  the  sensitive,  who  are  far  from
rare,  proceed  from  all  objects,  more  or  less  brightly,  and
especially  from  the  head  and  hands  of  human  beings.  Some
are  so  sensitive  in  the  waking  state,  as  to  see  these  emana-
tions even  in  day-light ;  and  somnambulists  almost  always  do
so,  as  already  mentioned.  Now,  if  we  suppose  a  greatly
excited  state  of  the  nervous  system  to  intensify  these  lumi-
nous appearances,  they  may  be  observed  in  the  patients,  by
such  among  those  who  approach  them  as  are  more  or  less
sensitive,  even  in  day-light,  and  by  many  more  in  the  dark.
The  appearance,  once  seen,  and  regarded  as  miraculous,
will  not,  probably,  be  very  soberly  described,  and  may  have
been  much  exaggerated.

Here  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  it  has  been  recorded,
among  others,  by  Sir  Henry  Marsh,  that  dying  persons
often  exhibit  such  a  halo :  and  it  may  be  regarded  as  a
universal  belief,  that  dying  persons  often  acquire  the  power
of  seeing  what  may  be  called  visions,  but  which  are,  most
probably,  the  effects  of  clairvoyance.

Let  us  not,  then,  rashly  pronounce  all  ecstatics  to  be
impostors,  but  rather  investigate  the  phenomena.  I  would
not  even  rashly  decide  on  the  falsehood  of  the  apparent
suspension,  or  rather  counteraction,  of  the  law  of  gravity,
asserted  to  have  been  observed  in  such  cases,  as  well  as  in
the  celebrated  one  of  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  and  in  which
the  patient  is  said  to  have  remained  for  a  short  period,  sus-
pended in  the  air,  without  support.  There  appear  to  be
facts,  in  artificial  magnetism,  which,  if  confirmed,  would
warrant  us  in  admitting  this  to  be  possible.  I  allude  to  the
strange  attraction  exercised  on  the  subject  by  the  magnetiser,
which,  in  cases  where  the  patient  was  extremely  susceptible,
and  the  magnetiser  very  powerful,  is  said  to  have  occasion-
ally reached  the  point  of  raising  the  former  from  the  floor,


EXTASIS  OFTEN  PREDICTED.  17 0

in  opposition  to  gravity,  and  of  preventing  him  from  falling,
in  positions  in  which  he  could  not  otherwise  have  remained
for  an  instant.

7.  With  regard  to  Extasis,  as  occurring  in  the  course  of
experiments  on  Animal  Magnetism,  it  must  be  regarded  in
so  far  as  artificial,  that  it  occurs  as  a  consequence  of  these
experiments,  and  would  probably,  in  most  cases,  not  occur
without  them.  Still,  as  those  in  whom  they  occur,  even
although  healthy,  are  the  most  sensitive  to  all  magnetic  or
odylic  influences,  extasis,  as  we  have  seen,  does  occur  spon-
taneously. And  even  in  the  course  of  magnetic  experiments
or  magnetic  treatment,  it  usually  comes  unsought,  perhaps
always  the  first  time,  although  the  subject  may  sometimes
become  able  to  induce  it  at  will.

When  it  occurs  in  a  subject,  fortunate  enough  to  be  in
the  hands  of  a  judicious  magnetiser,  who  does  not  thrust
his  notions  on  the  subject,  but  leaves  the  ecstatic  to  tell  his
own  story,  it  certainly  offers  very  remarkable  phenomena,
whatever  interpretation  be  put  upon  them.

The  patient,  or  the  healthy  subject,  will  often  predict
with  great  accuracy,  and  a  long  time  before  the  extasis,
the  day,  hour,  and  minute  of  its  occurrence.  E.,  formerly
spoken  of,  did  so  two  years  ago,  with  regard  to  one  remark-
able extasis  of  hers,  and  I  believe  also  predicted  several
less  striking  since  that  time.  As  I  write,  I  am  in  hourly
expectation  of  hearing  the  details  of  a  second  great,  or
strongly  marked  extasis,  which  she  has  for  some  time  fixed,
in  the  magnetic  sleep,  for  Jan.  8th ;  I  shall,  if  permitted,
give  some  account  of  it  in  Part  II.  E.,  in  her  waking
state,  is  not  aware  of  her  own  prediction,  which  of  course
is  not  spoken  of  to  her,  or  indeed  to  any  one,  except  my-
self and  one  or  two  others,  who  are  much  interested  in
the  result.

In  the  very  remarkable  work  of  M.  Cahagnet,  already
alluded  to,  there  is  an  account  of  a  most  remarkable  clair-
voyante,  who  could  at  pleasure,  and  with  the  permission  and
aid  of  her  magnetiser,  pass  into  the  highest  stage  of  extasis,
in  which  she  described  herself  as  ineffably  happy,  enjoying
converse  with  the  whole  spiritual  world,  and  herself  so  en-
tirely detached  from  this  sublunary  scene,  that  she  not  only
had  no  wish  to  return  to  it,  but  bitterly  reproached  M.  Ca-
hagnet for  forcing  her  back  to  life. On  one  occasion,  at


176  THE  EXTATIC  SOMNAMBULISTS

her  urgent  request,  he  allowed  her  to  enjoy  that  state  longer
than  usual.  But  he  took  the  precaution  of  placing  another
very  lucid  clairvoyant,  a  young  lad,  en  rapport  with  her,
with  strict  orders  to  watch  her  closely.  She  seemed  at  first
unconscious,  but  by  degrees  her  body  assumed  an  alarming
aspect,  became  to  appearance  dead,  that  is,  was  in  the  tor-
pid trance,  like  that  of  the  Faquirs,  pulseless,  cold,  and  de-
void of  respiration.  The  lad,  who  kept  his  eye  (the  in-
ternal vision  of  clairvoyance,)  on  her,  at  last  exclaimed,
"  she  is  gone  !  I  see  her  no  longer  I"  M.  Cahagnet  then,
after  much  fruitless  labor,  and  not  until,  as  he  informs  us,
he  had  prayed  fervently  to  be  enabled  to  restore  her  to  life,
succeeded  in  re-establishing  warmth  and  respiration.  The
girl,  on  waking,  overwhelmed  him  with  reproaches  for  what
he  had  just  done,  and  could  not  be  pacified  till  he  succeeded  in
convincing  her,  she  being  a  young  woman  of  pious  charac-
ter and  good  feeling,  that  what  she  desired  amounted  to
suicide,  and  was  a  grievous  crime,  for  which  he  would  be
held  responsible.

Various  other  examples  of  this  form  of  extasis  are  men-
tioned in  the  work  of  M.  Cahagnet,  to  which  I  refer  the
curious  reader.  M.  Cahagnet  is  since  dead,  or  I  should
have  endeavored  to  see  his  experiments  ;  he  was  an  opera-
tive, who  seems  to  have  been  possessed  of  excellent  abili-
ties, and  to  have  made  his  observations  with  great  care.
His  subjects  exhibited  clairvoyance  in  its  most  perfect  forms,
and  most,  or  all,  of  them  also  passed  into  extasis,  in  which
they  described  the  spiritual  world.  Indeed,  this  is  the  dis-
tinguishing feature  of  extasis ;  and  the  extreme  form  above
described,  where  the  body  assumes  the  aspect  of  death,  as
in  trance,  is  very  rare.  In  general  the  ecstatics,  as  in  the
cases  of  M.  Cahagnet,  and  in  that  of  E.,  describe  minutely
all  they  see  and  feel.

Now  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  M.  Cahagnet  was  an  en-
thusiast, in  the  genuine  and  good  sense  of  the  term,  in  re-
ference to  this  subject,  and  no  wonder,  when  such  facts  were
presented  to  him.  But  I  can  see  no  reason,  in  his  book,
to  suppose  that  his  enthusiasm  in  any  way  affected  his  in-
tellect. Many  are  ready  to  imagine  without  enquiry,  that
the  visions  of  his  ecstatics,  concerning  the  spiritual  world,
are  only  dreams,  the  character  of  which  is  determined  by
his  views  on  the  subject,  and  hence  the  remarkable  agree-


OF  M.  CAHAGNET.  177

ment  which  in  general  exists  between  the  statements  of  his
different  ecstatics.  Such  was  the  view  which  first  offered
itself  to  my  own  mind.  But  I  am  very  averse  to  deciding
such  questions  without  ^enquiry,  and  on  reading  further  and
more  attentively,  I  found  that  this  view  would  not  apply  to
all  the  facts  recorded.  Indeed,  if  on  some  points  the  ecsta-
tics expressed  views  and  opinions  in  accordance  with  his,  in
many  others  they  not  only  differed  from  him,  but  pertina-
ciously held  their  own  opinions,  and  the  result  finally  was,
that  he  adopted,  and  says  he  was  compelled  to  adopt,  no-
tions in  regard  to  the  spiritual  world,  entirely  opposed  to
his  former  views,  which  seem  to  have  been  materialistic.

I  do  not  propose,  in  such  a  work  as  this,  the  object  of
which  is  chiefly  to  record  my  own  observations,  to  enter
fully  into  such  matters  as  these,  of  which  I  have  no  expe-
rience. But  I  have  thought  it  right  to  mention  the  subject,
and  to  refer  to  the  work  of  M.  Cahagnet,  which  will  be
found  very  interesting  by  all  those  who  wish  to  penetrate,
as  far  as  is  permitted,  into  the  mysteries  of  the  world  of
spirits.  If  there  be  a  spiritual  world  at  all,  and  such  is  the
almost  universal  belief  of  mankind,  it  is  at  least  possible,
that  the  revelations  of  ecstatics  may  be  more  or  less  true,
just  as  they  may  be  supposed  to  be  mere  dreams.  I  con-
fess that  what  most  strongly  affects  my  mind,  and  deters
me  from  assuming  the  latter  hypothesis,  until  I  shall  have
been  enabled  to  study  the  phenomena  of  Extasis,  is  the  sin-
gular harmony  between  the  visions  of  different  ecstatics,
between  those,  for  example  of  E.,  and  those  of  M.  Cahag-
net's  subjects.  I  may  add,  that  Dr.  Haddock,  in  whose
house  E.  lives,  and  who  has  described  the  phenomena  of
her  case,  is  a  gentleman  of  cool  and  reflecting  mind,  a  good
observer,  and  besides,  as  I  know  from  experience,  a  most
judicious  and  prudent  magnetiser.  And  I  can  also  state,
having,  by  his  kindness,  been  permitted  to  study  his  inte-
resting clairvoyante,  although  not  in  the  extatic  stage,  at
my  leisure,  and  in  his  absence,  as  well  as  when  he  was  pre-
sent, that  she  is  a  genuinely  honest,  truthful,  and  intelligent
girl,  although  she  has  not  had  the  advantages  of  even  a
common  education.  I  have,  therefore,  no  reason  to  doubt
the  facts  as  described  by  Dr.  Haddock,  any  more  than
those  given  by  M.  Cahagnet  and  others,  whatever  may
hereafter  prove  to  be  their  true  nature.


178  THE  SPIRITUAL  WORLD.

If  the  visions  of  magnetic  ecstatics  be  nothing  but  dreams,
then,  as  described  by  the  observers  of  such  cases,  they  must
be  regarded  as  dreams  of  a  very  remarkable  and  peculiar
character,  and  they  are  found,  in  different  cases,  very  closely
to  resemble  each  other  in  their  general  or  essential  pecu-
liarities. The  ecstatics  find  themselves  (and  this  is  said  by
all,  whether  educated  or  not,  and,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  not
only  without  prompting  on  the  part  of  the  magnetiser,  but
very  often  to  his  great  surprise,  and  sometimes  contrary  to
his  belief,)  in  communication  with  the  spiritual  world.
They  hold  long  conversations  with  spirits,  to  whom  they
often  give  names,  and  who,  in  many  cases,  according  to
their  account,  are  the  spirits  of  departed  friends  or  relations.
The  remarks  and  answers  of  these  visionary  beings  are
reported  by  the  ecstatics.  Some  of  them  affirm  that  every
man  has  an  attendant  good  spirit,  perhaps  also  an  evil  one
of  inferior  power.  Some  can  summon,  either  of  themselves
or  with  the  aid  of  their  attendant  spirit,  the  spirit  or  vision
of  any  dead  relation  or  friend,  and  even  of  persons  also
dead,  whom  neither  they  nor  the  magnetiser  have  ever  seen,
whom  perhaps  no  one  present  has  seen;  and  the  minute
descriptions  given  in  all  these  cases,  of  the  persons  seen  or
summoned,  is  afterwards  found  to  be  correct.  Many  other
details,  some  of  them  still  more  astounding  are  given,  but,
for  the  reason  already  given,  I  confine  myself  here,  to  a
brief  general  indication  of  the  strange  phenomena  of  Ex-
tasis,  which,  be  it  remembered,  I  have  not  myself  had  an
opportunity  of  observing.

Now,  certainly  such  visions  as  these,  whatever  be  their
real  nature,  are  not  ordinary  dreams.  It  is  idle  to  reject
them  as  altogether  imaginary,  and  illogical  to  do  so  without
enquiry.  And  I  repeat,  that  all  those  who  believe  in  the
existence  of  a  spiritual  world,  must  feel  that  they  may  pos-
sibly contain  revelations  of  it.

The  belief  in  the  existence  of  the  world  of  spirits  is  as
old  as  mankind  ;  and  the  belief  that  men  are,  in  certain  cir-
cumstances, capable  of  entering  into  communication  with  it,
it  is  not  much  less  venerable.  It  has  been  the  favorite  dream
of  philosophers,  poets,  and  divines,  in  all  ages,  and  there-
fore, without  venturing  to  pronounce  dogmatically,  I  would
say  to  all,  observe,  study,  reflect  and  examine,  before  coming
to  a  decision  on  this  mysterious  subject. It  is  easy  to  say


THE  POUGHKEEPSIE  SEER.  179

that  Swedenborg  was  a  mad  enthusiast  ;  but  it  is  not  the
less  certain,  that  he  was  a  man  of  prodigious  ability  and
learning,  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  science  of  his  day  ;
and  the  most  striking  circumstance,  in  my  opinion,  con-
nected with  magnetic  ecstatics  is,  that  they  agree  in  very
many  points  with  Swedenborg  ;  and  that  this  agreement  is
found  to  occur  precisely  in  regard  to  those  things  which  we
are  accustomed  to  regard  in  him,  as  the  products  of  an  in-
sane enthusiasm.  It  is  observed,  moreover,  in  ignorant  per-
sons, who  have  never  even  heard  of  the  name  and  opinions
of  the  Swedish  philosopher.

I  do  not  here  refer  to  the  case  of  the  Poughkeepsie  Seer,
Andrew  Jackson  Davis.  I  think  there  can  be  no  doubt,
that  his  revelations,  which  present  an  appalling  hotch-potch
of  all  possible  metaphysical  systems,  are  essentially  the
genuine  results  of  a  most  remarkable  degree  of  magnetic
sympathy  with  all  who  approach  him,  which  leads  him  to
retail,  as  they  are  imaged  in  his  own  mind,  the  hetero-
geneous opinions  and  ideas  of  such  as  act  upon  him,  un-
known to  themselves,  and  have  read  and  thought  upon  me-
taphysical subjects.

There  are,  I  believe,  cases  of  Extasis,  not  disturbed  by
this  kind  of  sympathy,  and  such  cases  are  well  worthy  of
and  will  richly  reward  the  most  diligent  and  attentive  in-
vestigation.

In  my  next  Letter,  I  shall  go  on  to  those  facts  connected
with  the  excitement  and  manifestation  of  individual  mental
faculties,  which  have  been  called  by  some,  with  not  a  happy
selection  of  terms,  Phreno-mesmerism,  or  Phreno-magnet-
ism.  I  have  already  very  briefly  alluded  to  the  fact  that
the  mental  faculties  may  be  roused  into  action,  in  a  person
who  is  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  in  a  variety  of  ways.  I  now
propose  to  examine  this  matter  somewhat  more  fully.


LETTER  XI.

1.  When  certain  subjects  are  thrown  into  the  magnetic
sleep,  it  is  found,  on  trial,  that  by  touching  certain  parts  of


180  PHRENOLOGY.

the  head,  marked,  and  sometimes  violent,  manifestations  of
certain  mental  faculties  occur.  It  is  further  observed  that
these  manifestations  correspond,  in  their  nature,  to  the  part
of  the  head  touched,  on  the  principles  of  Phrenology.  This
has  been  proclaimed  by  some  as  a  convincing  proof  of  the
truth  of  Phrenology,  and  by  others  either  rejected,  because
it  seemed  to  favor  that  science,  or  it  has  been  ascribed  to
other  causes,  entirely  independent  of  the  cerebral  organs  of
the  Phrenologist.  Both  parties  appear  to  me  to  have  been
hasty  in  their  conclusions:  for  the  phenomena  may,  and  do
occur,  occasionally,  in  such  a  way  as  not  necessarily  to
prove  the  truth  of  the  organology  of  Gall,  while,  on  the
other  hand,  cases  are  met  with  in  which  we  cannot,  I  think,
explain  the  facts  except  on  the  hypothesis  of  Gall,  that
every  mental  faculty,  whether  it  be  a  propensity,  a  senti-
ment, or  an  intellectual  aptitude,  is  dependent  for  its  mani-
festation in  this  life,  on  a  certain  portion  of  the  brain.

2.  This  is  not  the  place  for  a  discussion  of  the  truths  of
Phrenology,  even  if  these  were  less  generally  adopted  and
felt  to  be  true  than  they  are.  In  spite  of  the  storm  of
abuse  which  was  showered  on  Gall  and  Spurzheim  as  quacks
and  impostors,  their  anatomy  of  the  brain  is  now  universally
admitted  to  be  the  best,  and  their  mode  of  dissecting  it  the
only  good  one;  and  their  view  of  the  constitution  of  the
mental  faculties,  considered  by  itself,  as  well  as  their  classi-
fication, are  regarded  as  eminently  practical,  and  at  least
equal  to  those  of  any  other  metaphysician.  Men  see  that
those  who  have  thus  distinguished  themselves  as  investiga-
tors in  Anatomy  and  as  thinkers  in  Mental  Philosophy,  are
not  likely  to  have  been  quacks,  and  still  less  impostors.
And  even  their  organology,  after  so  short  an  interval  as
barely  half  a  century,  is  no  longer  regarded  as  absurd,  but,
on  the  contrary,  its  ideas  pervade  our  conversation  and
literature,  and  even  its  language  is  employed,  as  singularly
precise  and  convenient,  by  writers  of  every  class.  Phre-
nology has  passed  through  the  first  stage  of  violent  opposi-
tion, in  which  it  was  decried  as  a  mischievous  novelty ;  it
has  even  passed  through  the  second,  in  which,  as  invariably
happens  with  new  truths,  it  was  declared,  by  those  who  had
at  first  denounced  it  as  new,  to  be  old  and  well  known ;  and
it  will  soon  be  generally  not  only  admitted,  but  taught  as
true  science. The  late  Lord  Jeffrey,  in  an  article  on  the


REAL  ORIGIN  OF  GALL'S  SYSTEM.  181

subject  in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  boldly  scouted  it  in  every
aspect,  and  fulminated  the  memorable  dictum,  that  "  there
is  not  the  smallest  reason  to  suppose  that  the  brain  is  con-
cerned in  any  mental  process,  save  only  the  perceptions
derived  from  the  external  senses  !"  a  statement  which,  even
at  that  time,  must  have  appeared  ludicrously  absurd,  and  a
proof  of  the  grossest  ignorance,  to  all  acquainted  with  either
physiology  or  mental  philosophy;  not  to  speak  of  those  who
could  see  what  daily  passed  around  them,  and  who  saw  the
effects  of  a  blow  on  the  head,  or  an  apoplexy,  on  all  the
mental  powers  without  exception ;  or  who  know  that  idiots
have  commonly  either  singularly  small  or  else  misshapen
and  diseased  heads,  and  that  there  is  no  instance  on  record
of  any  one  whose  head  measured  less  than  fourteen  inches
in  its  greatest  circumference,  who  possessed  human  faculties
and  intelligence  at  all,  while  yet  many  such  unfortunates
have  lived,  or  rather  vegetated,  possessed  of  a  few  animal
instincts  and  of  the  external  senses.  Nay,  I  may  go  much
further,  and  say  that  few,  if  any,  are  now  to  be  found  who
doubt  that  a  well-formed  head,  that  is,  brain,  is  desirable ;
or  who  will  deny  that  a  full,  high,  broad  forehead  indicates
superior  intellect ;  that  a  large  base  and  posterior  part  of
the  head  indicates  powerful  animal  propensities,  and  that  a
full  development  of  the  coronal  region  is  somehow  connected
with  refined,  virtuous,  and  religious  feelings.  These  three
great  regions  are  admitted  by  most  people,  but  they  hesitate
at  what  they  call  the  small  details  of  the  organology ;  they
imagine  Gall  to  have  invented  these,  and  to  have,  of  his  own
fancy,  subdivided  the  three  regions,  which  they  suppose  to
have  been  generally  admitted  before  his  time,  into  those
smaller  mappings,  which  to  some  are  so  great  a  stumbling-
block. Such  is  a  very  common  notion  of  Phrenology.

But  that  notion  is  not  only  unfounded,  it  is  the  direct  re-
verse of  the  truth.  The  three  great  regions  of  the  brain
were  not  admitted  before  Gall's  time.  Some  authors  had
done,  what  he  did  not ;  they  had  arbitrarily  mapped  out  the
head,  not  from  observation,  but  from  fancy.  Some  of  these
cranial  maps  are  extant,  and  one  exhibits  the  intellect  lo-
cated in  the  occiput.  And  even  Gall  himself  did  not  at  first
recognise  or  admit  the  intellectual,  animal,  and  moral  regions.
It  was  only  after  he  had,  by  observation  and  comparison,
pursued  with  unwearied  diligence  for  years,  detected  the
16


182  EFFECTS  OF  TOUCHING  THE  HEAD

connection  of  the  powers  of  certain  isolated  feelings,  propen-
sities, and  talents,  and  of  their  absence  or  deficiency,  with
the  more  or  less  perfect  development  of  certain  parts  of  the
brain,  indicated  externally  by  the  corresponding  parts  of  the
head,  that  he  was  at  last  struck  with  the  fact,  that  the  or-
gans of  certain  allied  feelings,  &c,  were  allied  in  position
also ;  that  the  groups  of  the  domestic  feelings,  of  the  observ-
ing powers,  of  the  reflecting  faculties,  and  of  the  higher  sen-
timents, were  represented  by  groups  of  organs  associated
together  in  place.  Hence  the  idea,  which  belongs  to  Gall,
of  the  three  great  regions.  His  march  was  precisely  the
reverse  of  what  is  often  attributed  to  him.  It  was  strictly
inductive ;  and  the  details  of  mapping,  which  are  often  de-
nied and  rejected  as  purely  arbitrary,  were  actually  the  first
observed,  and  furnished  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of
those  great  regions,  which  are  admitted  by  those  who  reject
the  details,  and  are,  indeed,  instinctively  felt  to  be  true,
when  pointed  out.

Such  being  the  case,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  anticipate
the  universal  reception  of  Phrenology  in  the  course  of
another  half  century  or  another  generation.  I  may  safely
hazard  the  prediction,  that  the  Edinburgh  Review  will  not
venture  again  to  issue  the  anti-physiological  dictum  above
referred  to.  Should  it  do  so,  the  merest  tyro  among  its
readers  would  laugh  it  to  scorn.  The  lamented  author,  who
fell  into  so  gross  an  error,  (which,  by  the  way,  was  not,  so
far  as  I  know,  reprehended,  or  even  noticed,  by  any  physi-
ologist, except  the  phrenologists,)  when  he  ventured  into
regions  previously  unexplored  by  him,  announced,  in  the
same  article,  his  intention,  if  at  the  end  of  ten  years  from
that  date,  phrenology  should  still  survive,  to  annihilate  it
once  more.  At  the  end  of  the  ten  years,  with  the  inconve-
nient tenacity  of  life  exhibited  by  all  truths,  physiological  or
metaphysical,  or  of  any  other  kind,  phrenology  was  more
rampant  than  ever,  and  as  we  have  seen,  it  continues  to
exist.

"  The  thane  of  Cawdor  lives  ;  a  prosp'rous  gentleman  •"

and  phrenology  still  awaits  the  coup  de  grace,  for  that  pro-
mise was  never  fulfilled.

3.  As  I  admit  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  phrenology,
without  imagining  so  new  a  science  to  be  perfect  or  com-
plete, I  am  quite  prepared  to  find  it  confirmed  in  the  mag-


IN  THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  183

netic  sleep,  as  it  is  in  the  waking  state.  Let  us  now  see
what  the  facts  are.

In  some  magnetic  sleepers,  if  we  touch  with  the  finger  any
given  part  of  the  head,  such,  for  example,  as  the  organ  of
Tune,  or  of  Self-Esteem,  without  a  word  of  suggestion,  we
instantly  obtain  a  corresponding  manifestation.  It  is  really,
in  many  cases,  like  touching  the  keys  of  an  organ  (in  the
other  sense  of  the  word)  when  the  bellows  are  full  of  wind,
and  the  sound  instantly  follows.  If  Tune  be  the  organ
touched,  the  subject  forthwith  breaks  into  song.  If  it  be
Self-Esteem,  he  throws  back  his  head,  struts  with  immense
dignity,  and  declares  himself  superior  to  the  rest  of  man-
kind. Touch  the  organ  of  Love  of  children,  and  he  dandles
an  imaginary  babe,  with  most  paternal  affection.  Touch
Benevolence,  the  expression  changes  to  that  of  compassion ;
his  hand  is  thrust  into  his  pocket,  and  held  forth  with  all  his
store.  Touch  Acquisitiveness,  the  griping  miser  instantly
appears,  and  with  appropriate  look  and  speech,  the  money
is  restored  to  its  original  receptacle ;  it  is  well  if  the  nearest
object,  however  bulky,  be  not  also  "boned,"  to  use  a  slang
but  expressive  phrase.  If  Caution  be  the  stop  touched,  the
music  is  the  most  distressing,  nay,  often  appalling  pantomime
of  fear,  or  of  misery.  But  if  Hope  be  played  on,  the  clouds
vanish,  and  joyous  sunshine  gilds  every  feature.  Such  are
a  few  of  the  effects  produced.  I  speak  of  but  a  small  part
of  what  I  have  often  seen,  and  often  produced.  It  is  unne-
cessary to  say  that  I  have  done  so  in  cases  where  no  decep-
tion was  or  could  be  practised.  The  question  is  rather,  How
are  these  effects  produced  ?

4.  There  are  two  theories ;  the  first  supposes  them  to  be
the  mere  results  of  the  operator's  will,  or  of  sympathy  with
him;  the  second  believes  them  to  be  the  genuine  results  of
the  effect  of  the  touch  in  exciting  the  subjacent  cerebral
organs.

I  believe  that  both  are  true  ;  that  is,  that  some  cases
may  be  explained  on  the  first  theory,  but  that  other  cases
exist,  in  which  it  does  not  suffice ;  the  second  alone  can  be
adopted  in  these.

There  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt,  that  in  some  cases  the
will  of  the  operator  is  almost  omnipotent.  Even  in  the
conscious  impressible  state  of  Mr.  Lewis,  or  in  that  of  Dr.
Darling,  precisely  similar  effects  are  produced  by  suggestion.


184  CASES  IN  WHICH  SYMPATHY

The  subject,  if  told  that  he  is  Father  Mathew,  delivers  a
lecture  on  temperance  ;  if  desired  to  sing  or  spout,  he  does
so  ;  if  persuaded  that  he  is  ruined,  he  exhibits  in  perfection
the  pantomime  of  despair,  and  so  on,  as  I  have  often  seen.
And  as  I  have  also  seen  many  effects,  of  all  kinds,  produced
by  the  silent  will,  I  cannot  doubt  that  it  is,  in  some  cases,
capable  of  replacing  suggestion.  Besides,  to  a  person  ac-
quainted with  phrenology,  the  suggestion  may  be  conveyed
by  touching  a  particular  part  of  the  head.  I  confess  that
I  think  that  this  last  explanation,  although  certainly  possi-
ble, can  apply,  at  most,  to  a  very  few  persons ;  for  on  trial,
I  seldom  find  any  one,  not  a  professed  and  practical  phreno-
logist, who  can  point  out  the  position  of  the  phrenological
organs,  with  any  degree  of  accuracy,  even  among  those  who
admit  phrenology  to  be  true.

Further,  the  manifestations  can  be  often  called  out,  not
only  by  suggestion,  but  by  touching  other  parts  of  the  body
than  the  head,  and  that,  in  cases  where  perhaps  touching
the  head,  as  often  happens,  has  no  effect.  Some  have  endea-
vored to  show,  that  touching  a  particular  part  of  the  arm,
leg,  or  trunk,  is  followed  by  the  same  manifestation  at  all
times  and.  in  all  cases  ;  but  I  have  not  seen  any  good  evi-
dence of  this.  Mr.  Lewis  informs  me,  that  in  cases  in  which
he  can  produce  such  effects  by  the  will,  he  can  do  so,  what-
ever part  he  touches,  and  can  call  out  the  same  faculty  by
touching  many  different  parts.  His  will,  as  I  have  already
mentioned,  is  singularly  powerful.

As  to  sympathy,  it  is  necessary  in  so  far,  as  it  is  a  con-
dition indispensable  to  the  successful  exercise  of  the  will.
But  no  one  who  has  ever  seen  these  beautiful  manifestations,
which  are  invaluable,  from  their  truth  and  beauty,  to  the
intelligent  artist,  can  suppose  that  the  state  of  the  subject
is  a  mere  reflexion  of  the  operator's  mind.  For  while  the
latter  is  tranquil,  the  former  may  be  heaving  with  emotion ;
and,  as  I  have  seen,  accidental  emotions  in  the  operator
are,  very  often,  not  communicated  to  the  subject,  who  may
be  an  excellent  one,  and  is  perhaps  acting  some  passion  or
feeling  to  the  life,  when  the  operator  becomes  convulsed
with  laughter,  &c,  and  yet  he  is  not  thereby  affected
at  all.

I  therefore  admit,  nay  I  maintain,  that  there  are  many
cases,  in  which  suggestion,  or  the  will  of  the  operator,  or


AND  SUGGESTION  DO  NOT  ACT.  185

sympathy  with  him,  will  suffice  to  explain  the  occurrence  of
the  facts.

6.  But  there  are  other  cases,  in  which  this  explanation
does  not  apply.  And  I  would  again  remark,  that  I  have
taken  all  precautions  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  deception.

First,  the  subject  is  often  unacquainted  with  the  very
name  of  Phrenology,  and  ignorant  of  the  position  of  a  single
organ.  Yet  he  will,  if  a  good  case,  respond  to  the  touch
instantly  wherever  it  may  be  made,  just  as  where  will  is  the
agent.

But  secondly,  when  the  operator  is  himself,  as  often  hap-
pens, as  ignorant  of  phrenology  as  the  patient,  he  is  sur-
prised and  confounded  at  the  results,  because,  when  touching
a  part,  he  knew  not  its  function,  and  therefore  had  no
volition  on  the  matter  at  all.  Yet  here  also,  as  I  have
seen,  the  manifestation  will  often  come  out  as  well  as  before.
Nay,  the  pressure  of  a  chair,  or  of  the  wall,  on  a  part  of
the  head,  will  sometimes,  when  quite  accidental,  as  well  as
the  accidental  touch  of  a  hand  or  arm,  whether  of  the  ope-
rator or  not,  produce  the  same  effects.  Indeed,  it  often
happens,  that  when  an  operator  who  knows  phrenology,
intends  to  touch  one  organ,  and,  turning  to  speak  to  some
one,  touches  a  wrong  organ,  with  the  idea  of  the  first  in  his
mind,  or  when  his  hand  slips  from  one  organ  to  another,  he
is  surprised  at  what  appears  a  wrong  result,  till  he  detects
the  cause  of  it,  and  all  this  in  cases,  where  the  subject  has
no  idea  whatever  of  phrenology.

Thirdly,  it  frequently  happens,  that  the  operator,  when
touching  an  organ,  either  does  not  know  what  manifestation
to  expect,  or  possibly  expects  one,  and  yet  an  admirable
manifestation  is  the  result,  different  from  any  he  had
imagined.  Thus,  in  trying  a  number  of  organs,  I  had  no
idea  what  to  expect  from  that  of  weight,  which  is  believed
to  give  the  sense  of  resistance,  and  to  aid  in  preserving  the
balance.  I  tried  on  two  subjects,  both  seated,  and  I  took
no  time  to  consider  what  would  be  the  result.  The  first
drew  himself  up  from  a  stooping  posture,  into  a  perfectly
upright  one,  with  a  deep  sigh.  With  this  in  my  mind,  I
tried  the  other,  but  he  immediately  leaned  forward,  his  face
assumed  an  expression  of  horror,  and  he  screamed  out  that
he  was  falling  into  a  bottomless  abyss.  Both  manifestations
belong  to  the  faculty,  but  most  certainly  neither  was  ex-

16*


186  COMBINED  MANIFESTATIONS.

pected  by  me.  When  I  tried,  in  the  second  case,  the  organ
of  Size,  the  subject  instantly  spoke  of  an  elephant,  40  feet
high,  which  he  saw,  "a  big  black  beastie,"  as  he,  being  an
Aberdonian,  called  it  at  first,  with  that  intense  delight  in
diminutive  terms,  which  characterises  the  natives  of  Bon
Accord.  I  had  formerly  seen  the  same  faculty  manifested
in  the  form  of  the  perception  of  vast  distance,  one  of  its
functions  being  to  observe  distance,  and  was  expecting  that,
rather  than  the  "beastie."  I  might  give  other  examples,
but  I  refrain.

Fourthly :  when  I  tried  the  combination  of  two  or  more
organs,  touched  at  once,  combined  manifestations  came  out,
as  quickly  as  the  single  ones,  and  before  I  could  even  con-
jecture what  was  likely  to  ensue.  Thus,  when  I  touched
Acquisitiveness  and  Benevolence  at  once,  in  a  subject  in
whom  both  came  out  well  separately,  he  began  discoursing
to  an  imaginary  beggar,  with  his  hand  in  his  pocket,  which
however  he  could  not  prevail  on  himself  to  extract  from
thence,  concerning  the  duty  of  assisting  the  poor  by  good
advice,  and  by  taking  trouble  about  them,  rather  than  by
giving  money.  In  another  subject,  I  obtained,  accidentally,
a  very  fine  combination,  indicating  at  the  same  time,  that
the  excitement  produced  by  touch  lasts  for  a  certain  time,
which  is  longer  in  some  cases  than  in  others.  When  Vene-
ration was  excited,  the  subject  exhibited  a  beautiful  picture
of  devotion.  He  knelt  and  prayed,  with  a  fervor  and  in-
tensity of  expression  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  surpass.
Humility  was  intensely  predominant  in  his  gesture.  When
Self-esteem  was  touched,  the  organ  being  large,  he  exhibit-
ed pride  and  hauteur  to  a  most  ludicrous  degree,  and  this
faculty  was  kept  excited  for  a  time.  At  this  moment  a
gentleman  entered  the  room,  who  anxiously  desired  to
witness  the  manifestation  of  humble  devotion.  I  therefore
touched  Veneration,  being  firmly  convinced  that  I  should
obtain,  as  I  had  frequently  done,  the  former  result;  but  I
was  disappointed.  Devotion  indeed  came  out,  but  with  a
totally  different  character.  Instead  of  kneeling,  he  stood
erect,  and  his  prayer  began;  "  0  Lord!  I  thank  thee  that
thou  hast  made  me  so  much  superior  to  all  other  men  in
knowledge  of  thee,"  &c.  The  tone  of  voice  was  no  longer
humble,  and  in  short,  an  artist,  wishing  to  paint  a  picture
of  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple,  and  the  Publican  afar  off,


EFFECTS  IN  THE  CONSCIOUS  STATE. 187

would  have  found  this  man,  in  his  last  state,  a  perfect  model
for  the  former ;  in  his  first,  an  equally  perfect  study  for  the
latter.  I  have  seen  many  other  instances  of  combined
minifestations,  where  I  knew  not  what  to  expect.

From  the  above  considerations  I  think  it  is  evident,  that
there  are  cases  in  which  Sympathy  and  Will  do  not  suffice
for  the  explanation,  and  where  nothing  but  the  admission
of  the  phrenological  organs,  and  of  the  influence  of  the
operator  on  these  by  contact,  can  explain  the  results
obtained.

7.  I  have  seen  cases  in  which  I  could  easily,  by  touch,
excite  some  organs,  but  not  others,  which  in  other  cases  I
could  easily  bring  into  action.  In  one  case,  where  the
organ  of  Caution  could  not  be  excited,  my  hand  happened
to  touch  that  of  Secretiveness,  lying  just  below  it,  unknown
to  me.  Instantly  a  bystander  said,  "Look!  look!  what  is
she  doing  ?"  and  I  saw  her  secreting  under  her  shawl,  some
small  object  taken  very  cunningly  from  the  table.  I  was
thinking  of  and  desiring  a  manifestation  of  fear  or  of  terror.

8.  Lastly,  I  have  observed  that,  in  some  persons,  in  their
ordinary  state,  certain  faculties  not  only  become  unusually
active,  but  are  easily  excitable  by  touching  their  organs.
A  lady  mentioned  to  me  that  she  was  annoyed  with  spectral
illusions,  which  indicated  morbid  activity  of  Form,  Color,
and  other  perceptive  faculties.  I  tried  the  effect  of  touch-
ing, in  succession,  all  the  perceptive  organs.  Those  of
Form,  Color,  Size,  Order,  and  Number,  all  responded  to
the  touch,  and  exhibited  beautiful  objects  of  many  kinds,
singly,  or  in  vast  numbers ;  grouped  in  disorder,  or  symme-
trically arranged;  grey,  or  splendid  in  varied  hues;  and
extending  to  infinite  distance,  and  small  or  large,  according
to  the  organs  touched.  When  Weight  was  touched,  she  felt
as  in  a  bad  dream,  as  if  falling  from  a  precipice,  or  the
ground  falling  away  from  her  feet.

This  case  confirms  that  theory  of  spectral  illusions,  which
refers  some  of  them  to  morbid  excitement  of  the  perceptive
organ,  which,  however,  does  not  explain  all  spectral  ap-
pearances.


On  the  whole,  we  must,  I  think,  admit  that  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  and  in  susceptible  subjects,  the  mental  faculties


188  EFFECTS  OF  MAGNETISM

may  be  readily  excited  to  action  by  touching,  or  pointing  at,
their  organs,  as  well  as  by  the  will  of  the  operator.  See
Part  II.


The  next  subject  to  which  I  wish  to  direct  your  atten-
tion, is  the  fact,  that  the  lower  animals  are  susceptible  of
the  magnetic  influence.  This  has  been  often  observed,  and
it  is  important,  as  excluding  the  action  of  the  imagination,
as  well  as  the  idea  of  collusion,  and  leading  to  the  conclu-
sion that  a  real  influence  exists,  which  passes  from  the  ope-
rator to  the  subject.

1.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  celebrated  horse-
tamer,  and  others  who  were  in  the  habit  of  subduing  un-
broken or  savage  animals,  have  used,  perhaps  without  know-
ing it,  some  magnetic  process.  The  great  Irish  horse-tamer
is  said  to  have  shut  himself  up  for  a  short  time  with  the
horse,  and  at  the  end  of  the  time  to  have  produced  him
tamed.  He  evidently  had  a  secret,  and  it  would  appear
that  it  must  have  been  very  simple,  or  he  would  not  have
been  so  fearful  of  its  being  discovered.  It  is  said,  however,
that  either  he,  or  other  tamers,  breathed  into  the  animal's
nostrils,  and  certainly  this  process  has  been  found  very
powerful  by  some  who  have  tried  it.  Now,  we  know  that
breathing  is  one  of  the  processes  adopted  in  Animal  Magnet-
ism, and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  breath  is  strongly
charged  with  the  influence.  The  influence  of  the  human
eye  on  the  lower  animals  is  a  familiar  fact,  and  a  great
part,  if  not  the  whole  of  the  feats  of  Van  Amburgh,  and
others  who  subdue  lions  and  tigers,  depends  on  the  use  of
the  eye.  They  never,  if  they  can  help  it,  especially  in  the
case  of  very  fierce  animals,  withdraw  their  fixed  gaze,  and
so  long  as  that  is  kept  up,  and  the  eye  of  the  animal  is
fascinated  in  this  way,  so  long  does  he  attempt  nothing
against  his  subduer.  It  is  well  known,  however,  that  it  is
often  dangerous  to  relax  the  steadiness  of  the  gaze,  or  to
turn  away  the  eye.  JSTow  gazing  is  an  extremely  powerful
means  of  magnetising,  so  much  so,  that  in  my  experience,
I  always  begin,  in  a  new  case,  by  gazing  steadily  for  five  or
ten  minutes  into  the  eyes*  of  the  subject.  Mr.  Lewis,  whose
power  is  so  remarkable,  operates  chiefly  by  gazing,  and
those  who  have  seen  him  operate,  can  readily  understand


ON  THE  LOWER  ANIMALS.  189

the  fascination  of  the  eye,  when  used  with  so  intense  a
power  of  concentration  as  is  found  in  Mr.  Lewis.  Within
these  few  days,  Mr.  Lewis  easily  and  completely  magnetised
a  cat,  in  the  presence  of  several  persons.  A  case  was
lately  published  in  the  Zoist,  in  which  the  Duke  of  Marl-
borough magnetised  a  very  fierce  dog  by  gazing  alone.

Miss  Martineau  has  also  recently  published  a  case,  in
which  she  not  only  magnetised  a  cow,  suffering  from  acute
disease,  but  cured  the  animal  by  magnetic  treatment.

It  would  appear  that  the  lower  animals,  being  in  a  more  natu-
ral state  than  civilised  man,  are  generally,  perhaps  always,
susceptible  to  magnetic  influence,  as  man,  in  his  natural  state,
probably  is  also.  Experiments  on  this  subject  would  certain-
ly yield  very  interesting  results.

2.  Not  only  are  the  lower  animals  susceptible  of  the  hu-
man magnetic  influence,  but  they  can  exert  a  similar  influ-
ence on  each  other.  The  power  of  the  snake  to  fascinate
birds  by  gazing,  is  pure  Animal  Magnetism.  Not  only  is
this  fact  daily  observed  in  America,  but  snakes  are  very
often  seen  to  fascinate  larger  animals,  such  as  the  domestic
cat,  and  even  at  incredible  distances.  Mr.  Lewis  informs
me  that  he  has  often  seen  this.  The  cat  becomes  strange-
ly agitated,  when  those  observe  it  see  no  snake ;  but  a  snake
is  always  found  on  looking  for  it,  with  its  eyes  fixed  on  the
cat.  The  latter  is  compelled  to  move  towards  the  reptile,
and  after  a  time,  falls  down  apparently  unconscious,  and
quite  helpless,  unable  to  use  its  limbs,  when  if  not  rescued,
it  falls  an  easy  prey  to  the  snake,  It  is  also  observed,
that  when  the  snake  is  frightened  away,  or  killed,  and  its
gaze  suddenly  removed,  the  cat,  in  some  instances,  instantly
dies.  This  Mr.  Lewis  has  seen.  This  reminds  us  of  the
facts  formerly  mentioned,  in  regard  to  the  magnetic  trance,
or  extasis,  which  may  pass  into  death,  and  in  which  it  is
sometimes  difficult  for  the  magnetiser  to  restore  full  life.

3.  There  would  appear  to  exist  among  the  lower  animals,
some  means  of  communication  unknown  to  us.  This  has  been
observed  in  all  animals,  and  is  usually  ascribed  to  Instinct.
But  what  is  Instinct  ?  This  is  merely  giving  the  fact  a  name,
not  explaining  its  nature.  In  the  dog,  this  peculiar  sagacity
has  been  much  noticed,  because  the  dog  is  so  much  in  con-
tact with  man  ;  but  there  is  hardly  an  animal  which  does  not
exhibit  it,  and  in  regard  to  which  it  has  not  been  re  corded.  The


190  SYMPATHY  IN  ANIMALS.

courts  of  justice  and  punishments  of  rooks,  the  movements
of  birds  of  passage,  and  hundreds  of  analogous  facts,  point
to  some  peculiar  influence.  How  does  a  dog  trace,  not  only
his  master,  but  also  any  thing  which  his  master  has  .touched,
and  commands  him  to  seek,  even  although  it  be  concealed  ?
How  does  a  dog,  carried  to  a  distance  by  sea,  or  in  a  bag,  find
his  way  home  by  the  direct  route  ?  Who  can  explain  the
well-attested  fact,  that  a  Scotch  terrier,  having  been  taken
to  England,  and  there  cruelly  mangled  by  a  large  dog,  not
only  found  his  way  home,  but  immediately  again  departed
for  the  scene  of  his  ill-usage,  not  however  alone,  but  with  a
companion,  an  old  friend,  in  the  shape  of  a  large  dog,  who,
when  they  arrived  at  their  destination,  assisted  him  to  worry
his  tormentor?  If  we  ascribe  to  the  scent,  the  dog's  power
to  trace  his  master,  the  degree  of  scent  required  is  so  great,
that  it  amounts  to  a  new  sense ;  for  he  will,  after  long  con-
finement, often  go  to  where  he  last  saw  his  master,  and  not
finding  him  there,  will  yet  trace  him,  through  many  places,
till  he  find  him.  We  cannot  suppose  ordinary  scent  here  to
be  the  agent.

I  am  rather  inclined  to  ascribe  many  of  the  marvels  of
Instinct  to  magnetic  sympathy,  which  there  is  reason  to  be-
lieve is  very  active  and  powerful  in  animals.  We  know  that
animals,  of  different  genera,  and  even  classes  or  orders,  often
exhibit  an  attachment  very  similar  to  that  sometimes  observed
between  a  magnetiser  and  his  subject;  and  they  also  shew
very  unaccountable  antipathies,  both  to  men  and  animals.

It  has  lately  been  stated,  by  M.  Aliix,  on  the  authority  of
M.  Benoit  in  Paris,  and  of  another  discoverer,  (also,  I  be-
lieve, a  Frenchman,  who  is  now  in  America,)  both  of  whom,
during  the  last  ten  years,  have  been  employed  in  working
out  the  discovery,  which  they  had  severally  and  independ-
ently made,  although  they  are  now  associated  to  work  it  out,
that  this  magnetic  sympathy  is  remarkably  developed  in
snails ;  that  these  animals,  after  having  once  been  in  commu-
nication or  in  contact,  continue  ever  after  to  sympathise,  no
matter  at  what  distance  they  may  be.  And  it  has  been  pro-
posed to  found,  on  this  fact,  a  mode  of  communication  be-
tween the  most  distant  places.  Nay,  M.  Allix  describes,
with  care  and  judgment,  experiments  made  in  his  presence,
in  which,  the  time  having  of  course  been  fixed  beforehand,
words,  spelled  in  Paris  by  M.  Benoit,  and  also  by  M.  Allix


SNAIL  TELEGRAPH.  191

himself,  were  instantly  read  in  America,  and  as  instantly
replied  to,  by  words  spelled  there,  and  read  in  Paris.  All
this  was  done  by  means  of  snails,  and  although  the  full  de-
tails of  the  apparatus  employed,  and  of  all  the  processes
necessary  to  ensure  success,  have  not  yet  been  published,  yet
the  account  given  by  M.  Allix,  and  also  by  M.  Benoit,  goes
so  far  as  to  enable  us  to  conceive  the  principle  made  use  of.

It  would  appear  that  every  letter  has  a  snail  belonging  to
it  in  Paris,  while  in  America,  each  letter  has  also  a  snail,
sympathetic  with  that  of  the  same  letter  in  Paris,  the  two
snails  of  each  letter  having  been  at  some  period,  and  by  some
process,  brought  into  full  sympathy,  and  then  separated  and
marked.  There  is,  of  course,  a  stock  of  spare  snails  for  each
letter,  in  case  of  accident,  but  it  is  found  that  these  animals
will  live  for  a  year  without  food,  should  that  be  necessary.
When  a  word  is  to  be  spelled  in  Paris,  the  snail  belonging
to  the  first  letter  is  brought  by  some  galvanic  apparatus,  not
yet  fully  described,  into  a  state  of  disturbance,  with  which
his  fellow  in  America  sympathises.  But  this  requires  to  be
ascertained ;  which  is  done  by  approaching,  in  America,  to
all  the  snails  successively,  a  testing  apparatus,  not  described,
which  however  includes  a  snail.  On  the  approach  of  this,
the  snail  whose  fellow  in  Paris  has  been  acted  on,  exhibits
some  symptom,  which  is  not  exhibited  by  any  other,  and  the
corresponding  letter  is  noted  down.  This  is  clone  with  each
letter,  and  thus  the  word  is  finally  spelled.

Now  all  this  may  appear,  at  first  sight,  very  absurd  and
ridiculous.  I  confess  it  appeared  so  to  me,  when  I  first
heard  of  it.  But  when  I  recollected  all  I  had  seen  of  sym-
pathy in  man,  all  that  was  known  about  sympathy  in  the
lower  animals,  and  when  I  read  the  account  given  by  M.
Allix,  a  gentleman  well  versed  in  science,  of  the  successful
experiments  at  which  he  had  assisted,  I  perceived  that  the
only  difficulty  lay  in  admitting  the  fact  of  the  extraordinary
sympathy  of  snails,  and  that,  this  being  granted,  all  the  rest
was  not  only  possible  but  easy.  Now,  I  know  nothing  what-
ever about  the  habits  of  snails ;  and  surely  I  am  not  entitled
to  reject  facts,  thus  attested,  without  some  investigation  into
them.  I  cannot  say  that  the  alleged  sympathy  is  impossi-
ble. But  an  investigation  into  the  matter,  so  long  as  the
full  details  of  the  experiments  made  by  the  discoverers  are
not  published,  is  certain  to  be  a  laborious  task,  and  probably


192  ACTION  OF  MAGNETS

a  fruitless  one.  It  cost  them  a  long  time  to  ascertain  the
facts,  and  they  have  been,  for  ten  years,  engaged  in  bring-
ing their  discovery  into  a  practical  form.  Till  the  promised
publication  appears,  we  can  only  admit  the  possibility  of  the
thing,  and  wait  for  the  explanation,  which  shall  enable  us
to  verify  it  for  ourselves.  It  will  certainly  be  very  remark-
able, if  a  snail  telegraph  should  come  into  action,  which,  in
spite  of  the  proverbial  slowness  of  the  animal  concerned,
should  rival  in  rapidity  the  electric  telegraph,  and  surpass
it  in  security,  inasmuch  as  there  are  no  wires  to  be  cut  by
an  enemy,  besides  being  infinitely  less  costly,  since  no  solid,
tangible  means  of  communication  are  required,  and  all  that
is  needed, is  the  apparatus  at  either  end  of  the  line,  and  the
properly  prepared  snails.

It  appears  from  the  paper  of  M.  Allix,  that  even  this  as-
tounding novelty  is  not  new.  At  least,  it  would  seem,  that
a  long  time  ago,  I  cannot  fix  the  period,  a  secret  mode  of
correspondence  was  devised,  intended  chiefly  for  communi-
cations with  a  beleaguered  fortress,  in  which  it  is  believed
that  animal  sympathy  played  the  leading  part.


LETTER  XII.

In  this  Letter  I  shall  proceed  to  mention,  in  a  very  gen-
eral way,  the  action,  on  the  human  system,  of  inanimate
objects,  such  as  magnets,  crystals,  &c.  It  is  the  less  neces-
sary to  dwell  at  length  on  this  subject,  as  Baron  von  Reichen-
bach's  Researches  on  Magnetism,  (a  translation  of  which  I
published,  in  so  far  as  they  have  appeared  in  Germany,  in
the  month  of  May  1850,  having  previously  given,  in  1846,
an  Abstract  of  Part  I.)  contain  the  results  of  the  only  truly
scientific  investigation  which  has  yet  been  made  on  that
point.  It  is  true  that  we  only  possesss,  at  present,  a  part
of  these  admirable  researches,  which  were  continued,  with
great  labor  and  astonishing  perseverance,  for  five  years.
The  Baron,  during  that  time,  collected  full  materials  for  a
work  on  the  numerous  branches  of  the  subject  investigated
by  him  ;  but  he  has  not,  as  yet,  been  able  to  publish  more


AND  OF  OTHER  BODIES.  193

than  a  part,  sufficient,  however,  to  make  us  eager  to  obtain
the  remainder.  The  labor  and  time  required  for  arranging
and  publishing  the  details  of  so  many  investigations,  made
on  upwards  of  100  different  persons,  is  very  great,  and  the
remainder  of  the  work  can  only  appear  gradually,  as  it  is
brought  into  a  state  fit  for  publication.

In  Part  I.  however,  we  have  a  general  summary  of  the
whole  investigation,  and  it  is  to  that  that  we  must  refer  for
the  facts  which  have  been  ascertained  on  this  matter.

1.  Mesmer  observed  the  effects,  not  only  of  magnets,  but
of  other  things  on  the  human  body ;  but  he  seems  to  have
been,  and  his  followers  certainly  were,  in  too  great  a  hurry
to  apply  the  power  he  had  observed  to  profitable  purposes,
and  to  the  cure  of  disease,  so  that  they  made  no  thorough
or  scientific  examination  of  it ;  and  the  whole  subject  fell
into  discredit.

Nevertheless,  in  now  appears,  that  the  fundamental  facts
are  true.  Magnets  do  act  on  the  human  body.  When
passes  are  made  with  them,  the  same  sensations  are  experi-
enced, as  when  the  operator  uses  his  hand.  Here,  no  doubt,
the  influence  of  the  hand  is  combined  with  that  of  the  mag-
net ;  but,  by  using  the  magnet  without  the  hand  of  the
operator,  or  in  the  hand  of  a  person  whose  hand,  by  itself,
has  no  perceptible  effect,  it  is  ascertained  that  the  magnet
does  exert  an  influence  identical  with  that  exerted  by  the
human  body.

This  influence  may  go  so  far  as  to  produce,  even  at  a  great
distance,  unconsciousness,  as  well  as  the  true  magnetic  sleep,
and  in  highly  susceptible  cases,  even  cataleptic  rigidity  and
convulsions.  In  one  such  case,  mentioned  by  Reichenbach,
a  large  magnet,  being  disarmed  at  the  greatest  distance
permitted  by  the  room,  instantly  struck  the  patient  into
complete  rigidity  and  unconsciousness.  But  Reichenbach
has  also  shown  that  a  large  number  of  perfectly  healthy  per-
sons are  sensitive  to  the  influence  from  the  magnet.  This
sensitiveness  is  not  a  morbid  condition,  and  is  found,  in  dif-
ferent degrees,  in  one  person  out  of  three,  on  an  average,  of
healthy  and  diseased  people.

2.  This  influence  is  conducted,  or  passes,  through  all
matter,  differing  in  this  from  the  electrical  influence,  which
cannot  pass,  for  example,  through  glass  or  resin,  but  passes
easily  through  metals.

17


194  RESEARCHES  OF

3.  Like  electricity  and  ordinary  magnetism,  it  is  polar  in
its  distribution.  In  the  magnet,  this  influence,  which  Reich-
enbach  has  named  Odyle,  is  associated  with  Ferro-Magnet-
ism,  that  power  by  which  the  suspended  needle  points  to  the
north,  and  by  which  the  magnet  attracts  iron  filings.  But
it  is  found,  as  we  shall  see,  unconnected  with  ferro-magnet-
ism,  as  in  crystals,  or  in  the  human  body.  But  wherever
it  appears,  that  is,  whether  in  magnets,  in  crystals,  or  in  the
human  body,  it  is  polar,  like  ferro-magnetism ;  that  is,  there
is  a  difference  in  its  manifestations  at  the  two  ends  or  poles
of  the  magnet  or  other  body  possessing  it.  It  occurs,  also,
in  amorphous  matter,  &c.  without  distinct  polarity.

4.  The  odylic  influence  is  characterised,  in  its  flow  out  of
one  body  towards  all  others,  for,  like  heat,  light,  and  elec-
tricity, it  is  sent  forth  in  all  directions,  by  its  emanations
being  luminous,  that  is,  to  sensitive  persons,  in  the  dark.
The  light  is  very  faint,  so  as  generally  to  be  overpowered
by  the  faintest  glimmer  of  ordinary  light,  although  very
sensitive  persons,  and  most  persons  when  in  the  magnetic
sleep,  can  see  it  in  day-light.  It  presents  the  rainbow
colors,  but  at  the  northward  pole  of  magnets  the  blue,  at
the  southward  the  red  predominates.  For  a  multitude  of
very  interesting  details  on  the  odylic  light  of  magnets,  I  re-
fer to  the  work  of  Reichenbach  already  mentioned,  Part  II.

5.  Not  only  is  the  odylic  influence  found  in  magnets,  but
also  in  crystals.  All  bodies,  when  in  distinct  and  large
crystals,  possess  it,  and  exhibit,  to  the  sensitive,  the  same
or  analogous  luminous  emanations,  often  of  great  beauty.
Crystals  are  also  odylically  polar,  and  produce,  though  less
powerfully,  the  same  effects  as  magnets,  or  as  the  human
hand.

6.  The  human  body  is  found  to  possess  the  same  influence,
and  to  produce  the  same  effects  on  the  sensitive,  as  magnets
do.  I  have  already  spoken  of  the  light  seen,  by  persons  in
the  magnetic  sleep,  to  issue  from  the  tips  of  the  operator's
fingers.  This  is  odylic  light,  which  is  seen  by  the  sensitive,
at  least  in  the  dark,  without  their  being  in  the  magnetic
sleep.  The  hands  are  oppositely  polar ;  and  the  head,  eyes
and  mouth  are  also  foci  where  the  odylic  influence  appears
to  be  concentrated.  This  is  the  reason  why  passes  with
the  hands,  and  gazing,  are  the  most  powerful  means  of  mag-
netising.


BARON  VON  REICTIENBACH.  195

7.  Besides  the  sources  of  odyle  above  mentioned,  Pccicb-
enbach  has  shown,  that  it  is  present  in  all  material  sub-
stances, though  generally  in  a  less  degree  than  in  magnets
or  crystals.  He  has  found  it  to  be  developed  by  heat,  light,
electricity,  common  or  galvanic,  friction,  and  every  species
of  chemical  action,  such  as  combustion,  the  solution  of  a
metal  or  of  an  alkali  in  an  acid,  respiration,  and  the  changes
going  on  in  the  animal  body  generally.  This  explains  why
the  human  or  animal  body  is  so  plentiful  a  source  of  odyle.
He  has  also  found  it  in  plants  ;  and  has  detected  its  presence
in  the  light  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars.

8.  Another  important  observation  is,  that  the  human
body  is  strongly  influenced  by  the  magnetism  of  the  earth.
Many  very  sensitive  persons  cannot  sleep  unless  their  bed
lies  in  a  plane  parallel  to  the  magnetic  meridian,  with  the
head  towards  the  north.  I  have  had  opportunities  of  see-
ing several,  and  hearing  of  many  more,  persons  who  experi-
ence this  ;  and  many  of  them  had  observed  it,  without
being  able  to  account  for  it,  long  before  Reichenbach's  ex-
periments were  made.  It  appears  extremely  probable,  that
some  diseases  may  be  more  easily  cured  when  this  position
of  the  bed  is  observed.  To  some  patients,  the  position,  at
right  angles  to  it,  is  quite  intolerable,  and  this  has  been
noticed  long  ago,  but  ascribed  to  fancy  or  idiosyncrasy  alone.

It  is  also  found  that  people  are  more  readily  magnetised
when  they  sit,  with  the  head  towards  the  north,  the  face
turned,  and  the  feet  extended  towards  the  south,  than  in
any  other  position.  I  have  myself  repeatedly  experienced
this,  and  probably,  if  observed,  it  will  be  found  to  be  a
general  fact,  although  many  are  easily  enough  magnetised
in  any  position.  Eeichenbach  has  also  found,  that  to  see
the  odylic  light,  for  example,  best,  the  subject  should  be  in
the  north  and  south  position,  with  the  head  towards  the
north.

9.  Reichenbach  has  also  observed  many  very  curious  facts
concerning  the  distribution  of  the  magnetic  or  odylic  in-
fluence in  the  body,  at  different  hours,  and  before  or  after
meals.  On  waking  in  the  morning,  or  rather  with  sunrise,
it  begins  to  rise,  sinks  a  little  before  breakfast,  from  the
effect  of  hunger,  then  rises  steadily,  with  a  sudden  increase
at  dinner-time,  continuing  to  rise  till  the  evening,  or  after


196  ODYLE  IDENTICAL  WITH

sunset,  when  it  begins  to  fall,  and  falls  during  the  night,
till  before  sunrise  it  is  at  its  lowest  ebb.  For  many  curious
and  interesting  details  on  this  point,  and  for  the  application
of  these  facts  to  the  due  regulation  of  our  mode  of  life,
with  a  view  to  the  preservation  of  health,  I  refer  to  the
work  of  Reichenbach,  so  often  mentioned.

10.  In  all  these  researches,  odyle  appeared  to  be  polar;
and  the  negative  and  positive,  northward  or  southward
poles  of  any  object  possessing  the  odylic  force,  such  as  a
magnet,  a  crystal,  the  human  body,  of  which  the  hands  are
the  chief  poles,  always  produced  peculiar  effects.  The
negative  or  northward  pole  caused  a  grateful  coolness,  and
gave  out  light  in  which  blue  predominated.  The  sensation
caused  by  the  positive  or  southward  pole  was  a  disagreeable
warmth,  and  in  its  light  red  prevailed.  The  right  hand  is
negative  and  cool,  the  left  positive  and  warm.  The  sun's
rays  are  negative,  and  cause  to  sensitives  a  strong  but
delightful  coolness.  Nay  a  hot  stove  caused,  to  the  very
sensitive,  until  they  came  so  near  as  to  be  affected  by  the
radiated  heat,  a  cold  feeling  amounting  to  that  of  frost,  due
to  its  negative  odylic  emanations ;  and  in  some,  the  nume-
rous tapers  in  a  Roman  Catholic  church  caused  not  only
cold,  but  fainting.  The  moon,  on  the  contrary,  is  odylically
positive,  and  her  rays  excite  a  feeling  of  warmth  in  the
sensitive.  All  the  planets,  which,  like  the  moon,  shine  by
reflected  light,  are,  like  her  odylically  positive.

11.  In  short,  odyle  is  universally  diffused  throughout
the  material  universe,  and  in  this  respect,  it  agrees  with
heat,  light,  and  electricity.  By  a  laborious  and  beautiful
investigation,  Reichenbach  has,  in  my  opinion,  demonstrated
the  existence  of  a  force,  influence,  or  imponderable  fluid,
whatever  name  be  given  to  it,  which  is  distinct  from  all  the
known  forces,  influences,  or  imponderable  fluids,  such  as
heat,  light,  electricity,  magnetism,  and  from  the  attractions,
such  as  gravitation  or  chemical  attraction.  But  it  is  highly
analogous  to  the  other  imponderables,  and,  as  we  have  seen,
is  found  associated  with  them.  All  of  them  may  possibly
be  hereafter  reduced  to  one  primary  force,  but  in  the  mean-
time odyle  must  be  distinguished  from  the  rest,  just  as  heat,
light,  and  electricity  are  from  each  other.

Although  Reichenbach  has  not  made  his  experiments  with
artificially  magnetised  persons,  nor  on  those  in  the  magnetic


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.  197

sleep,  or  the  state  of  artificial  somnambulism,  yet  he  has
observed,  that  persons  who  are  subject  to  spontaneous  som-
nambulism are  almost  always  very  sensitive  when  in  their
ordinary  state,  and  that  when  they  fall  into  somnambulism,
their  sensitiveness  is  greatly  increased.  Now  we  know  that
persons  in  artificial  somnambulism  or  magnetic  sleep  are  also
highly  sensitive,  so  that  they  see  the  odylic  light  from  the
hand  or  from  other  objects,  even  in  day-light.

12.  Hence  it  is  hardly  to  be  doubted  that  the  odylic  in-
fluence, which  exists  in  magnets  and  in  the  hand,  and  which
in  magnets  produces  the  sensations  formerly  described,  and
even  the  magnetic  sleep,  is  identical  with  the  magnetic  in-
fluence of  the  hand,  which  is  usually  employed  to  produce
the  effects  of  Animal  Magnetism.

Thus,  when  Mesmer  spoke  of  an  influence  from  magnets,
and  of  a  magnetic  fluid,  as  producing  these  effects,  he  was
right,  in  so  far,  at  least,  as  the  existence  of  the  influence  is
concerned ;  which,  if  not  a  fluid,  is  as  much  entitled  to  the
name  as  the  electric  fluid.  But  he  was  wrong  in  supposing
it  to  be  identical  with  ferro-magnetism,  with  which  it  is  only
associated.  The  mesmeric  baquet  was  merely  a  mixture  of
all  sorts  of  things,  which,  giving  rise  to  a  slow  chemical
action,  furnished  a  slow  but  constant  current  of  odylic,  or
magnetic  influence.

We  may  therefore,  for  the  present,  safely  assume  the
odyle  of  Reichenbach,  discovered  by  a  totally  different  and
independent  train  of  researches,  as  being  the  influence  or
cause  to  which  are  due  the  effects  of  Animal  Magnetism,  as
above  described.  The  coincidence  of  the  two  modes  of  in-
vestigation in  this  great  point,  of  the  existence  of  an  in-
fluence, which  may  be  exerted,  or  pass,  from  one  individual
to  another,  is  the  best  guarantee  for  the  accuracy  of  both.

We  can  no  longer  have  a  difficulty  in  conceiving  how  a
susceptible  person  may  be  thrown  into  somnambulism  by  the
influence  of  another,  even  without  contact.  If  a  magnet
can  do  this,  why  may  not  the  hand,  which  has  been  shown
to  possess  the  very  same  influence  as  the  magnet  ?  It  ap-
pears to  me,  that  the  laborious  and  truly  scientific  researches
of  Reichenbach  have  forever  settled  the  question  as  to  the
existence  of  an  external  and  universally  diffused  influence,
different  from  all  known  influences,  although  closely  allied

17*


198  ODYLIC  LIGHT.

with  and  analogous  to  several  of  them,  and  which  is  capable
of  producing  the  effects  of  Animal  Magnetism.

13.  I  have,  with  very  imperfect  means  and  limited  leisure,
repeated  many  of  Reichenbach's  experiments,  on  magnets,
crystals,  chemical  action,  and  the  human  hand,  on  sensitive
persons  in  the  ordinary  waking  state.  And  in  every  such
case,  with  great  variations  in  degree,  I  have  found  his  state-
ments and  descriptions  rigorously  exact.  I  have  also  been
informed,  by  many  friends,  as  well  as  by  many  persons  un-
known to  me  personally,  who  have  repeated  some  of  these
experiments,  chiefly  those  with  small  magnets  and  crystals,
that  their  experience,  in  every  point  observed  by  them,  con-
firms the  statements  of  the  Baron.  Sensitive  persons  are
easily  found,  if  we  only  look  for  them,  and,  according  to  my
own  observation,  they  are  not  less  frequent  here  than  he
found  them  to  be  in  Vienna.

I  would  here,  in  recommending  the  repetition  and  prosecu-
tion of  these  attractive  researches,  by  enquirers  possessing
the  leisure  which  is  necessary,  urge  on  them  the  absolute
necessity  of  attending  to  the  conditions  minutely  laid  down
by  Reichenbach.  In  order  to  see  the  odylic  light,  for  ex-
ample, not  only  must  the  person  be  sensitive,  but  the  dark-
ness must  be  absolute,  and  the  sensitive  should  remain  in  it
for  an  hour  or  two,  before  we  can  expect  the  eye  to  be  fully
awake  to  the  faint  but  beautiful  luminous  emanations  of
magnets,  crystals,  the  hand,  &c.  And  after  the  observer
and  his  subject  or  subjects  have  entered  the  darkened
chamber,  not  the  smallest  gleam  of  light,  even  of  the  dullest
daylight  or  of  a  candle,  must  be  allowed  to  enter  at  chink
or  cranny,  door  or  window.  No  one  should  come  in  or  go
out  during  the  experiment ;  for  if  the  door  be  opened,  the
admission,  for  an  instant,  of  light  from  the  next  room,  blinds
the  subject,  unless  of  the  highest  order  of  sensitives,  which
is  rare,  for  half  an  hour,  an  hour,  or  even  longer,  to  the
feeble  beams  of  odylic  light.  Another  essential  precau-
tion is,  that  no  one  should  be  close  to  the  subject  or  to
the  object  observed.  The  approach  even  of  the  observer
often  extinguishes  the  light,  visible  but  a  moment  before,
by  changing  the  odylic  state  of  the  magnet,  &c,  as  well  as
that  of  the  subject  himself.  Unless  all  these  and  other
precautions  are  attended  to,  failure  is  the  result.

14.  Before  passing  on  to  the  next  point  to  be  discussed,


AURORA  BOREALTS.  199

I  would  here  refer  to  two  beautiful  applications  of  Reichen-
bach's  discoveries. — First,  since  all  chemical  action  is  at-
tended with  the  emission  of  odylic  light  as  well  as  odylic
influence,  the  changes  which  take  place  in  the  dead  bodies
by  decay,  which  arc  chemical,  are  sources  of  odylic  light,
just  as  are  the  changes  in  the  living  body,  respiration,  diges-
tion, &c.  &c.  Hence  sensitive  persons  see  luminous  ap-
pearances over  graves,  especially  over  recent  graves.  There
will  be  found  in  the  work  of  Reichenbach  several  most  in-
teresting and  instructive  cases  of  this  fact,  and  thus  we  find,
that  science,  with  her  torch,  dissipates  the  shades  of  super-
stition. Corpse-lights  exist,  but  they  are  not  supernatural ;
neither  are  those,  who  habitually  see  them,  what  we  call  in
Scotland  "  uncanny."  The  lights  are  perfectly  natural  and
harmless ;  and  the  seers  are  only  sensitive  persons.  I  have
been  informed  of  several  such  cases,  in  which  these  lights
are  always  seen  at  night  (if  dark)  over  church-yard  graves
or  burying-vaults,  and  in  which  the  observation  dates  many
years  before  Reichenbach  made  his  investigations.

Secondly:  As  magnets  emit  beautiful  odylic  light,  so  the
earth,  which  is  a  vast  magnet,  emits  its  odylic  light;  which,
in  consequence  of  the  great  size  and  enormous  power  of  the
magnet  concerned,  becomes  visible  to  all  eyes,  perhaps  more
vividly  to  the  sensitive  ;  but  this  is  not  easy  to  ascertain.
This  is  not  a  mere  hypothesis.  It  is  supported  by  a  series
of  the  most  beautiful  experiments  with  which  I  am  ac-
quainted. Reichenbach  converted  a  large  iron  globe,  two  or
three  feet  in  diameter,  into  a  powerful  temporary  magnet,
by  causing  an  electric  current  to  traverse  a  wire  coiled  round
a  bar  of  iron  passing  from  pole  to  pole  of  the  sphere.  When
the  globe  was  suspended  in  the  air,  in  an  absolutely  dark
room,  the  sensitives  saw  the  odylic  light  in  the  most  exqui-
site beauty,  and  with  all  the  peculiar  characters  of  the
Aurora  Borealis  and  the  Aurora  Australis.  At  each  pole
appeared  a  wide  circle  of  light,  more  blue  at  the  northward,
more  red  at  the  southward  pole,  but  at  both  with  all  the
rainbow  hues.  The  equator  was  marked  by  a  luminous  belt,
towards  which,  on  or  close  above  the  surface  of  the  sphere,
lines  of  light  constantly  streamed  from  the  polar  circles.  In
the.  polar  circles,  as  well  as  in  the  streaming  lines,  the  colors
were  arranged  so  that  red  predominated  in  one  quarter,  the
south,  blue  in  the  opposite,  yellow  in  the  west,  and  opposite


200  ARTIFICIAL  AURORA.

to  it,  grey,  or  tlie  absence  of  color,  while,  as  in  all  the
odylic  rainbows,  a  narrow  stripe  of  red  appeared  near  the
grey,  at  the  end  of  the  iris  most  remote  from  the  great  mass
of  red — a  most  beautiful  confirmation  of  Sir  David  Brewster's
analysis  of  the  spectrum.  The  delicate  streaming  lines  or
threads  of  light  passed  by  insensible  gradations  from  one
color  to  the  other,  so  that  any  two  contiguous  lines  appeared
to  have  the  same  color,  yet,  on  looking  a  little  farther  on,
the  color  gradually  changed,  and  thus  the  whole  of  the  rain-
bow hues  appeared  in  their  order,  red,  orange,  yellow,  green,
blue,  indigo,  violet,  and  last  of  all  the  small  red  stripe,  and
the  grey.  But  the  passage  from  red  to  orange,  or  from
orange  to  yellow,  &c,  was  not  sudden,  but  slow  and  gradual,
so  that  all  the  intermediate  tints  were  seen.  Nor  was  this
all,  for  in  the  air,  above  each  pole,  appeared  a  splendid
crown;  or  umbel  of  light,  more  blue  at  the  northward,  more
red  at  the  southward,  but  exhibiting  also  all  the  colors,  and
sending  towards  the  equator  splendid  streamers  of  many-
colored  light,  dancing  and  leaping,  lengthening  and  shorten-
ing, just  as  the  finest  northern  streamers  do,  to  the  delighted
eye  of  the  observer.  I  cannot  here  enter  into  a  full  de-
scription of  this  artificial  Aurora,  the  first  ever  produced ;
but  I  may  record  my  conviction,  that  this  experiment  gives,
to  that  theory  which  regards  the  Aurora  as  odylic  light,  a
degree  of  probability  far  greater  than  attaches  to  any  other
theory  of  that  phenomenon.  I  may  observe  also,  that  the
Aurora  does  not  cease  to  be  a  magnetic  phenomenon;  and
that  it  should  affect  the  needle  is  to  be  expected,  since,  in
magnets,  odylic  influence  and  odylic  light  are  found  asso-
ciated with  the  ferro-magnetic  influence.

15.  It  still  remains  for  me  to  speak  of  a  class  of  facts,
which  has  not  yet  been  alluded  to.  I  mean,  the  power
which  we  possess  of  communicating,  to  certain  objects,  the
magnetic  influence.  Mesmer  spoke  of  magnetised  water;
but  this  idea  was  scouted  and  rejected  as  absurd.  But  every
one  who  has  studied  Animal  Magnetism,  and  tried  the  ex-
periment, knows,  that  water  may  be  so  charged  with  vital
magnetism,  (with  odyle,)  that  a  person  in  the  magnetic
sleep,  without  the  slightest  knowledge  that  the  experiment
is  made  or  intended,  instantly  and  infallibly  distinguishes
such  water  from  that  not  magnetised.  It  is  generally  de-
scribed as  having  a  peculiar  taste,  not  easily  defined,  and  as


MAGNETISED  WATEK.  201

producing  internal  warmth  when  swallowed,  and  these  pecu-
liarities are  very  strongly  marked.  Some  subjects  describe
it  as  vapid  and  tasteless,  like  rain,  or  distilled  water,  whereas
the  same  water,  if  not  magnetised,  has  to  them  (if  it  be  good
spring  water,)  its  usual  agreeable  sharpness.  Of  the  fact,
which  I  have  often  tested,  there  can  be  no  doubt.

This  effect  may  be  produced  either  by  the  hand,  in  which
case,  while  the  vessel  is  held  resting  on  the  left  palm,  and
grasped  by  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  circular  passes  are
made  above  it  with  the  right  hand,  or  the  fingers  of  the
right  hand  are  held  with  their  points  close  to  the  surface
of  the  water,  or  by  magnets,  held  in  the  same  way,  or  by
crystals.

Reichenbach  has  shown,  that  sensitive  persons,  even  when
not  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  often  readily  distinguished  mag-
netised water  from  ordinary  water.  The  effect,  in  all  cases,
lasts  only  for  a  certain  time,  which  may  extend,  when  the
charge  is  strong,  to  a  good  many  hours.

Magnetised  water,  as  I  have  seen,  will  often  cause  the
magnetic  sleep,  in  persons  who  have  been,  on  former  occa-
sions, put  to  sleep  by  the  operator  in  the  usual  way.  I
have  seen  it  also  produce  natural  sleep,  in  excitable  persons,
not  formerly  magnetised,  and  sometimes  the  sleep  has  taken
place  instantly  on  swallowing  the  water,  and  has  been  sound
and  refreshing.  It  is  indeed  possible,  that  it  may  have  been
magnetic  sleep,  at  least  in  some  of  these  persons  ;  but  as  the
object  was  to  produce  sleep  in  those  who  were  restless,  no
experiments  were  tried.

Not  only  water,  but  any  other  body,  as  has  been  shown
by  Reichenbach,  may  be  charged  with  the  influence ;  and  it
is  not  uncommon  for  the  magnetic  sleep  to  be  produced,  in
the  absence  of  the  operator,  by  an  object  thus  charged  and
sent  by  him  to  his  patient.  The  patient  will  easily  detect
the  attempt  to  impose  on  him  by  an  object  not  charged;  at
least  in  many  cases,  just  as  he  knows  magnetised  from  un-
magnetised  water.


I  now  come  to  another  matter ;  namely,  the  applications
which  may  be  made  of  the  facts  hitherto  noticed.  And
here  I  would  again  urge  on  your  attention  the  consideration,
that  it  is  no  argument  against  the  study  of  a  fact,  or  of  a


202  THERAPEUTICAL  EFFECTS

series  of  facts,  to  say,  that  it  is  useless,  and  nothing  more
than  a  mere  curiosity  of  science.  There  is  no  such  thing
as  a  mere  curiosity  of  science ;  that  is,  there  is  nothing  of
which  it  can  be  said  that  it  may  not,  at  a  moment's  notice,
become  useful,  either  in  reference  to  some  other  scientific
matter,  or  in  its  practical  application  to  the  purposes  of
ordinary  life  or  of  the  arts.  I  have  already  given  many
instances  of  this,  and  one  of  these  was  the  sudden  applica-
tion, to  a  most  important  practical  purpose,  the  alleviation
of  pain,  of  a  substance  long  regarded  as  a  scientific  curiosity,
of  no  value  whatever,  namely  Chloroform.  The  same  sub-
stance supplies  us  with  the  example  of  the  application  of  a
discovery  to  the  improvement  of  the  method  of  investigating
another  branch  of  science,  which,  in  its  turn,  may  bear  rich'
fruits  of  practical  utility,  especially  in  reference  to  the  cure
of  disease;  and  to  the  investigation,  again,  of  another  sub-
ject, the  laws  of  the  nervous  system,  or  of  the  vital  principle.

Every  one  knows  that  many  important  points  in  physiology
have  been  ascertained  by  experiments  on  living  animals,  the
cruelty  of  which,  in  most  minds,  so  far  exceeded  any  possible
benefit  to  be  derived  from  them,  that  they  were  only  under-
taken by  a  few  of  stronger  nerves,  and  less  sensitive  to  the
sufferings  of  the  dumb  victims  to  science,  than  most  peojDle
are.  Now,  by  the  use  of  chloroform,  all  conceivable  experi-
ments on  living  animals  may  be  at  once  divested  of  pain.
The  animals  will  not  suffer,  and  if  their  lives  are  sacrificed,
it  will  be  with  less  suffering  than  when  they  die  to  furnish
our  tables,  or  to  supply  us  with  sport.  No  one  need  now
recoil  from  such  experiments ;  they  will  be  prosecuted  with
greater  success,  because  there  will  be  no  writhings,  no  strug-
gles, no  cries,  to  interrupt  or  dismay  the  experimenter,
whose  mind,  free  from  the  reproach  of  his  own  conscience
for  cruelty,  will  be  far  better  fitted  to  discern  the  truth.
Such  is  the  second,  possibly  in  its  consequences  to  mankind
the  most  important,  application  of  Chloroform.  And  more
remain  behind.

1.  In  like  manner,  if  Animal  Magnetism  had  never  yet
been  applied  to  any  useful  purpose,  this,  so  far  from  being  a
reason  for  neglecting  it,  would  furnish  the  strongest  reason
why  it  should  be  more  diligently  studied,  since  it  is  only  by
a  knowledge  of  all  the  properties  which  can  be  ascertained


OF  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.  203

to  belong  to  any  agent,  that  we  can  hope  to  find  useful  ap-
plications of  it.  It  was  because  the  discoverers  of  Chloro-
form confined  their  observations  to  its  physical  and  chemical
properties  alone,  or  rather  to  some  of  these,  and  neglected
to  try  its  action  on  the  system  when  inhaled,  that  it  con-
tinued so  long  useless.

But  Animal  Magnetism,  in  point  of  fact,  already  presents
many  useful  applications.  It  has  been,  and  daily  is,  used
to  produce  insensibility  to  pain,  in  surgical  operations.  It
is  used  with  very  great  success,  to  relieve  rheumatic  and
neuralgic  pains.  Many  cases  of  severe  neuralgia,  but  not
all,  yield  to  its  use.  It  daily  removes  headaches,  and  pro-
duces refreshing  sleep  in  persons  who  have  long  suffered
from  wakefulness.  It  relieves,  nay,  with  perseverance  it
often  cures,  many  diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  such  as
paralysis,  hysteria,  epilepsy,  catalepsy,  and  chorea,  or  St.
Vitus'  Dance.  And  all  this,  from  its  direct  and  powerful
action  on  the  nervous  system,  might  be  anticipated.

2.  The  effects  of  Animal  Magnetism,  however,  are  not
confined  to  such  cases.  It  acts  on  the  general  health,
doubtless  through  the  nervous  system,  in  such  a  way  as  to
produce  very  often  the  most  marked  improvement,  and  in
many  instances  to  cause,  sooner  or  later,  old  and  very  an-
noying complaints  to  disappear.  Nay,  cases  occur,  in  which
one  operation,  especially  if  it  induce  the  sleep,  will  be  fol-
lowed by  a  rapid  and  permanent  cure.  This,  it  is  true,  is
the  exception ;  but,  with  patience  and  perseverance,  even
without  ever  producing  the  sleep,  we  may  cure  or  relieve  a
large  number  of  cases,  provided  they  be  not  of  that  nature
which  precludes  hope  of  amendment.  An  immense  number
of  magnetic  cures  have  been  recorded,  both  by  medical  and
non-medical  operators,  among  them  that  of  a  well-marked
case  of  cancer  by  Dr.  Elliotson  ;  and  making  every  allow-
ance for  imperfect  observation,  and  for  the  tendency  to
exaggerate  the  merit  of  any  new  method  of  treatment,  no
doubt  can  reasonably  be  entertained  that  Animal  Magnetism
is  a  very  powerful  means  of  cure,  and  ought  to  be  in  the
hands  of  every  physician.  The  absurdity  of  the  idea  of  an
universal  medicine,  or  panacea,  is  obvious  ;  but  that  is  no
reason  for  rejecting  a  method  which,  in  many  cases,  will
prove  of  essential  service,  and  which  is  not  only  manage-


204  INSANITY  TREATED  BY

able  but  safe  ;  which,  therefore,  if  it  do  no  good,  will  at
least,  in  good  hands,  do  no  harm.

I  have  had  many  opportunities  of  seeing  the  good  effects
of  magnetism,  even  where  the  object  has  been  only  to  study
the  phenomena.  It  daily  happens  that  persons  magnetised
for  that  purpose,  astonish  and  delight  the  operator,  by  tell-
ing him  that,  since  magnetism  was  used,  they  have  got  rid
of  some  obstinate  complaint ;  or  that  their  general  health
and  spirits  are  strikingly  improved.

If  it  be  said,  that  these  effects  are  due  to  the  imagination
alone,  I  answer,  that  if  so,  they  are  not  on  that  account
unreal  or  imaginary ;  that  it  is  then  our  duty  to  study  the
power  of  the  imagination,  and  use  it  as  a  most  powerful
agent  for  good;  that  at  all  events,  Animal  Magnetism,  in
that  case,  has  a  very  great  action  on  the  imagination,  and
is  probably  the  best  means  of  acting  on  it.  But  in  many
cases,  the  imagination  does  not  act,  because  it  is  not  ap-
pealed to.  Both  subject  and  magnetiser  are  often  taken  by
surprise,  when  they  find  that  some  distressing  complaint,
perhaps  regarded  as  hopeless,  but  which  neither  of  them
had  thought  of  curing,  has  been,  as  if  by  magic,  relieved  or
cured.

I  would  particularly  direct  the  attention  of  physicians  to
the  value  of  Animal  Magnetism,  in  reference  to  insanity,
not  only  as  regards  treatment,  but  also  for  another  reason.

There  is  no  doubt  that  many  persons  who  are  subject  to
attacks  of  insanity,  as  in  the  case  of  other  diseases  of  the
nervous  system,  are  very  sensitive,  and  susceptible  to  mag-
netic or  odylic  influence.  Hence  we  are  prepared  to  find,  as
has  been  recorded  in  many  instances,  that  magnetic  treat-
ment is  sometimes  effectual  in  insanity,  where  all  means
have  failed.  The  treatment,  and,  above  all,  the  moral
management  of  the  insane,  has  of  late  been  greatly  improv-
ed ;  and  for  the  greater  part  of  this  improvement  we  are
indebted  to  phrenology.  Violence,  restraint,  and  cruelty,
are  banished  from  our  asylums,  and  means  are  judiciously
and  kindly  resorted  to,  in  most  of  them,  for  employing  such
faculties  as  remain  capable  of  being  used.  The  result  is,
that,  in  spite  of  the  sad  reflections  which  arise  in  the  mind
when  visiting  an  asylum,  we  feel,  if  it  be  well  conducted,
that,  for  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  unfortunate  inmates,  it  is  a
scene  of  pleasure,  and  of  such  happiness  as  they  can  enjoy,


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.  205

which  often  surpasses,  by  far,  the  lot  of  the  sane  man. I
rejoice  to  think,  that  the  improvement  is  progressive.

But  I  am  now  convinced,  that  the  treatment  of  the  insane
will  not  be  so  complete  or  so  efficient  as  it  may  become,  till
Animal  Magnetism  is  regularly  introduced  into  the  practice
of  every  asylum.  Indeed,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
control  exercised,  by  the  aid  of  the  voice  and  eye,  on  many
of  the  insane  by  an  experienced  physician,  depends  mainly
on  their  being  in  the  impressible  state  so  often  mentioned,
in  which  suggestion  and  command  act  like  magic  on  the
patient.  If  this  were  generally  known,  and  systematically
attended  to,  much  good  might  be  effected.  And  where  the
patient  is  susceptible  or  impressible,  there  is  good  reason  to
hope  that  direct  magnetisation  may  produce  the  best  results.
Animal  Magnetism  is  not  less  powerful  on  the  insane  than
on  the  sane ;  nay,  it  is  more  so ;  probably  because,  in  many
cases,  the  essence  of  insanity  is  some  disturbance  of  the
natural  distribution  of  odyle  in  the  system.  The  effect  of
the  moon,  whose  rays  are  strongly  charged  with  positive
odyle,  on  the  insane,  corroborates  this  view.

There  is,  however,  another  reason  why  the  physician
ought  to  study  Animal  Magnetism,  in  its  relation  to  insanity.
It  is  this :  many  insane  persons  appear,  when  we  study  the
symptoms  as  they  are  described  by  writers  on  the  subject,
to  be,  in  fact,  only  in  a  peculiar  magnetic  state.  I  mean,
that  they  have  a  consciousness  distinct  from  their  ordinary
consciousness,  just  as  happens  in  the  magnetic  sleep.  Let
us  suppose  a  patient  to  fall,  spontaneously,  into  a  continued
magnetic  sleep,  in  which,  while  his  eyes  are  open,  he  has
no  recollection,  or  only  an  imperfect  recollection,  of  his  or-
dinary state.  He  is  perhaps  lucid,  and  lives  in  a  world  of
his  own,  entirely  consistent  with  itself,  but  absolutely  in-
comprehensible to  all  around.  His  perceptions  are,  to  him,
and  indeed  absolutely,  real ;  but  to  others  they  appear  mere
dreams.  He  sees  absent  or  dead  friends ;  nay,  he  holds
long  conversations  with  them;  he  sees  also  objects,  which
really  exist,  but  at  a  distance.  He  is  partially  or  wholly
dead  to  the  objects  which  surround  him,  and  is  absorbed,
and  perhaps  supremely  happy,  in  the  contemplation  of  the
persons,  places,  and  things  seen  by  his  lucid  vision.  Lastly,
he  becomes  ecstatic,  and  sees,  and  converses  with  denizens
of  the  spiritual  world.
18


206  USE  OF  MAGNETISM  IN  THE

Now  every  word  uttered  by  such  a  person  is,  to  those
around  him,  positive  proof  of  his  insanity.  He  is  shut  up ;
and  the  nature  of  the  case  not  being  even  suspected,  he
becomes  still  more  firmly  rooted  in  his  new  state,  in  which,
perhaps,  he  dies.

But  it  may  be  asked,  Is  that  man  insane  ?  I  answer,  in
one  sense,  yes ;  for  he  is  unfit,  so  long  as  he  continues  in
that  state,  for  intercourse  with  the  world.  But  in  another
sense,  I  say,  no;  for  his  mental  powers  are  unimpaired,  and
he  is  only  in  a  very  vivid  dream,  so  to  speak,  but  a  dream
of  realities,  visible  and  audible  to  him  by  reason  of  exalted
odylic  sensitiveness.

In  such  a  case,  admitting,  for  the  present,  the  possibility
of  its  occurrence,  it  would  seem  reasonable  to  expect  that
he  might  be  cured,  that  is,  simply  restored  to  ordinary  con-
sciousness, by  magnetic  treatment.  The  chief  symptom  is
so  intense  a  degree  of  odylic  sensitiveness,  that  the  impres-
sions made  on  the  sensorium  by  those  odylic  emanations  of
which  I  have  spoken,  and  of  which  I  shall  speak  more  fully
in  the  next  Letter,  and  which  are  at  all  times  acting  on  us,
though  overlooked — that  these  impressions,  contrary  to  what
occurs  in  the  normal  state,  are  so  vivid  as  to  overpower
those  derived  from  the  external  senses.  May  not  this  ex-
cessive sensitiveness  be  removed  by  appropriate  magnetic
treatment  ?  This,  however,  cannot  be  done,  unless  the  na-
ture of  the  case  be  understood,  and  magnetic  treatment
practically  studied.

Now,  it  is  not  a  mere  fancy  of  mine,  that  such  cases  are
viewed  as  cases  of  insanity,  and  the  patients  shut  up  ac-
cordingly, without  appropriate  treatment.  I  have  been
informed  of  a  case,  in  which  a  lady,  confined  as  insane,  who
(in  consequence  of  accidental  circumstances,  which,  appear-
ing to  have  a  favorable  effect,  were  very  judiciously  made
use  of,)  so  far  recovered  as  to  be  sent  home,  and  was  re-
garded as  cured.  During  her  illness,  her  conversation  was
not  only  rational  but  highly  intelligent,  except,  of  course,
in  regard  to  certain  delusions,  probably  of  the  nature  I  have
described  above.  "When  sent  home,  she  retained  complete
consciousness  and  memory  of  all  that  had  passed  during  her
confinement ;  and  by  and  bye  was  engaged  to  a  gentleman
with  whom  she  had  become  acquainted  since  her  illness.
She  now  had  a  severe  illness,  of  a  febrile  character,  and  on


TREATMENT  OF  INSANITY.  207

recovering  from  this,  she  had  lost  all  trace  of  recollection
of  her  insane  state,  of  her  confinement,  and  of  the  person
to  Avhom  she  was  engaged,  who  was  received  by  her,  to  his
no  small  surprise,  as  an  utter  stranger.  She  was  now  really
cured,  and  just  as  she  had  been  before  her  insanity.

Now,  I  cannot  help  thinking,  that  she  was,  during  her
confinement,  in  a  magnetic  state  such  as  I  have  described,
and  that  her  first  recovery  was  no  true  cure,  inasmuch  as
she  retained  her  new  consciousness,  which  was  forever  lost
when  she  really  recovered,  after  an  illness  which  strongly
affected  the  nervous  system.  Might  not  a  similar  change
have  been  effected  by  magnetic  treatment,  when  she  was
first  confined  ?

I  know  a  young  gentleman,  singularly  susceptible  to  odylic
and  magnetic  influences,  who  some  years  ago  was  still  more
so,  and  very  narrowly  escaped  being  confined  as  insane.
Being  fortunately  under  the  charge  of  humane  and  enlight-
ened persons,  he  has  been  treated  by  magnetism,  with  very
great  benefit.  His  susceptibility  has  diminished  so  far  as
no  longer  to  cause  uneasiness  to  his  friends.  Had  he  been
confined,  and  had  not  magnetism  been  employed,  he  would
probably  now  be  in  an  asylum,  while,  with  the  exception  of
'the  excessive  sensitiveness  to  odylic  impressions,  he  never
was,  in  any  shape  or  degree,  insane.

I  am  acquainted  with  another  gentleman,  who,  at  times,
suffers  acutely  from  odylic  impressions  of  every  kind,  so  that
almost  every  person  or  object  that  he  approaches  is  a  source
of  the  most  painful  and  distressing  sensations.  He  is  so
far  from  being  insane,  that  his  intellect  is  of  a  very  high
class,  and  he  is  quite  aware  of  the  cause  of  his  sufferings.
He  has  told  me,  that,  but  for  this  knowledge,  he  would
almost  have,  at  times,  believed  himself  to  be  insane.

I  observe  in  the  accounts  of  the  insane,  the  delusion  of
seeing  and  conversing  with  absent  persons,  or  with  spirits,
given  as  an  infallible  sign,  where  it  occurs,  of  insanity.  It
may  be  so,  in  some  cases ;  but  it  is  self-evident,  that,  as  it
may  depend  merely  on  spontaneous  extasis,  more  permanent
than  usual,  while  the  mind  is  entirely  unimpaired,  just  as
happens  in  artificial  magnetic  extasis,  some  cases,  treated  as
insanity,  may  have  been  of  this  latter  kind.

It  is  therefore  much  to  be  desired,  that  physicians  should
learn  the  characters  of  every  stage  of  Animal  Magnetism.


208  USEFUL  APPLICATIONS

I  would  say,  therefore,  and  especially  to  medical  men,  use
magnetism,  were  it  only  to  become  acquainted  with  it,  and
in  the  course  of  your  experiments,  you  will  be  sure  to  find
some  one  unexpectedly  benefited  by  it.  You  will  then  use
it  for  the  cure  of  disease,  and  although  we  cannot  hope  to
enjoy  its'  full  benefits  until  it  has  been  fully  studied,  still,  so
safe  and  so  powerful  a  remedy  should  be  employed,  espe-
cially when  the  usual  means  have  failed.  The  more  it  is
used,  the  better  shall  we  become  acquainted  with  it,  and  the
more  effectually  shall  we  be  able  to  employ  it.


3.  In  regard  to  other  useful  applications  of  Animal  Mag-
netism, much  cannot  as  yet  be  said.  I  can  very  well  imagine
it  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  searching  more  deeply  than
by  other  means  we  can,  into  the  nature  of  the  relation  be-
tween the  mind  and  the  body ;  into  the  laws  of  thought ;
and  even  into  the  nature  of  the  mind  itself.  I  mean,  that
whether  we  regard  thought,  as  some  do,  as  merely  the  ne-
cessary result  of  the  action  of  the  brain,  or  whether  we
assume,  as  is  usually  done,  the  existence  of  a  separate  being,
the  soul,  mind,  or  thinking  principle,  which  uses  the  brain
as  its  instrument — in  either  case,  a  careful  study  of  the  va- .
rious  mental  phenomena  observed  in  Animal  Magnetism  must
throw  light  on  the  laws  of  thought,  perception,  sensation,  &c.
There  is,  for  example,  a  class  of  patients,  who,  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  can  accurately  point  out  the  precise  part  of  the
brain  which  acts  in  every  manifestation,  whether  of  thought,
of  sensation,  of  muscular  motion  and  muscular  sense,  of
memory,  in  short,  of  every  act  in  which  the  brain  is  con-
cerned. Some  can  even  see,  and  describe  consistently,  the
actual  physical  changes  in  the  brain  which  accompany  these
acts,  and  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  much  valuable  infor-
mation may  thus  be  acquired.  I  have  already  pointed  out,
that  the  questions  of  the  essential  nature  of  mind,  and  even
of  matter,  are  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human  faculties ;  but
the  laws  of  their  mutual  relations  are  attainable.  While,
therefore,  we  confess  that  we  know  nothing,  and  probably
never  shall  know  any  thing,  of  the  essence  of  mind,  let  us
diligently  use  all  the  means  in  our  power  to  acquire  a  know-
ledge of  the  laws  of  its  action.

4.  Again,  it  is  quite  easy  to  see  how  sympathy  and  clair-


OF  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.  209

voyance  may  be  turned  to  useful  purposes.  They  may  enable
us  to  obtain  information  about  absent  friends  or  relations;
nay,  they  are  actually  often  used  for  that  purpose.  They
may  be  used  to  discover  missing  or  stolen  goods  and  docu-
ments, and  for  this  purpose  also  they  are  daily  employed.
In  Part  II.  will  be  found  some  instances  of  such  applications
of  lucidity.  I  have  already  said  that  I  think  it  far  from
improbable  that  this  power  may  be  so  used  as  to  throw  light
on  obscure  historical  points,  and  to  discover  documentary
evidence  in  regard  to  these.  Moreover,  I  have  already  de-
scribed the  principle,  which  certainly  has  nothing  impossible
in  it,  of  the  use  of  animal  sympathy  in  the  projected  Snail
Telegraph,  or,  as  it  is  called  by  the  inventors,  the  Pasilalinic
Telegraph  ;  and  I  have  also  mentioned  the  application  of
lucidity  to  the  inspection  of  the  living  frame,  healthy  or  dis-
eased, for  anatomical  and  physiological  as  well  as  medical
purposes.

All  these  applications  are  yet  in  their  infancy.  But  as
the  number  of  observers  increases,  so  will  increase,  not  only
the  number  of  cases  of  lucidity,  but  also  that  of  useful  appli-
cations, which,  if  not  made  now,  will  sooner  or  later  be  dis-
covered.


5.  There  is,  indeed,  one  useful  application  of  our  know-
ledge of  Animal  Magnetism,  which  has  already  been  made,
and  will  yet  be  made  to  a  greater  extent ;  I  mean  that  of
explaining  many  things,  which,  to  the  ignorant,  appear  super-
natural, and  which,  the  knowledge  of  their  real  nature  having,
in  earlier  ages,  and  even  down  to  a  period  not  very  remote,
been  considered  as  a  secret  or  mystery,  and  confined  to  cer-
tain classes  of  men,  such  as  priests,  adepts,  magicians,  sor-
cerer, and  perhaps  astrologers  and  physicians,  some  of  whom
may  have  really  believed  that  they  possessed  supernatural
power,  acquired  the  names  of  magic,  sorcery,  witchcraft,  the
black  art,  &c.

All  sorts  of  necromancy,  divination,  and  oracles,  may  be
ranked  in  the  same  category;  and  it  may  safely  be  said,  that
the  more  intimately  we  become  acquainted  with  Animal  Mag-
netism, the  more  do  we  find,  that  every  notion  which  has
prevailed  among  men  in  regard  to  these  matters  may  be  re-

18*


210  MAGIC,  DIVINATION,  ETC.,

ferred  to  natural  causes,  connected  with  Animal  Magnetism
in  some  of  its  innumerable  developments.

In  the  heathen  temples,  the  magic  cure  of  disease  was  often
associated  with  the  oracle,  and  the  belief  in  both  was  uni-
versal. If  we  grant  the  possibility  of  clairvoyant  prevision,
and  the  evidence  seems  to  me  to  lean  in  favor  of  it,  we  may
readily  understand  how  the  priesthood,  trained  in  the  sacred
mysteries,  knew  how  to  produce  the  magnetic  state,  includ-
ing lucidity,  especially  in  females,  who  are  more  readily
magnetised.  The  lucid  priestess,  rendered  so  by  means
partly  known  and  partly  unknown,  but  certainly  with  the
aid  of  music  and  fumigations,  probably  also  by  gazing  and
passes,  sat  on  her  tripod,  which  was  perhaps  a  magnetic  ap-
paratus, and,  by  means  of  her  lucidity,  described  the  dis-
eases of  her  clients,  or  predicted  future  events.  When  true
lucidity  was  not  to  be  found,  imposture  was  resorted  to,  but
it  is  hardly  possible  to  believe  that  there  was  no  foundation
whatever  for  the  universal  belief.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  priests  of  India,  Egypt,
Greece,  Home,  and  other  pagan  countries,  had  secrets  or
mysteries,  which  were  carefully  veiled  from  the  public  eye.
It  is  equally  certain  that  those  of  Egypt  had  extensive
knowledge  of  natural  truths,  both  in  astronomy  and  physics,
as  well  as  in  medicine,  and  that  the  sages  of  Greece  resorted
to  their  temples  for  information.  Such  acute  observers  as
the  Egyptians  could  not  fail  to  discover  the  leading  facts  of
Animal  Magnetism,  which  indeed  occur  spontaneously  every
day.  A  spontaneous  somnambulist,  if  lucid,  and  capable
of  truly  describing  absent  persons  and  objects,  perhaps  also
of  predicting  the  inevitable  consequences  of  what  he  saw,
would  be  regarded  by  the  people  as  inspired  by  the  gods ;
while  the  priests,  who  studied  the  matter,  and  made  it  a
crime  for  any  but  their  own  class  to  do  so,  would  soon  find
out  how  to  produce  the  inspiration  at  pleasure,  especially
if,  as  is  now  found  to  be  the  case  in  India,  according  to  the
unimpeachable  testimony  of  Dr.  Esdaile,  every  man  proved
to  be  susceptible  of  Magnetism.

This  is  a  most  tempting  subject  of  investigation.  I  had
already,  to  a  considerable  extent,  collected  materials  for  a
brief  history  of  Magnetism,  and  its  various  developments,
from  the  earliest  ages  down  to  its  rediscovery  by  Mesmer ;
and  I  had  intended  here  to  show,  that  all  the  magic,  sorcery,


EXPLAINED  BY  MAGNETISM.  211

divination,  and  witchcraft,  of  the  early  and  middle  ages
was,  in  so  far  as  founded  on  natural  truth,  only  the  result
of  a  knowledge  of  Animal  Magnetism,  a  knowledge  jea-
lously guarded  by  those  who  possessed  it,  and  probably  at
their  suggestion,  regarded  by  the  people  as  the  direct  gift
of  infernal  powers.  This  has  been  often  proved,  and  many
authors,  especially  in  Germany,  have  treated  of  the  subject,
although  there  is  no  English  work  to  which  the  reader  might
be  referred.

Such,  therefore,  was  my  intention ;  namely,  to  have  given
a  brief  abstract  of  what  had  been  ascertained,  by  the  la-
borious investigations  of  many  learned  men,  in  regard  to
the  history  of  magnetism,  and  its  relation  to  magic,  witch-
craft, divination,  &c.

But  while  occupied  in  this  research,  for  which  my  other
avocations  left  but  little  time,  at  uncertain  intervals,  I  was
informed,  and  I  rejoiced  to  find  the  information  correct,
that  the  proposed  work  was  in  far  better  hands,  in  those
namely,  of  the  veteran  defender  of  modern  magnetism  in
this  country,  Mr.  Colquhoun,  whose  "Isis  Revelata,"  many
years  ago,  contributed  in  a  great  degree  to  create  that
general  interest  in  the  subject  which  has  of  late  so  greatly
increased.  Those  who  know  that  gentleman  and  his  works,
are  aware  that  his  learning  is  profound,  his  research  un-
wearied, and  his  intellect  clear  and  comprehensive.  His
proposed  work  on  the  History  of  Animal  Magnetism  is,  I
rejoice  to  say,  in  a  state  of  great  forwardness;  and  I  gladly
refer  you  to  it,  and  refrain  from  here  entering  minutely
into  the  questions  above  alluded  to.

I  shall  content  myself  with  pointing  out,  that  a  great
proportion  of  those  things  which  are  called  magic,  witch-
craft, divination,  &c,  obviously  depend  on  those  principles
of  Animal  Magnetism  which  I  have  endeavored  systemati-
cally to  present  to  you.

6.  Thus,  not  only  the  ancient  oracles,  and  the  magical
cures  of  the  pagan  temples,  but  also  the  divination  which
even  yet  survives  in  Egypt,  and  of  which  Miss  Martineau
and  other  writers  have  given  us  an  account,  are  clearly  to
be  referred  to  lucidity  or  clairvoyance,  as,  in  regard  to  the
latter  mode  of  divination,  I  shall  endeavor  to  show,  when
treating  of  the  theory  or  explanation  of  Animal  Magnetism.
The  wonders  of  the  magic  mirror,  and  of  the  magic  crystal,


212  APPARITIONS  EXPLAINED

will  also  be  found,  I  think,  to  depend  essentially  on  the
same  cause.  The  researches  of  M.  Dupotet  have  led  him,
it  is  said,  to  the  discovery  of  the  secret  of  much  of  the
magic  of  the  middle  ages,  including  the  magic  mirror,  and
the  world  looks  anxiously  for  the  completion  of  his  investiga-
tions. It  is  well  known,  also,  that  the  magic  crystal  has  of
late  attracted  much  attention,  and  that  several  ancient
crystals  are  extant,  the  properties  of  which,  it  is  to  be
hoped,  with  the  help  of  Reichenbach's  discoveries,  will  admit
of  scientific  ascertainment.

7.  The  belief  in  witchcraft,  in  the  power  possessed  by
certain  persons  of  rendering  themselves  invisible,  which  feat
is  now  daily  exhibited  by  such  operators  as  Dr.  Darling  or
Mr.  Lewis,  who  become  invisible  to  their  subjects  in  the
conscious  state ;  in  that  of  assuming  the  form  of  any  man
or  animal,  which  is  quite  as  easy,  by  means  of  suggestion,
as  the  former ;  in  the  power  of  travelling  through  the  air  to
a  distant  place,  and  seeing  what  there  occurs ;  finally,  the
belief  in  intercourse  with  spirits,  good  or  evil,  which  occurs
daily,  whether  as  a  dream  or  otherwise,  in  magnetic  or
spontaneous  extasis ;  all  these  are  explainable  by  what  has
been  said  on  sympathy,  suggestion,  lucidity,  trance,  and
extasis.

It  is  notorious  that,  while  many  persons  suffered  for
witchcraft,  who  died  denying  every  allegation  against  them,
many  confessed  to  all  the  above  offences,  as  they  themselves
regarded  them.  The  truth  and  actual  occurrence  of  the
facts,  or  visions,  or  delusions,  which  are  still  facts,  is  the
most  satisfactory  explanation  of  such  confessions.

Animal  Magnetism  will  finally  dissipate  all  the  obscurity
and  all  the  superstition  which  has  attached  to  this  matter ;
and  when  we  see  that  the  facts,  delusions,  or  visions,  how-
ever astounding,  depend  on  natural  causes,  superstition  will
have  lost  her  firmest  hold  on  the  human  mind.

8.  Another  obscure  subject  has  been,  in  part,  cleared  up
by  the  discoveries  of  Animal  Magnetism.  I  mean,  spectral
illusions,  or  Apparitions.  There  can  now  be  no  doubt,  that
some  apparitions  are  visions  occasioned  by  lucidity,  that  is,
by  clairvoyance,  occurring  spontaneously.  In  these,  the
absent  person  is  really  seen,  and  his  occupation  at  the  mo-
ment is  also  perceived. Or  the  image  of  a  dead  person  is


BY  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.  213

recalled  by  suggestion,  and  becomes  so  vivid  as  to  be  taken
for  reality.

There  is,  as  we  have  seen  above,  a  third  species  of  spec-
tral appearances,  depending  on  the  odylic  light  from  graves,
&c.  This,  according  to  Reichenbach,  is  described  generally
without  specific  form,  a  mass  of  faint  white  light,  often  as
high  as  a  man.  The  accounts  I  have  had  of  it,  as  seen  by
persons  in  this  country,  are  similar.  It  is  easy  to  imagine,
that  an  excited  and  terrified  imagination  may  give  a  hu-
man form  to  this  light,  and  such,  in  the  opinion  of  Reichen-
bach,  is  the  origin  of  ghosts,  which  arc  generally  white.
But  it  is  remarkable,  that  in  the  very  first  case  mentioned
by  Reichenbach,  that  of  the  light  seen  by  the  amanuensis
of  the  blind  poet  Pfeffel,  in  a  garden,  over  a  spot  where,  on
digging,  there  were  found  the  remains  of  a  human  body,
imbedded  in  a  mass  of  lime,  doubtless  buried  there  many
years  before,  during  a  pestilence,  the  young  man  saw  it  in
the  form  of  a  female  figure  floating  over  the  spot,  with  one
arm  on  her  breast,  the  other  hanging  down.  I  am  not  pre-
pared to  say,  that  in  this  case,  in  which  the  observer  was
repeatedly  questioned  in  presence  of  the  object,  the  learned
Baron  has  not  been  rather  hasty  in  regarding  the  form  as
altogether  fanciful.  Further  investigation  only  can  show
whether  the  light  from  a  body  may  not  have  the  general
form  of  the  body,  as  asserted  by  the  seer  in  this  case.

But  when  we  thus  refer  certain  classes  of  apparitions  to
natural  causes,  we  are  not  yet  able  with  certainty  to  ac-
count, in  this  way,  for  all.  Cases  are  recorded,  and  I  shall
give  one  or  two  in  Part  II.,  in  which  it  is  stated,  and  on
good  testimony,  that  apparitions,  generally  of  persons  at
that  moment  dying  or  dead,  have  been  seen,  not  as  a  faint
light,  but  in  their  natural  aspect  and  color;  not  by  one  ter-
rified peasant,  but  by  two  or  more  self-possessed  and  edu-
cated men.  Nay,  some  of  these  are  said  to  have  spoken,
and  to  have  done  so  for  a  purpose.  Every  one  knoAYS  the
story  of  Lord  Lyttleton,  and  of  the  mark  left  on  his  hand,
as  a  sign  of  the  reality  of  the  apparition.  But,  granting
that  to  have  been  a  dream,  we  cannot  apply  the  same
theory  to  the  case  of  the  apparition  which  I  shall  mention
in  Part  II.,  which  was  seen  by  a  whole  party  of  officers  at
table,  and  by  one  among  them  who  had  never  seen  the  per-
son whose  figure  appeared. The  explanation  of  such  facts


214  SECOND  SIGHT.

can  only  be  looked  for,  when  we  shall  have  more  deeply
studied  every  branch  of  the  subject.  I  am  inclined  to  think
that  Animal  Magnetism  will  supply  us  with  a  key  for  the
explanation  even  of  this  class  of  Apparitions  on  natural
principles.  I  need  hardly  mention,  what  is  well  known,
that  another  class  of  spectral  appearances,  not  connected
with  our  subject,  is  that  which  depends  on  optical  illusions,
or  disordered  internal  perception,  as  it  has  been  illustrated
and  described  by  Sir  W.  Scott,  Sir  D.  Brewster,  and  many
other  writers.

9.  There  can,  I  think,  be  little  doubt,  that  the  second
sight  is  also  a  phenomenon  depending  on  Animal  Mag-
netism, that  is,  on  spontaneous  lucidity.  The  objects  of  the
seer's  vision  are  commonly  said  to  have  been  such  as  were
at  a  distance,  such  as  an  approaching  traveller,  or  enemy.
If  we  suppose  the  seer  to  have  become,  by  concentrating
his  thoughts,  lucid,  and  yet  conscious,  or  at  all  events,  if  in
the  sleep,  yet  capable  of  speaking,  and  conversing  with
those  around  him,  he  may  have  seen,  by  clairvoyance,  the
distant  traveller,  toiling  along  the  mountain  path,  which  he
recognises  as  distant,  one,  two,  or  more  days'  journey,  and
he  may  thus  have  predicted  his  arrival  and  described  his
appearance.  I  know  that,  in  certain  persons,  extreme
voluntary  concentration,  or  reverie,  may  alike  produce  the
conscious  lucid  state,  and  that  persons  unknown  to  the  seer
may  thus  be  seen.  I  have  good  reason  to  believe,  that  is,
the  testimony  is  such  as  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt,  save  the
strangeness  of  the  fact,  that  I  have  myself  been  seen,  in
that  state,  by  a  gentleman  in  whom  it  frequently  occurs.
I  mean  that  this  took  place  before  we  ever  met,  and  when
he  had  only  heard  of  me  from  another  gentleman,  who  had
corresponded  with  me  on  Animal  Magnetism,  but  had  never
then  seen  me.  That  this  kind  of  distant  vision  often  occurs
in  the  magnetic  sleep,  we  have  already  seen.  It  is  its  oc-
currence in  the  conscious  state  which  is  so  remarkable.
Probably,  to  judge  from  the  accounts  we  have  of  them,  the
Highland  seers  were  sometimes  conscious,  that  is,  while
lucid,  still  retained  their  ordinary  consciousness,  and  some-
times in  the  magnetic  sleep,  or  in  a  dreamy  state  closely
allied  to  it,  in  which  their  consciousness  might  be  more
or  less  distinct  and  separated  from  their  waking  conscious-
ness.


PREDICTIONS.  215

10.  I  have  not,  in  treating  of  lucidity,  mentioned,  so
fully  as  I  am  now  enabled  to  do,  the  fact  that  Major  Buck-
ley generally  produces  the  clairvoyance  I  have  described,
in  which  the  clairvoyants  read  mottoes,  &c,  enclosed  in
boxes  or  nuts,  and  known  to  no  one  present,  without  causing
magnetic  sleep,  or  affecting  consciousness.  He  has  now
produced  this  remarkable  state  and  degree  of  lucidity  in  80
persons,  most  of  whom  belong  to  the  upper,  educated  class.
Major  Buckley  has  most  kindly  furnished  me  with  some
details,  which  will  be  found  in  Part  II.  I  shall  speak  of
his  method  of  operating,  when  I  come  to  the  attempt  to
explain  these  phenomena.

11.  To  return  to  the  second  sight.  It  is  also  said  to
extend  to  future  events,  and  I  am  not  prepared  to  deny  the
possibility  of  this.  I  have  elsewhere  referred  to  the  pre-
diction of  a  seer,  which  had  become  a  universally  believed
tradition  in  the  Highlands,  that  the  male  line  of  Mackenzie,
Lord  Seaforth,  should  be  extinguished  in  the  person  of  a
"  Caberfae,"  or  head  of  the  name,  as  in  that  clan  he  is
called,  wTho  should  be  deaf  and  dumb.  The  last  Lord  Sea-
forth, whom  I  have  seen  in  his  unfortunate  condition,  deaf,
unable  to  speak  articulately,  and  suffering  from  paralysis,
wTas  in  his  youth  a  man  of  uncommon  ability,  and  free  from
any  such  defects.  He  had  a  large  family,  and  several  sons,
all  of  whom  died  before  him,  so  that  the  title  is  now  extinct.
The  family  is  represented  by  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Stewart  Mac-
kenzie of  Seaforth.  The  prediction  was  current  long  before
the  events  took  place,  how  long  I  know  not ;  but  the  period
of  its  fulfilment  was  indicated  by  the  seer  as  to  be  marked
by  the  contemporaneous  occurrence  of  certain  physical  pecu-
liarities in  one  or  two  chiefs  of  other  clans.  These  also
occurred,  as  has  often  been  affirmed  to  me ;  and  it  is  men-
tioned in  Lockhart's  Life  of  Scott,  that  Mr.  Morrit  of
Rokeby,  being  on  a  visit  to  Brahan  Castle,  the  seat  of  the
family  of  Seaforth,  heard  the  tradition  in  all  its  details,
while  Lord  Seaforth  had  yet  several  sons  alive,  and  in  per-
fect health.

12.  A  still  more  remarkable  instance  of  prevision  is  that
of  M.  de  Cazotte,  who,  some  years  before  the  breaking  out
of  the  French  Revolution,  predicted,  with  great  minuteness,
its  bloody  character,  and  the  precise  fate  of  many  noble-
men, literary  men and ladies,  and even  that  of  the  King


216  PROPHECY  OF  CAZOTTE.

and  Queen.  This  prediction,  which  was  uttered  at  a  time
when  all  in  Paris  looked  forward  with  confidence  to  the
peaceful  march  of  Reform,  excited  great  sensation.  It  was
communicated,  by  persons  who  were  present,  to  friends  in
England,  and  became  the  topic  of  conversation  in  the  highest
circles,  while  no  one  believed  in  its  fulfilment  as  probable  or
even  possible.  Persons  are  or  lately  were  alive,  who  knew
of  it  at  that  time.  It  has  often  been  printed,  and  I  shall
give  some  account  of  it  in  Part  II.  Here  I  shall  only  ob-
serve, that  we  have  an  account  not  only  of  the  vision  or
tradition,  as  in  the  former  case,  but  of  the  seer.  And  it  is
most  important  to  remark  a  fact  which,  although  often
recorded,  is  omitted,  as  not  essential  to  it,  from  many  edi-
tions of  the  story,  that  M.  de  Cazotte  was  frequently  in  the
habit  of  uttering  predictions ;  and  that,  previous  to  doing
so,  he  invariably  fell  into  a  state,  which  is  described  as  a
kind  of  sleep  or  dreaming,  but  not  ordinary  sleep.  It  was,
doubtless,  either  the  magnetic  sleep,  or  a  state  of  deep  and
dreamy  abstraction,  favorable  to  lucidity.  I  confess  that
this  circumstance  is,  to  me,  the  strongest  evidence,  if  such
were  wanting,  of  the  truth  of  the  story.

13.  This  leads  me  to  allude,  briefly,  to  the  subject  of
popular  traditionary  prophecies,  to  which,  especially  as  re-
gards certain  predictions  long  current  in  Germany,  I  ven-
tured to  draw  public  attention  in  an  article  in  Blackwood's
Magazine  for  May  1850.  These  predictions  enter  into  very
curious  and  often  minute  details,  exactly  resembling  such  as
would  be  given  of  a  distinct  vision.  They  are  generally
described  as  having  been  seen  by  the  prophets  or  seers,
some  of  whom  appear  to  have  been  what  are  called  in  West-
phalia, Spoikenkiker,  that  is,  ghost-seers,  in  other  words,
highly  sensitive  to  the  magnetic  influence.  At  all  events,
these  ghost-seers  are  frequent  in  the  country,  and  among  the
people,  where  the  prophets  also  have  appeared.

The  predictions  above  alluded  to,  refer  in  general  to  events
to  happen  in  Germany  about  this  time,  that  is,  soon  after  the
introduction  of  railroads,  and  especially  to  a  dreadful  general
war,  in  which  the  final  conqueror,  or  great  Monarch,  is  to  be
a  young  prince  who  rises  up  unexpectedly.  The  war  is  also
to  break  out  unexpectedly  and  suddenly,  after  a  period  of
disturbance  and  revolutions,  while  all  the  world  is  crying,
"Peace,  peace." I  need  not  here  enter  into  more  minute


napoleon's  prediction.  217

details,  for  which  I  refer  to  the  article  above  mentioned.  I
shall  only  add,  that  the  state  of  Europe,  and  the  events  which
have  occurred  since  that  paper  appeared,  arc  much  in  favor
of  the  general  accuracy  of  the  predictions,  whatever  their
origin.  Time  alone  can  show,  how  far  they  arc  to  be  ful-
filled. But  their  existence,  as  authentic  and  generally  re-
ceived traditions,  is  at  all  events  a  remarkable  circumstance.

It  appears  to  me,  that  while  some  predictions,  which  are
said  to  have  been  fulfilled,  may  have  been  nothing  more
than  the  deductions  made  by  a  superior  intellect,  contem-
plating actual  facts,  and  their  most  probable  consequences,
this  explanation  cannot  apply  to  such  as  that  concerning  the
Seaforth  family,  nor  to  that  of  M.  de  Cazotte;  nor,  should
they  be  fulfilled,  to  many  of  those  of  the  Westphalian  and
Rhenish  seers,  who  are  ignorant,  illiterate  peasants.

Men,  such  as  Napoleon,  have  hazarded  predictions  as  to
the  inevitable  occurrence  of  a  great  war,  the  end  of  which,
according  to  Napoleon,  would  decide  whether  Europe  was  to
be  Cossack  or  Republican.  But  such  guesses,  dictated  by
profound  reflection,  or  extensive  knowledge  of  men  and  of
politics,  as  well  as  of  history,  are  always  vague  and  general ;
whereas  the  predictions  above  mentioned  are  not  only  precise
and  minute,  in  many  cases,  but  are  described  as  being  seen
in  a  trance,  sleep,  dream,  or  reverie,  in  short,  as  actual  vi-
sions, not  deductions.  That  such  visions,  even  if  true  pre-
visions, may  be  mixed  up  with  mere  dreams,  and  exaggerated
or  otherwise  disfigured  by  preconceived  or  suggested  ideas,
is  very  probable.  But  the  cases  above  referred  to,  with  their
minute  particularity,  cannot  be  disposed  of  in  this  way.
While,  therefore,  I  doubt  not  that  many  spurious  predictions
have  existed,  I  think  we  are  entitled  to  admit,  that  genuine
prevision  or  second  sight  is  a  possible  occurrence  as  a  spon-
taneous fact,  and  that  it  is  to  be  explained  on  the  principles
of  Animal  Magnetism.

In  my  next  Letter,  I  shall  endeavor  to  show,  that  the
explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  Animal  Magnetism  is  not
so  hopeless  a  matter  as  may  at  first  sight  be  supposed.  I
have  already  pointed  out,  that  we  are  unable  to  explain  any
natural  fact,  even  the  most  familiar,  in  the  sense  of  ascer-
taining its  ultimate  cause.  All  that  we  can  do,  is  to  reduce
or  refer  facts  to  certain  natural  laws,  which,  like  that  of
gravitation,  are  nothing  more  than  collective  facts  enabling
19


218  CAUSE  OF  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM.

us  to  see  the  law  or  rule,  according  to  which  the  facts  occur,
but  not  throwing  any  light  on  the  ultimate  question,  Why  or
how  they  occur?  We  know  that  the  Sun  and  the  Earth
attract,  or  tend  towards,  each  other  with  a  force,  which  has
been  shown  to  vary,  according  to  a  certain  rule,  in  propor-
tion to  the  masses  of  matter  which  act,  and  to  their  distance
from  each  other.  But  we  know  no  more.  We  cannot  tell
why  they  should  tend  towards  or  attract  each  other ;  nor
what  is  the  nature  of  the  force ;  nor  how  it  operates ;  but
only  that  it  does  operate ;  or  rather,  we  know  only  that  a
fact  occurs,  and  we  ascribe  it  to  a  force,  which  we  conceive
to  be  the  cause  of  it.  Our  explanations,  in  any  branch  of
science,  reach  no  farther  than  this  ;  and  I  propose  to  show,
that  we  may,. if  we  only  study  it,  learn  as  much,  in  process
of  time,  about  the  nature  or  cause  of  Animal  Magnetism,  as
we  know  about  Gravitation,  Chemical  Attraction,  or  Elec-
tricity.


LETTER  XIII.

Let  us  now  try  whether  we  can,  by  comparing  the  facts
which  have  been  ascertained,  throw  any  light  on  the  cause
or  causes  of  the  phenomena  of  Animal  Magnetism.  It  is
well  known  that  Mesmer  ascribed  the  facts  which  he  observed
to  a  peculiar  fluid,  which  he  called  the  magnetic  fluid.  This
he  supposed  to  exist  in  the  human  body,  as  well  as  in  the
magnet,  and  he  does  not  seem  to  have  distinguished  accu-
rately between  vital  magnetism  and  what  has  recently  been
called  ferro-magnetism,  that  power,  namely,  by  which  the
magnet  attracts  iron-filings,  and  the  magnetic  needle,  when
freely  suspended,  points  North  and  South.

As  it  was  soon  and  easily  perceived,  that  the  human  hand
does  not  attract  iron-filings,  and  cannot  give  to  the  needle
the  property  of  pointing  to  the  magnetic  poles,  it  was  rashly
concluded  that  Mesmer's  idea  of  a  magnetic  fluid,  existing
in  the  body,  was  altogether  without  foundation ;  and  his  facts
were  then  rejected  and  denied.  There  can  be  little  doubt
that  Mesmer  and  his  followers  were  in  a  great  measure  to


MESMER. PUYSEGUR. PETETIN.  219

blame  for  this  result.  They  shrouded  their  operations  in
mystery,  and  spoke  with  undue  confidence  on  points  of  theory
which  had  not  been  sufficiently  investigated ;  nor  is  the  me-
mory of  Mesmcr  quite  free  from  the  reproach  of  a  certain
amount  of  charlatanism,  and  of  having  preferred  his  own
personal  interests  to  those  of  science.  A  not  unnatural  pre-
judice was  thus  created  against  what  he  taught,  and  the  pro-
gress of  truth  was  retarded.  The  reports  of  Animal  Mag-
netism by  the  various  commissions  of  men  of  science  appointed,
in  France,  to  examine  it,  although  in  some  points  favorable
to  the  existence  of  facts  well  worthy  of  investigation,  yet  had
on  the  whole  an  unfavorable  effect,  as  the  commissioners
were  not  successful  in  obtaining  good  evidence  of  the  higher
phenomena,  and  evidently  leaned  to  the  opinion  that,  in  some
cases,  deceit  was  practised.  Yet  these  reports  were  not  de-
cisive. Bertrand  and  Colquhoun  have  shown  their  imperfec-
tions, and  they  are  now  seldom  referred  to  by  those  who
know  anything  of  the  subject  practically.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Marquis  de  Puysegur,  who  devoted
his  life  to  the  practice  of  Animal  Magnetism,  and  who  was
far  above  suspicion,  continued  to  obtain,  by  the  method  of
Mesmer,  very  remarkable  results,  especially  in  lucidity  and
the  cure  of  disease.  The  experiments,  also,  of  Dr.  Petetin
of  Lyons,  established  the  fact  of  the  transference  of  several
senses  to  the  epigastrium  as  a  spontaneous  occurrence ;  and
in  all  countries,  men  continued  quietly  to  study  the  subject,
chiefly,  however,  with  a  view  to  its  use  as  a  remedy.  No
one  undertook  a  regular  inductive  experimental  investigation,
but  many  facts  were  empirically  observed.

At  last  Baron  von  Beichenbach,  about  1843  or  1844,  was
accidentally  led  to  study  the  effects  of  magnets  on  suscepti-
ble persons,  at  first,  indeed,  on  such  as  were  suffering  from
disease  of  the  nervous  system.  This  enquirer  was  peculiarly
fitted  for  the  task.  To  a  thorough  scientific  training,  and
the  reputation  of  an  accurate  observer  and  skilful  experi-
menter, amply  justified  by  his  many  scientific  memoirs,  and
his  success  in  improving  the  manufacture  of  iron,  he  added
the  advantages  of  an  acute  and  logical  intellect,  of  habits  of
patient  and  persevering  thought,  and  caution  in  drawing
conclusions,  as  well  as  extreme  conscientiousness  in  report-
ing the  facts  observed.  It  was  fortunate  for  science  that  his
attention  was  directed  to  the  subject. But  I  must  here  men-


220  REICHENBACH.

tion,  that  his  experiments,  so  far  as  I  know,  were  not  made
on  persons  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  but  were  rather  confined
to  the  influence  exerted  by  magnets,  crystals,  the  human
hand,  &c.  &c,  on  persons  in  the  natural  waking  condition.
His  object  was,  to  begin  at  the  beginning,  and  to  lay  a
truly  scientific  and  lasting  foundation  for  more  extended  en-
quiries.

He  began  his  investigations  with  a  strong  prejudice
against  the  views  of  Mesmer,  a  prejudice  universally  diffused
among  the  scientific  men  of  Germany.  But  he  was  soon
compelled  by  the  force  of  facts,  to  admit  some  of  the  very
statements  which  had  been  most  repugnant  to  him.  I  may
specify,  the  influence  exerted  by  the  magnet  on  the  human
frame ;  the  fact  that  water  may  be  magnetised,  so  as  to  be
known  by  the  patient  from  ordinary  water ;  the  action  of
the  human  hand ;  its  power  of  magnetising  water  as  well  as
the  magnet  does  ;  and  the  appearance  of  light  from  the  fin-
gers of  the  operator.

He  now  entered  on  a  regular  series  of  researches,  con-
tinued during  nearly  five  years,  and  on  upwards  of  100  per-
sons, in  which  he  made  the  important  discovery,  that  light,
visible  in  the  dark  to  sensitives  in  the  waking  state,  is  emit-
ted not  only  by  the  hand,  and  by  the  magnet,  but  by  crys-
tals, and,  in  fact,  by  all  bodies  more  or  less.  He  further
observed,  that  his  sensitives,  when  in  a  cataleptic  state,  or
in  that  of  spontaneous  somnambulism,  became  far  more  sen-
sitive than  before.  He  found,  that  heat,  light,  electricity,
galvanism,  chemical  action,  friction,  animal  life,  and  vegeta-
tion, all  caused  emanations  of  the  same  light  seen  in  the
magnet,  in  crystals,  and  in  the  human  hand.  And  he  finally
ascertained,  that  sensitiveness  is  not  a  morbid  state,  but  is
found  in  healthy  persons,  and  that  one  person  out  of  three  is
more  or  less  sensitive,  not  indeed  always  to  the  light,  but
to  the  influence  of  magnets,  &c,  as  proved  by  their  sensa-
tions.

By  these  laborious  researches,  Reichenbach  was  finally
compelled  to  adopt  the  hypothesis  of  a  peculiar  influence,  or
force,  to  which  he  has  given  the  name  of  Odyle,  and  which
he  regards  as  the  cause  of  all  these  phenomena.  And  he
was  also  forced  to  admit  that  odyle  is  identical  with  the  mag-
netic fluid  of  Mesmer,  that  is,  in  so  far  as  the  latter  differs


ODYLE.  221

from  ordinary  or  ferro-magnetism,  from  which  Mesmer  failed
to  distinguish  it.  In  magnets,  odyle  is  associated  with  ferro-
magnetism ;  in  light,  with  light ;  in  heat,  with  heat ;  in
electricity  and  galvanism,  with  the  electric  influence ;  in
crystals,  &c.  it  is  found  alone,  and,  while  analogous  to  all
these  imponderables,  forces,  influences,  or  fluids,  as  some  of
them  are  often  called,  it  is  distinct  from  all.

The  name  given  to  this  influence  is  a  secondary  matter.
I  have  called  it,  in  the  preceding  pages,  Animal  Magnetism,
as  being  a  name  established  and  known,  but  if  it  is  to  have
a  new  name,  that  of  Odyle,  which  conveys  no  theoretical
opinion,  is  preferable,  and  indeed  unexceptionable.  In  re-
gard to  its  nature,  we  know  no  more  than  we  do  of  heat,
light,  electricity,  galvanism,  ferro-magnetism,  chemical  ac-
tion, cohesion,  gravitation,  &c.  We  may  call  it  a  force,  as
we  do  chemical  action,  gravitation,  and  cohesion ;  or  a  fluid,
as  we  speak  of  the  electric,  galvanic,  or  ferro-magnetic  fluids  ;
or  an  imponderable,  as  we  call  heat,  light,  electricity,  and
magnetism.  It  may  be  essentially  a  motion  in  the  particles
of  matter,  as  heat  and  chemical  action  are  supposed  to  be  ;
or  a  motion  in  the  particles  of  some  subtle  ether,  as  light  is
now  considered  ;  perhaps  even  of  the  same  ether,  if  such
exist.  All  this  may,  or  may  not  be.  What  we  know  is
only  that  certain  facts  occur,  and  we  cannot,  from  the  consti-
tution of  our  minds,  avoid  referring  these  to  a  force  or  in-
fluence, which,  when  the  phenomena  are  carefully  studied,
is  found  not  to  be  identical  with  any  of  the  other  influences
or  forces  above  mentioned,  and  must  therefore  have  a  name
to  itself.

It  is  quite  possible,  and  even  probable,  that  many,  or  all
of  these  influences,  may,  in  the  progress  of  our  knowledge,
be  referred  to  one  and  the  same  common  cause  or  principle.
But  till  such  a  common  principle  be  discovered,  the  attempt
to  classify  the  phenomena  of  odyle  under  any  other  impon-
derable, such  as  heat  or  light,  electricity  or  ferro-magnetism,
would  only  lead  to  hopeless  confusion.  And  even  after  such
a  common  principle  shall  have  been  discovered,  it  will  be
necessary  to  classify  these  different  phenomena,  as  different
modifications  or  phases  of  it.

For  these  reasons,  I  shall  use  the  terms  odyle  and  odylic
in  discussing  the  subject  theoretically  ; premising,  that  I

19*


222  ODYLIC  PHENOMENA.

use  odyle  as  synonymous  with  what  has  been  called  Animal
Magnetism  in  the  foregoing  Letters.


The  odylic  influence,  like  that  of  heat,  light,  and  elec-
tricity, is  universally  diffused.  In  regard  to  Ferro-magnet-
ism,  that  force  was  long  supposed  to  be  confined  to  certain
bodies,  such  as  the  loadstone,  and  two  or  three  metals.  But
even  then,  the  earth  was  necessarily  regarded  as  a  vast  mag-
net. The  beautiful  discoveries  of  Faraday,  however,  have
shown,  that,  in  a  modified  form,  called  by  him  diamagnetism,
because  bodies  under  its  influence  place  themselves,  when
freely  suspended,  at  right  angles  to  the  magnetic  meridian,
ordinary  magnetism  is  possessed  by  all  bodies.  And  his
most  recent  discovery,  that  oxygen  gas  is  attracted  by  the
magnet,  is  a  pregnant  proof  that  our  knowledge  of  this
force,  and  of  its  effects  on  our  earth  and  atmosphere,  admits
of  indefinite  extension.  I  need  hardly  point  out,  that  the
discovery  of  diamagnetism  harmonises  well  with  the  earlier
discovery  of  Reichenbach,  that  all  bodies  act  on  sensitive
persons,  and  give  out  luminous  emanations,  as  the  magnet
does.

The  universal  diffusion  of  the  odylic  influence  naturally
leads  to  the  anticipation,  that,  like  heat,  light,  &c,  it  must
exercise  some  action  on  the  human  body.  That  it  does  so,
has  been  experimentally  demonstrated,  and  may  at  any  time
be  proved  by  the  action  of  crystals  on  the  sensitive.

Like  heat  and  light,  odyle  is  transmitted  through,  or
traverses  space,  by  what  may  be  called  radiation,  and  is
also,  like  heat  and  electricity,  conducted  through  bodies.  It
appears  to  travel  less  rapidly  than  light ;  but  it  is  conducted
through  matter  much  more  rapidly  than  heat.  It  passes
readily  through  all  known  substances,  but  with  somewhat
less  facility  through  fibrous  or  interrupted  than  continuous
structures.  Thus  paper  or  wood  are  not  traversed  so  easily
by  it  as  some  other  bodies,  but  cannot  long  arrest  it.  Heat
passes  very  slowly  through  most  bodies  excepting  metals ;
and  electricity  is  arrested  by  most  non-metallic  bodies,  and
is  indeed  only  well  conducted  by  metals,  charcoal,  and  cer-
tain liquids.

Odyle  may  be,  to  a  certain  extent,  accumulated  in  a  sub-
stance, but  is  slowly  dissipated  again, The  body  charged


ODYLE  IS  POLAR.  223

with  it  retains  the  charge  longer  than  does  one  charged  with
electricity.

Like  electricity  and  magnetism,  odyle  has  a  strong  tend-
ency to  a  polar  distribution.  Thus,  in  magnets,  in  crystals,
and  in  the  human  body,  it  is  polar,  and  the  opposite  poles
exhibit  distinct  modifications.  In  bodies  confusedly  crys-
tallised, and  in  amorphous  bodies,  the  polar  arrangement
cannot  be  observed.

Like  heat,  light,  electricity,  and  magnetism,  odyle  tends
to  a  state  of  equilibrium,  and  its  external  manifestations
seem  to  depend  chiefly  on  the  disturbance  of  this  equili-
brium. Just  as  a  hot  body,  radiating  more  heat  than  it
receives,  soon  comes  to  an  equilibrium  of  temperature  with
the  surrounding  bodies,  so  does  a  body,  odylically  excited
or  charged,  tend  to,  and  ultimately  attain,  an  equilibrium  of
odylic  force  with  the  surrounding  bodies.  And  just  as  ferro-
magnetism  is  found  polar  and  active  in  a  magnet,  which  is
in  a  certain  ferro-magnetic  state,  a  state  we  may  call  a  pe-
culiar disturbance  of  equilibrium  in  the  ferro-magnetic  force;
so,  in  a  body  odylically  polar,  and  odylically  active,  such  as
a  magnet,  a  crystal,  or  the  human  body,  we  may  suppose  a
like  peculiar  arrangement  or  distribution  of  the  odylic  force,
the  results  only  of  which,  and  not  its  precise  nature,  are
known  to  us.

Such  is  a  very  brief  and  popular  sketch  of  the  nature  of
that  influence  to  which  I  consider  we  must,  in  the  present
state  of  our  knowledge,  refer  the  phenomena  of  Animal
Magnetism.  But  while  I  have  endeavored  to  show  that
odyle  is  to  be  ranked  with  the  known  imponderable  agents,
I  am  quite  aware  that  we  know  comparatively  little  of  the
laws  by  which  it  is  regulated.  The  observations  made  on
persons  artificially  magnetised,  or  mesmerised,  have  hitherto
been  almost  entirely  empirical,  and  have  not  been  guided  by
a  plan  of  research.  Those  on  natural  somnambulists  have
been  accidental  and  imperfect ;  and  the  little  that  we  do
know  on  the  subject,  we  owe  entirely  to  the  researches  of
Reichenbach,  made  on  persons  in  the  ordinary  state.  These
researches  have  laid  a  firm  and  lasting  foundation  for  future
investigations,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  subject
has  peculiar  difficulties.

First,  there  is  the  fact,  that  hitherto  the  observer  has  not
been  able  to  examine  the  most  important  facts  by  the  aid  of


224  DIFFICULTIES  OF  THE  INVESTIGATION.

his  own  senses,  but  has  had  to  trust  to  the  sensations  of
others.  In  my  Preface  to  the  translation  of  Reichenbach,
I  have  endeavored  to  prove,  that  this  is  no  argument
against  the  observations,  if  made  with  due  care,  and  on  a
sufficient  number  of  persons.  There  are  many  facts,  ad-
mitted and  reasoned  upon  in  all  sciences,  by  those  who  have
not  personally  seen  them,  and  know  them  only  by  the  re-
ports of  those  who  have.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  why  this
should  be  less  practicable  in  odylic  enquiries  than  in  others,
for  example,  in  geology,  geography,  meteorology,  and  above
all,  in  medicine.  Many  facts  in  medicine  rest  exclusively
on  the  testimony  of  the  patient,  whose  descriptions  the  phy-
sician cannot  test,  save  by  comparing  them  with  those  of
other  patients,  or  with  those  of  the  same  patient  at  another
time.  Every  thing,  in  medicine  as  well  as  in  researches  on
odylo,  depends  on  the  sagacity,  knowledge,  experience,  and
honesty  of  the  observer  or  physician,  who,  if  he  cannot  dis-
tinguish false  statements  from  true,  after  a  little  experience,
is  not  well  qualified  for  such  observations.  An  observer
possessing  the  necessary  qualifications,  will  not  find  this
difficulty  insuperable  ;  but  it  is  a  difficulty,  and  should  stimu-
late us  to  increased  ardor  and  perseverance  in  the  pursuit
of  truths,  which  are  at  once  more  interesting  and  difficult
of  attainment  than  many  others.  The  difficulty,  however,
becomes  daily  less  by  practice,  because  we  learn  the  neces-
sary precautions  against  illusion  ;  and  our  increasing  know-
ledge of  the  phenomena  enables  us  to  detect  fallacies  and  to
avoid  sources  of  error.

Secondly,  we  do  not  yet  possess  any  means  of  collecting,
accumulating,  and  concentrating  the  odylic  force,  as  we  can
do  in  the  case  of  magnetism  and  electricity.  The  odyle
which,  in  the  magnet,  accompanies  ferro-magnetism,^  is,
indeed,  more  powerful  in  proportion  to  the  force  of  the  mag-
net, but,  even  in  the  most  powerful  magnet  yet  tried,  it  has
not  reached  so  high  a  degree  of  intensity  as  would  be  re-
quired to  enable  us  duly  to  investigate  its  properties  with
ease  and  complete  success.  One  great  desideratum  is  an
odylic  battery,  just  as  we  have  a  galvanic  battery.  Since
chemical  action  gives  rise  to  odyle,  it  is  probably  in  some
form  of  chemical  action  that  we  shall  find  the  means  of  con-
structing such  a  battery,  and  when  we  shall  have  thus  ob-
tained the  power  of  odylically  affecting  every  man,  a  vast
step  will  be  gained.


EFFECTS  OF  ODYLE.  W&O

Thirdly  we  have  not  yet  obtained,  as  in  heat,  light,  elec-
tricity, galvanism,  or  magnetism,  a  convenient  and  accurate
means  of  measuring  the  quantity  or  intensity  of  odylic
force.  We  do  not  possess  any  substance,  which  is  so  affected
by  odyle,  that  its  consequent  changes  may  be  rigidly  mea-
sured and  referred  to  a  standard.  But  if  we  reflect,  that
odyle  has  only  just  been  discovered  as  a  physical  agent,  and
that  the  galvanometer  and  photometer  are  but  recent  inven-
tions, while  daily  improvements  are  made  in  all  our  instru-
ments for  measuring  electricity,  light,  and  the  other  ana-
logous forces,  the  natural  conclusion  is,  that  a  diligent  study
ofall  the  properties  of  this  new  force,  will  ere  long  yield  us
an  odylometer.  It  is  not  improbable  that  it  may  be  of  an
animal  nature,  since  the  most  marked  property  of  odyle  is
its  peculiar  action  on  the  nervous  system.  But  whatever
its  nature,  such  a  discovery  would  at  once  do  the  work  of  a
century  in  promoting  the  progress  of  odylic  science.  Let
us  hope  that  it  will  not  be  long  delayed.

In  the  meantime,  let  us  examine  whether  we  cannot  turn
to  some  account  the  knowledge  which  we  already  possess
of  odyle  and  of  its  manifestations,  in  accounting  for  the
phenomena  of  Animal  Magnetism  in  a  natural  way.

1.  If  the  human  body  be  a  perpetual  fountain  of  odylic
force,  in  virtue  of  the  chemical  changes  at  all  times  going
on  within  it,  in  the  processes  of  respiration,  digestion,  assi-
milation, excretion,  secretion,  muscular  and  nervous  action,
&c,  and  if  any  body,  containing  odyle,  radiates  it  to  all
other  bodies,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  the  vicinity  of  a  vigorous
healthy  person  may  powerfully  affect  one  sensitive  to  odylic
influence.

2.  If  the  odyle  in  the  human  body  be  polar,  and  if,  as  is
the  case,  according  to  Reichenbach,  the  hands  be  the  chief
or  primary  poles  (there  are,  as  in  crystals,  secondary  axes
and  poles,  but  in  man  the  transverse  axis  is  the  principal
one),  then  we  can  easily  understand  how  the  hand  should
be  so  powerful  in  producing  magnetic,  that  is,  odylic  effects,
as  we  find  it  to  be.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  light
is  seen  to  issue  from  the  points  of  the  fingers,  not  only  by
sensitives  in  the  ordinary  waking  state,  but  still  more  vividly
by  persons  in  the  magnetic  sleep.

3.  These  persons,  of  both  classes,  also  see  light  proceed-
ing from  the  eyes  and  mouth,  which  are  also  subordinate


226  CURRENTS  OP  ODYLE,

foci  of  odyle,  the  eyes  being,  as  the  hands,  and  indeed  the
halves  of  the  body  are,  oppositely  polar.  Hence  the  efficacy
of  gazing,  or  fascination,  and  of  breathing  on  the  head  or
over  the  heart  of  the  patient,  with  the  mouth  close  to  the
parts,  the  breath  being  highly  charged  with  odyle.

4.  Supposing  a  current  of  odyle,  like  that  of  galvanic
electricity  in  an  open  circuit,  to  tend  to  pass  from  the  posi-
tive or  +  pole,  through  any  interposed  body,  to  the  nega-
tive or  —  pole,  then,  as  the  left  hand  is  odylo-negative,
and  the  right  positive,  the  odylic  current  must  pass  from
the  right  hand,  through  any  substance  held  in  the  hands,  or
touched  by  them,  to  the  left  hand,  thence  up  the  left  arm,
through  the  chest,  and  so  down  the  right  arm,  till  the  cir-
cuit is  completed.  When  the  circuit  is  not  closed,  as  we
close  it  by  joining  the  hands,  or  by  holding  a  conductor
with  them,  the  odylic  current  does  not  take  place,  just  as
in  an  open  galvanic  circuit;  the  odylic  force  is  in  a  state  of
tension,  and  polar,  that  is,  strongest  at  the  poles.

If  now  the  operator,  in  whom  a  similar  state  of  tension
exists  as  in  the  patient,  takes  hold  of  his  hands,  right  in
left,  and  left  in  right,  which  is  the  natural  or  normal  way,
the  current  from  his  right  hand,  the  patient  acting  as  a  con-
ductor, and  closing  the  circuit,  will  flow  into  the  patient's
left  hand,  up  his  left  arm,  through  the  chest,  down  the  right
arm,  thence  to  the  operator's  left  hand,  up  his  left  arm,
through  his  chest,  and  down  his  right  arm,  thus  completing
the  circuit.

This  current  is  very  strongly  felt  by  the  sensitive,  and
as  it  harmonises  with,  and  is  added  to  their  own,  the  sen-
sations are  agreeable,  although  they  often  become  too  vio-
lent, and  if  continued  would  cause,  in  some  cases,  fainting
or  convulsions.  This  general  fact,  observed  by  Keichen-
bach  in  waking  sensitives,  I  have  often  confirmed,  as  to  the
great  power  and  agreeable  nature  of  the  sensation,  which
is  often  compared,  by  the  patient,  to  something  flowing  ex-
actly in  the  direction  described.

5.  But  if  the  operator's  hands  be  crossed,  before  he  takes
hold  of  the  patient's,  then  the  two  currents  are  opposed,
instead  of  being  united.  The  result  is,  that  a  species  of
contest  occurs,  accompanied  by  sensations  so  horrible,  that
very  sensitive  persons  cannot  endure  the  experiment  for  a
minute,  and  can  hardly  ever  be  persuaded  to  allow  it  to  be


THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  227

repeated.  This  remarkable  fact,  observed  by  Reichenbach,
I  can  confirm  to  the  fullest  extent ;  having  been  fortunate
enough  to  meet  with  a  highly  sensitive  patient,  who,  when
I  tried  the  experiment,  without  saying  one  word  to  her,  tore
away  her  hands  after  a  few  seconds,  and  declared  the  sen-
sation to  be  so  intolerable,  that,  had  it  continued  only  a  few
seconds  longer,  she  must  have  fainted  and  been  convulsed.
No  entreaties  nor  bribes  could  induce  her  to  let  me  repeat
the  trial ;  indeed  her  expressions  were  almost  verbatim  those
of  one  of  Reichenbach's  most  sensitive  patients,  and  this
poor  woman  had  never  heard  either  of  him  or  of  his  book,
which  at  that  time,  early  in  1846,  was  not  yet  known  in  this
country.  In  a  less  striking  degree,  I  have  seen  the  same
fact  in  many  other  cases.

6.  It  is  obvious  that  the  action  of  magnets  and  crystals,
both  of  which  are  polar,  on  the  patient,  admits  of  the  same
explanation.  Both,  in  fact,  cause  currents,  differing  accord-
ing to  the  pole  held  in  the  hand,  or  to  the  hand  which  holds
the  pole.  The  pole,  which  causes  a  cold  sensation  in  the
right  hand,  produces  a  warm  one  in  the  left,  and  vice  versd.
This  I  have  verified  more  than  a  hundred  times.

Non-polar  bodies  are  altogether  j  according  to  their  nature,
cold  or  warm  to  the  patient.  It  is  odylo-negative  bodies
which  are  generally  cold,  such  as  oxygen,  acids,  &c. ;  and
odylo-positive  bodies  which  are  warm,  such  as  hydrogen,
alkalies,  &c.

7.  With  regard  to  what  is  called  the  magnetic  state,
whether  that  extend  to  magnetic  sleep  or  not,  we  may  at-
tempt to  explain  it  in  the  following  manner.  Ordinary  sleep
has  been  proved  by  Reichenbach  to  be  connected  with  a
change  in  the  distribution  of  the  oclylic  influence  in  the  body.
During  sleep,  the  head,  generally,  is  less  odylically  charged
than  in  the  waking  hours.  For  details,  I  refer  to  the  work
of  Reichenbach.  Now,  by  the  action  of  the  operator,  who,
whether  by  passes,  gazing,  or  contact,  throws  some  of
his  odyle  into  the  system  of  the  patient,  a  change  is  pro-
duced in  the  relative  amounts  of  odyle  in  different  parts  of
the  body  or  of  the  head,  or,  in  other  words,  the  distribution
as  well  as  the  absolute  quantity  of  odyle  in  the  patient  is
changed.  The  precise  nature  of  the  change  is  not  known;
but  we  can  readily  conceive  how,  if  different  from  the  nor-
mal nightly  change,  as  it  undoubtedly  is,  it  may  produce  a


238  SOMNAMBULISM. SUGGESTION.

peculiar  kind  of  sleep,  in  which  the  intellect  remains  awake,
while  the  external  senses  are  drowned  in  slumber.  Such  is
the  general  view  I  would  propose  to  take  of  the  production
of  the  magnetic  state,  and  of  the  sleep.  The  essential
character  of  it  I  take  to  be  this,  that  while  most  or  all  of
the  external  senses  are  cut  off  from  action  on  the  sensorium,
the  internal  senses  are,  perhaps  in  consequence  of  this,
more  alive  than  usual  to  odylic  impressions  of  all  kinds.  It
is  certain,  that  persons  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  or  somnam-
bulists, spontaneous  or  artificial,  are  always  highly  sensitive
to  odylic  impressions,  such  as  the  light,  the  sensations  of
heat  and  cold,  &c.  Such  persons  as  are  moderately  sensi-
tive in  the  waking  state,  often  become,  in  the  state  of  som-
nambulism, sensitives  of  the  highest  order.

8.  I  would  regard  the  spontaneous  occurrence  of  som-
nambulism as  nothing  more  than  the  spontaneous  occurrence
of  that  peculiar  distribution  of  odyle  which  is  caused  in  the
magnetic  processes,  but  without  any  addition  to  its  quantity.
And  the  same  view  will  apply  to  the  impressible  state  pro-
duced by  Dr.  Darling's  process,  as  well  as  to  the  magnetic
sleep  of  Mr.  Braid's  method,  in  neither  of  which  is  odyle
added  from  without.

9.  The  power  of  the  operator  over  the  volition,  sensa-
tions, perceptions,  memory,  and  imagination  of  his  subject,
when  the  latter  is  in  the  magnetic  or  odylic  sleep,  and  with-
out any  suggestion,  may  be  supposed  to  depend  on  the  odylic
force  of  the  operator  being  superior  to  that  of  the  patient,
while,  from  the  conductibility  and  ubiquity  of  odyle,  the
operator  continues  in  communication  with  that  portion
which  has  passed  into  the  system  of  the  patient.  If  odyle
be  the  nervous  force,  or  vital  force,  and  it  is  at  least  as
likely  to  be  so  as  electricity,  then  it  may  be  the  odyle  of  the
operator,  overpowering  that  of  the  patient,  which  moves  the
muscles  and  determines  the  sensations,  &c.  of  the  latter.

10.  The  attraction  of  the  patient  towards  the  operator,
both  mental  and  physical,  may  be  explained  on  the  same
principle.  This  supposition,  as  well  as  the  preceding  ones,
receive  considerable  support  from  the  fact  that  the  sleeper
constantly  speaks  of  a  light  round  his  magnetiser,  or  of  a
luminous  vapor,  which  extends  to  and  embraces  himself.

All  the  facts  ascertained  in  regard  to  odyle  point  to  an
external  influence,  passing  from  one  body  to  another:  and


SYMPATHY. THOUGHT-READING.  229

hero  wc  have  a  visible  something,  which  is  seen  to  pass,  not
only  from  the  points  of  the  fingers,  but  from  the  whole  per-
son, of  the  magnetiscr,  to  that  of  his  patient.

11.  The  disagreeable  and  injurious  effects  of  cross-mag-
netism arise,  or  rather  may  be  supposed  to  arise,  partly
from  the  conflict  of  different  odylic  influences,  and  partly
from  the  accidental  reversal  of  currents,  which  must  often
occur,  when  others  take  hold  of  the  patient's  hands,  or
touch  him  in  various  ways.  The  facts  are  notorious  to  all
who  have  looked  at  the  subject.

12.  The  antipathy  of  the  sleeper  to  certain  objects  or
persons  probably  depends  on  the  strong  and  disagreeable
odylic  sensations  they  cause,  according  to  whether  they  are
negative  or  positive  in  reference  to  him.

13.  Sympathy  most  probably  depends  on  the  harmonious
action  of  the  odylic  force  of  the  operator,  or  of  any  other
person,  on  the  temporarily  exalted  odylic  state  of  the  pa-
tient. And  we  may,  without  much  difficulty,  conceive  odyle
to  be  the  medium  through  which  the  impressions  of  sympa-
thy are  conveyed.

The  existence  of  sympathy  cannot  be  doubted.  It  is  con-
stantly seen  in  spontaneous  manifestation,  as  I  have  already
mentioned.  Nay,  it  is  often  used,  by  those  who  are  unwil-
ling to  admit  the  existence  of  direct  clairvoyance,  as  furnish-
ing an  explanation  of  that  phenomenon  less  repugnant  to
their  preconceived  opinions.  Such  persons,  rather  than
admit  that  the  clairvoyant  posseses  the  power  of  vision  with-
out the  use  of  the  external  eye,  at  once  adopt  or  even  sug-
gest the  hypothesis  of  such  a  degree  of  sympathy  with  the
operator,  as  enables  the  subject  to  read  all  his  thoughts  with
perfect  accuracy.  They  do  not  stop  to  enquire  whether
this  be  in  reality  less  wonderful,  or  less  unaccountable  on
ordinary  principles,  than  the  notion  of  direct  clairvoyance ;
nor  do  they  consider  that  such  sympathy  is  as  truly  a  new
sense  as  any  thing  can  possibly  be.  But  all  men  know,  that
sympathy,  to  a  very  remarkable  degree,  is  a  daily  recurring
fact,  and,  although  quite  unable  to  explain  it,  having  never
perhaps  thought  on  the  subject,  they  embrace  it  at  once  as
a  refuge  from  the  obnoxious  idea  of  direct  clairvoyance.

I  need  hardly  remind  you  here,  that,  even  if  we  admit,
as  I  unequivocally  do,  sympathy  and  thought-reading  as
sufficient  to  explain,  if  they  be  admitted,  many  instances  of
20


230  ODYLE  THE  PROBABLE  MEDIUM

clairvoyance,  namely,  such  as  I  have  called  sympathetic,
mediate,  or  indirect  clairvoyance,  yet  there  are  many  facts
which  this  explanation  will  not  reach.

I  wish,  in  this  place,  only  to  point  out,  that,  admitting
sympathy,  odyle  is  most  probably  the  agent  or  medium.
The  odylic  atmosphere  of  the  operator,  and  that  of  the  sub-
ject, interpenetrating  each  other,  and  the  former  predomi-
nating over  the  latter,  the  subject  becomes,  for  the  time,  a
partaker  in  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  operator ;  and
thus,  although  the  details  of  the  process  are  shrouded,  at
present,  from  our  sight,  thought-reading  is  brought  about.
I  have  no  doubt  that  such  sympathy  does  occur,  and  I  con-
sider it  highly  probable,  that  the  explanation  here  suggested,
as  far  as  it  goes,  is  the  true  one.  Of  course,  I  understand
it  to  aj:>ply  to  spontaneous,  as  well  as  to  artificially  excited
sympathy.  It  is  obvious,  that  to  an  influence  like  odyle,
as  to  light,  distance  may  be  a  matter  of  no  importance.  If
odyle  exist,  it  traverses  space,  as  light  does ;  only,  as  ap-
pears from  the  observations  of  Keichenbach,  not  quite  so
rapidly.

14.  We  now  come  to  the  explanation  of  direct  or  imme-
diate, or  true  clairvoyance,  which  I  have  already  given  my
reasons  for  admitting,  as  an  ascertained  fact,  whether  we
can  explain  it  or  not.

The  phenomenon  is  the  great  stumbling-block.  Some  boldly
declare  that  they  never  will  believe  it,  forgetting  that  belief
is  involuntary,  and  that,  on  sufficient  evidence,  they  must,
if  they  attend  to  that  evidence,  believe  it.  In  my  opinion,
after  reading,  I  will  not  say  the  whole  recorded  evidence,
but  as  much  of  it  as  I  could  procure,  the  recorded  evidence
of  the  fact  is  sufficient.  But  I  have  not  expressed  that
belief,  until  after  I  had  seen  it  myself.  Now  I  have  ob-
served two  things  among  those  highly  estimable  persons  who
do  not  yet  admit  the  fact  of  direct  clairvoyance.  The  first
is,  that  they  are,  in  general,  quite  unacquainted  with  the
recorded  evidence.  The  second  is,  that  their  objections,
when  sifted,  always  assume  ultimately  the  shape  of  an  asser-
tion, that  it  is  impossible,  or  that,  as  it  cannot  be  accounted
for,  it  must  be  rejected.  I  might  add  a  third,  namely,  that
these  persons  have  rarely,  if  ever,  investigated  the  matter
for  themselves.  Now  I  do  not  quarrel  with  the  philosophic
caution  which  declines  to  adopt  an  entirely  new  and  start-


OF  SYMPATHY  AND  CLAIRVOYANCE.  231

ling  fact,  unless  on  unexceptionable  evidence,  or  on  ocular
demonstration.  But  when  the  witnesses  are  numerous,  their
character  unimpeached,  and  the  fact  not  physically  or  ma-
thematically impossible,  caution  is  not  entitled  to  go  further
than  to  say,  "I  am  not  satisfied;  I  must  enquire  into  these
things."  The  most  cautious  philosopher  has  no  right  abso-
lutely to  reject  facts  thus  attested,  because  he  cannot  see
their  explanation;  and,  above  all,  he  has  no  right  to  brand
the  witnesses  with  the  charge  of  deceit  or  imposture,  without
full  and  careful  enquiry.  If  he  will  not,  or  cannot,  investi-
gate, let  him,  in  decency,  be  silent.  I  do  not  invent;  I
speak  of  what  happens  every  day;  and  I  say,  that  those
men  of  science  who,  declining  to  investigate,  have  neverthe-
less fulminated  denial  and  accusations  of  falsehood  against
those  who  have  investigated,  have  not  acted  on  the  golden
rule,  "  Do  unto  others  as  ye  would  that  they  should  do  unto
you,"  and  their  conduct  is  as  illogical  and  irrational  as  it  is
unjust  and  impolitic.

But  while  I  protest  against  this  conduct,  on  the  part  of
men  of  science,  who  ought  to  know  better,  I  make  every
allowance  for  those  not  trained  to  scientific  pursuits,  many
of  whom,  unwittingly  confounding  belief  and  understand-
ing, really  have  a  difficulty  in  admitting  any  thing  for  which
a  plausible  explanation  cannot  be  found.  I  have  more  than
once  pointed  out,  that  if  we  were  to  reject  all  that  we  can-
not explain,  little  indeed,  if  anything,  would  be  left ;  and
that  our  explanations  are,  at  best,  but  attempts  to  classify
phenomena  under  natural  laws,  of  which  we  know  no  more,
than  that  they  exist  or  appear  to  us  to  do  so.  Yet  such
explanations  are  of  great  use  in  facilitating  the  apprehen-
sion of  scientific  truths,  and  therefore  I  shall  now  endeavor
to  give  such  an  imperfect  explanation  of  clairvoyance  as
occurs  to  me,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  as  being
admissible.  It  is  only  an  attempt,  however,  and  is  not  to
be  regarded  as  truth,  but  only  as  an  allowable  hypothesis.
It  is  again  to  odyle  that  I  refer,  as  the  cause  or  rather
medium  of  the  manifestations  of  this  kind  of  vision.

First,  let  me  remind  you,  that  the  first  observation  of
many  lucid  persons  is,  that  they  see,  with  closed  eyes,  the
operator's  hand,  as  well  as  his  person,  and  other  objects,
and  that  all  are  luminous;  indeed  they  are  often  described
as  surrounded  by  a  luminous  vapor  or  atmosphere,  which,


232  ODYLIC  EMANATIONS

as  I  have  already  mentioned,  embraces  the  subject,  and
mixes  with  his  own  atmosphere.  Now  I  think  this  is  clearly
an  odylic  phenomenon.  The  objects  seen  are  seen  in  odylic
light,  to  which  lucid  persons  are  invariably  highly  sensitive.

Secondly ;  the  eyes  are  not  used,  but  the  objects,  if  not
clearly  seen,  are  placed  on  the  head  or  forehead,  commonly
on  the  anterior  coronal  surface.  I  have  seen  a  clairvoyante,
who,  in  trying  to  write,  looks  at  the  paper  with  the  top  of
her  head  close  to  it,  her  eyes  closed  and  useless  from  their
position.  I  have  a  specimen  of  writing  thus  executed  by
her.  She  is  the  same,  who,  when  she  wishes  to  place  an
object,  such  as  a  letter  or  lock  of  hair,  "  right  before  her
eyes,"  places  it  in  contact  with  the  anterior  coronal  region
of  her  head.  If  odyle  or  odylic  light  be  here  the  agent,
the  cranium  is  no  barrier  to  its  passage  to  the  brain,  for
odyle  traverses  all  solid  bodies  that  have  been  tried.

Thirdly;  when  distant  objects  are  seen,  the  clairvoyant,
if  asked  how  he  sees  them,  often  speaks  of  a  luminous  cloud
or  fog,  extending  from  them  towards  him,  and  joining  a
similar  cloud  from  himself;  in  this  combined  cloud  he  then
sees  the  object,  at  first  dim  and  grey,  afterwards  plain  and
in  its  natural  colors.  This  description  tallies  well  with  our
hypothesis  of  the  universal  diffusion  of  odyle  as  the  medium
for  lucid  perception.

All  this  may  be  learned  from  the  accounts  given  of  their
own  sensations,  given  by  intelligent  lucid  subjects,  and  it
corresponds  closely  to  the  statement,  on  many  points,  of  the
sensitives  of  Reichenbach,  who  were  in  the  waking  condition.

15.  Now,  if  we  would  proceed  a  little  further,  and  en-
deavor to  discover  how  lucid  perception  is  obtained,  I  must
again  remind  you  of  an  opinion,  which  is  not  new,  that  every
influence  emitted  by  any  body  acts,  so  to  speak,  on  all  other
bodies.  The  heat,  light,  electricity,  and  sound,  emitted  by
any  bodies,  fall  upon  all  other  bodies,  and  consequently  on
our  organs  of  sense,  but  so  weakened  as  to  be  utterly  over-
looked among  the  stronger  impressions  caused  by  nearer
objects  of  sense.

16.  Now,  let  us  suppose  that  the  odylic  emanations,  which
appear  certainly  to  be  emitted  by  all  bodies,  fall  on  our
inner  sense,  they  also  are  entirely  overlooked,  in  persons  of
ordinary  sensitiveness,  because  they  are  very  feeble,  when
compared  with  those of  sight, hearing, smell,  taste,  and


REACH  THE  SENSOKIUM.  233

touch.  The  sensitive,  however,  perceive  them,  when  their
attention  is  directed  to  them,  and  under  favorable  circum-
stances; and  the  lucid  are  always  very  highly  sensitive.

17.  Next,  let  us  see  what  happens  in  the  magnetic  sleep.
In  that  state,  the  two  most  marked  characters  are,  the  clos-
ing of  some  one  or  more  of  the  external  senses,  especially
of  sight,  and  of  hearing,  (for  all  sounds  save  the  operator's
voice,)  the  two  which  are  constantly  receiving  impressions
from  without.  The  consequence  is,  that  the  inner  sense,  no
longer  distracted  by  the  coarse  impressions  of  these  senses,
becomes  alive  to  the  finer  odylic  emanations,  (which  do  not
require  the  usual  modes  of  access,  as  we  have  seen,)  and
may  even  perceive  the  faint  pulses  or  reverberations  of  the
distant  sights,  sounds,  &c,  alluded  to  in  the  last  paragraph
but  one,  the  odylic  atmosphere  aiding  perhaps  to  convey
them  by  their  new  route.  If  the  subject  be  highly  sensitive,
and  the  external  senses  closed,  he  is  in  the  very  best  con-
dition for  lucid  perception ;  but  the  impressions  he  notices
are  not  new ;  they  were  formerly  overlooked  because  of  their
faintness ;  they  are  now  attended  to  because  of  their  inten-
sity; for  they  are  the  strongest  of  all  that  now  reach  the
sensorium.

18.  One  powerful  argument  in  favor  of  this  view  is  de-
rived from  the  fact,  that  the  lucid  state  occurs  spontaneously,
and  is  then  always  preceded  by  abstraction,  concentration
of  thought,  reverie,  sleep,  or  somnambulism,  all  of  which
states  render  us  more  or  less  dead  to  the  impressions  of  the
external  senses,  and,  by  consequence,  alive  to  odylic  im-
pressions.

19.  I  may  here  allude  to  the  state  of  conscious  lucidity,
which,  as  I  have  mentioned,  some  individuals  can  produce
in  themselves;  and  this  is  always  done  by  concentration  or
abstraction;  and  which  Major  Buckley  "has  been  so  success-
ful in  producing  in  others.  I  presume  some  part  of  his
process  implies  concentration  of  thought;  but  it  is  truly
remarkable,  that  the  chief  part  of  it,  after  lucidity  has  ap-
peared, consists  in  his  making  passes  over  his  own  face,
and  over  or  towards  the  object  to  be  deciphered.  Both
manipulations  are  said  by  the  clairvoyantes,  to  shed  a  flood
of  blue  light  (negative  odylic  light)  over  the  object.  Too
many  passes  render  the  blue  too  deep,  and  reverse  passes
clear  it  up  again.

20*


234  ODYLIC  TRACES  FOLLOWED  UP

20.  Clairvoyants  who  see  the  intimate  structure  of  their
own  bodies,  or  those  of  others,  often  describe  the  frame  as
bathed  in  beautiful  light,  and  entirely  transparent  to  them.
This  accords,  in  a  remarkable  manner,  with  the  observa-
tion of  Eeichenbach's  sensitives,  to  whom  a  thick  bar  of
iron,  shining  in  odylic  glow,  appeared  transparent  like  glass.

21.  When  a  clairvoyant  takes  into  his  hand  a  lock  of
hair  or  a  letter,  it  would  appear,  that  the  odylic  emanations
adhering  to  these  bodies,  according  to  the  account  given  by
lucid  subjects,  enable  them  to  trace  and  discover  the  person
to  whom  they  belong.  Can  it  be  that  the  hair  and  the
writing  are  never  totally  disconnected  from  him,  and  con-
tinue in  odylic  communication  with  him  ?  Certain  it  is,  not
only  that  he  is  thus  discovered,  but  that  much  confusion
and  difficulty  occur  when  the  objects  have  been  handled  by
various  persons.  The  clairvoyant  sometimes  sees  the  last
person  who  touched  them,  but  recognises,  by  an  instinctive
feeling,  at  least  in  many  cases,  that  that  is  not  the  right
person.  He  often  requests  the  operator,  by  certain  mani-
pulations, to  banish  the  intruding  images,  and  never  hesi-
tates about  the  right  one  when  found.

22.  I  have  been  informed  by  a  gentleman,  who  is  able  to
bring  himself  into  the  conscious  lucid  state,  and  in  that
state  to  see  persons  quite  unknown  to  him,  at  a  distance,
that  he  can  only  compare  the  process  by  which  he  finds  the
person  asked  for,  to  that  by  which  a  dog,  liberated  from
confinement,  traces  his  master.  He  first  finds  the  (odylic)
trace  in  the  enquirer's  mind,  then  follows  it  back  to  the
point  where  the  person  asked  for  last  parted  with  the  en-
quirer. From  this  point  he  pursues  only  the  trace  of  the
former,  and  soon  finds  him.  I  regard  this  observation,  on
which  I  have  every  reason  to  place  entire  reliance,  as  ex-
tremely interesting  and  important,  in  reference  to  the  theo-
retical enquiry.  And  when  similar  observations  shall  have
been  multiplied,  we  may  hope  to  advance  much  further.

23.  When  a  clairvoyant  sees  past  events,  we  may  suppose
that  he  follows  their  {odylic)  traces  upward,  instead  of
downward,  from  a  given  point.  Here  our  theory  agrees
with  that  old  one,  which  maintains  that  every  event  leaves
an  indelible  trace,  which  continues  to  exist  as  long  as  the
world  to  which  the event  belongs. In  point of  fact,  in


J5Y  LU(jri)  SUBJECTS.  ZoO

magnetic  experiments  with  hair  and  with  writing,  past
events  are  described  every  day  as  vividly  as  present  ones,
whatever  may  ultimately  prove  to  be  the  medium  of  com-
munication; and  this,  too,  where  the  action  of  sympathy
with  the  operator  or  enquirer  is  excluded.

24.  We  may  apply  the  same  principles  to  the  explanation
of  witchcraft,  magic,  and  sorcery,  as  practised  in  various
countries  from  the  earliest  periods.  I  have  already  alluded
to  this  when  considering  the  application  of  Animal  Magnet-
ism, and  I  have  there  given  my  reasons  for  not  entering
fully  into  the  interesting  historical  questions  connected  with
it,  which  are  in  far  better  hands,  in  those  of  the  author  of
Isis  Revelata.

It  is  evident  that  the  priests  of  India,  Egypt,  and  Greece,
were  well  acquainted  with  Animal  Magnetism,  and  that  they
had  probably  various  methods  of  producing  artificial  clair-
voyance. The  Egyptians,  as  is  proved  by  paintings,  used
processes  like  our  modern  ones;  and  it  is  well  known  that
soft  music,  a  dim  light,  and  fumigations,  were  used  by  ma-
gicians in  all  countries.  Heathen  tradition  and  mythology
contain  many  traces  of  Animal  Magnetism.  Thus  the
transformations  of  the  gods  into  men  and  animals  are
founded  on  the  power  possessed  by  the  magnetiser  over  the
mind  of  his.  subject,  even  in  the  conscious  state.  I  have
seen  this  power,  in  regard  to  the  perceptions  of  the  patient,
who  was  all  the  time  quite  conscious,  so  complete  that  he
was  made  to  believe  the  operator  to  be  any  other  man,  or
any  animal,  or  any  inanimate  object;  and  also  to  believe
the  same  of  any  third  person.

Now,  our  present  knowledge  of  these  matters  is  quite  in
its  infancy,  and  there  would  be  nothing  marvellous  or  incre-
dible in  the  news  that  some  one  had  discovered,  or  redis-
covered, the  means  of  bringing  any  number  of  persons,  at
pleasure,  into  the  impressible  state  in  which  suggestion  acts
so  powerfully,  and  of  acting  on  all  at  one  time.  By  such
means,  jailors  might  be  eluded,  and  he  who  had  the  secret
might  escape  from  a  room  full  of  people  eager  to  catch  him,
by  simply  deceiving  or  deranging  their  perceptions  by  such
subjective  metamorphoses,  which  they  could  not  but  firmly
believe  in.  The  ring  of  tradition,  which  conferred  invisi-
bility, is  easily  matched  now-a-days;  for  nothing  is  so  easy
as  for  the  magnetiser  to  render  himself,  and  any  other  per-


236  SUGGESTION  EXPLAINS  MUCH

son  or  object,  invisible  to  those  under  bis  control.  The
power  of  acquiring,  silently,  this  control  over  several  at
once  is,  as  I  have  said,  now  a  desideratum ;  but  that  deside-
ratum may  soon  be  discovered,  if  sought  for.  I  saw,  two
days  ago,  a  gentleman  made,  by  Dr.  Darling,  without  any
preparation  whatever,  but  just  as  he  entered  the  room,  to
believe  a  watch  to  be  a  turnip,  a  friend  to  be  a  lamp-post,
and  a  huge  balloon  to  ascend  majestically  from  the  floor,
&c.  From  this,  it  is  hardly  a  step  to  seeing  the  witch  as-
cend on  her  broomstick,  or  the  devil  flying  through  the  air
to  the  Brocken  on  the  back  of  a  goat.

"We  can  readily  understand  how  any  one,  possessed  of  this
knowledge  in  an  age  of  ignorance,  might  acquire  the  repu-
tation of  being  a  bought  slave  to  Satan,  from  whom,  at  the
cost  of  his  soul,  he  had  obtained  his  powers.  Nay,  we  can
even  imagine  the  story  of  the  Devil  and  Dr.  Faustus  to  be
merely  an  allegorical  warning  against  the  risk,  to  him  who
too  curiously  pries  into  the  mysteries  of  nature,  of  losing
his  hold  on  religion  and  his  hopes  of  a  future  existence — an
opinion  not  yet  extinct.

25.  Possession,  which  was  universally  believed  in,  was
obviously  founded  on  the  occurrence,  spontaneously,  per-
haps as  a  symptom  of  nervous  disease,  of  a  high  degree  of
magnetic  susceptibility.  The  patient  saw  and  felt  what  no
one  else  did.  He  believed  himself,  as  others  believed  him,
to  be  under  the  influence  of  an  evil  demon.  If  subject  to
extasis,  he  saw  in  his  vision  the  spirit  that  possessed  him.

26.  Clairvoyance  was  doubtless  used,  or  abused,  to  inspire
confidence  in  the  sorcerer.  When  he  could  truly  describe
absent  and  unknown  persons,  unknown  places,  the  events
there  occurring,  nay,  the  very  thoughts  of  the  enquirer's
mind,  and  the  desires  of  his  heart,  he  might  easily  pass  for
a  prophet,  even  without  prevision.  An  adroit  use  of  the
present,  known  perhaps  by  clairvoyance  to  him  alone,  might
convince  the  world  of  his  power  to  read  the  future.

The  magic  of  the  modern  Egyptians,  as  Miss  Martineau
has  concluded,  depends  on  clairvoyance.  The  boys  who  see
are  chosen,  because  the  young  are  most  susceptible.  An
operation  is  performed,  including  fumigations,  which,  when
tried  on  Miss  Martineau,  produced  to  a  certain  degree  the
well-known  sensation  of  being  magnetised.  The  boys  are
then  told  to  gaze  at  a  surface  of  ink  on  the  palm  of  the


OF  MAGIC  OR  WITCHCRAFT.  237

hand.  Now,  we  know  that  gazing  thus,  without  the  ink,  as
in  Dr.  Darling's  method,  produces  a  magnetic  state,  and
even  the  sleep ;  while  Major  Buckley  produces  clairvoyance,
and  that  too  in  the  conscious  state,  by  a  process  as  easy.
Probably,  some  passes  are  also  made,  and  the  boys,  becom-
ing lucid,  see  and  describe,  often  by  thought-reading,  the
persons  asked  for.  That  they  sometimes  fail  and  blunder
is  what  happens  in  all  such  experiments,  if  genuine,  both
because  the  subjects  are  of  his  unequal  power,  and  because
even  a  good  subject  varies  in  power.  But  it  is  not  possi-
ble to  doubt  that  they  often  succeed,  although,  no  doubt,
there  are  sham  magicians  and  spurious  subjects  occasionally.
The  ink  serves  chiefly  as  a  mirror,  but  may  also  act  in
virtue  of  its  odylic  influence  in  aiding  the  induction  o*f  the
magnetic  state.

27.  The  magic  crystal  belongs  to  the  same  category.
The  high  odylic  virtue  of  rock  crystal  seems  to  have  been
known  to  the  adepts  of  the  middle  ages ;  and  crystals  were
cut  into  a  round  or  oval  shape,  that  they  might  act  as
mirrors.  Several  of  such  crystals,  said  to  be  magic  ones,
exist  in  this  country.  It  is  now  pretty  generally  known
that  one  of  these,  said,  on  what  authority  I  do  not  know,
to  have  belonged  to  the  magicians  Dee  and  Kelly,  who  cer-
tainly had  one,  came  into  the  possession  of  a  noble  lady,
distinguished  in  the  literary  world,  who  has  died  since  that
time.  She  was  told  it  was  a  magic  crystal,  but  could  not
discover  any  of  its  powers.  At  the  sale  of  her  effects,  it
was  purchased  by  a  gentleman  who  knew  its  history.  One
day,  on  entering  the  room,  he  found  a  group  of  children
round  it,  who  declared  that  the  crystal  was  alive ;  and  it
appeared  that  they  saw  in  it  the  images  of  absent  persons,
it  is  said,  even  of  such  as  they  had  never  seen,  and  of  some
that  were  dead.  I  cannot  vouch  for  the  details  of  this  story,
however,  and  I  shall  only  say,  that  I  am  not  prepared  to  re-
ject the  statements  made  concerning  the  crystal,  although
they  may  have  been  distorted  and  exaggerated.

I  conceive,  that  when  the  children  gazed  at  it,  its  odylic
influence,  added  to  the  effect  of  gazing,  may  have  thrown
them  into  a  conscious  magnetic  or  lucid  state ;  and  that  these
visions  appeared  in  the  crystal  because  they  were  looking
into  it.  The  subject  requires  to  be  rigorously  investigated,
and  in  the  meantime  we  must  suspend  our  judgment.


238  THE  MAGIC  CRYSTAL.

I  have  been  informed  of  two  other  magic  crystals,  both  of
which  are  said,  in  the  same  way,  to  act  on  children.  A  fourth
is  now  in  my  possession,  and  I  hope  to  obtain  its  history.  I
am  trying  its  effects  on  children,  and  will  give  the  results  in
Part  II.  But  I  have  tried  it  on  a  young  gentleman  in  the
magnetic  lucid  sleep,  who,  without  knowing  what  it  was,  as
I  put  it  into  his  left  hand  after  he  was  asleep,  saw  in  it,  the
first  time,  a  light,  which  was  so  bright  as  to  be  painful,  and
was  accompanied  by  a  very  strong  odylic  sensation  up  his
arm,  so  that  he  disliked  it.  Another  time  he  found  the  light
not  so  painful  (I  rather  think  the  crystal  was  in  his  right
hand),  and  expressed  great  delight  at  its  beauty.  With  shut
eyes,  he  described  it  as  full  of  bright  bands,  confusedly  cross-
ing each  other,  of  the  most  splendid  rainbow  colors.  On
further  enquiry,  or  rather,  on  leaving  him  to  himself,  he
began  to  speak  of  lucid  visions,  which,  although  caused  by
the  crystal,  and  quite  distinct  from  his  usual  ones,  he  did
not  see  in  the  crystal,  but  felt  as  if  transported  to  the  places
he  described.  He  began,  and  without  my  asking  him  any
questions  whatever,  to  speak  of  a  very  remarkable  man,
whom  he  saw,  and  whom  he  connected,  in  some  way,  with
the  crystal.  I  shall  give  in  Part  II.  some  curious  details
about  this  man,  whom  my  clairvoyant  repeatedly  visited,  till,
in  consequence  of  his  illness,  I  could  make  no  further  expe-
riments with  him.  I  found  the  same  crystal  to  be  strongly
felt  by  other  magnetised  persons,  who  also  saw  light  from  it,
with  their  eyes  shut.

It  has  lately  been  said,  by  various  observers,  that  suscep-
tible persons,  looking  into  a  glass  of  magnetised  water,  see
clairvoyant  visions.  While  I  write  this,  I  have  been  in-
formed of  some  experiments  of  a  very  satisfactory  nature
with  the  crystal  above  referred  to  as  having  been  for  a  few
days  in  my  possession.  These  I  shall  give  in  Part  II.,  along
with  any  other  facts  that  I  can  obtain  in  reference  to  the
action  of  mirrors,  crystals,  or  magnetised  water.

28.  I  have  been  informed  on  good  authority,  that  round
or  oval  masses  of  glass  are  made  in  England,  and  sold  at  a
high  price,  to  the  ignorant,  for  the  purposes  of  divination.
The  persons  who  sell  them  perform  a  certain  process,  which
they  say  is  necessary  to  their  virtue.  It  is  probably  a  pro-
cess of  magnetisation,  as  water  is  magnetised.  The  pur-
chaser is  then  directed  to  gaze  into  the  crystal,  concentrating


THE  MAGICLMIRROR.  239

her  thoughts,  for  it  is  generally  females  who  resort  to  them,
on  the  person  she  wishes  to  sec.  She  then  sees  her  lover,
or  any  other  person  in  whom  she  is  interested.  Now,  I  be-
lieve, that  by  the  gazing  and  concentration  of  the  thoughts,
aided  by  the  odylic  influence  of  the  glass,  she  may  be  ren-
dered more  or  less  lucid,  and  thus  sec  or  dream  of  the  absent
person.  So  that  the  dealers  in  these  crystals  are  not  mere
impostors,  but,  as  I  suppose,  trade  on  a  natural  truth,  im-
perfectly known  to  themselves.

29.  The  magic  mirror  is  to  be  explained  on  the  same
principle  as  the  magic  crystal.  It  was  a  contrivance,  pro-
bably a  very  effectual  one  and  depending  on  portions  of  know-
ledge now  lost  or  dormant,  for  causing  the  conscious  lucid
state.  It  would  appear  that  the  researches  of  M.  Dupotet
have  led  him  to  the  rediscovery,  among  other  portions  of
the  magic  of  the  middle  ages,  of  the  mode  of  manufacture
of  these  mirrors,  which  are  not,  I  understand,  of  glass,
but  of  a  black  substance  with  a  smooth  surface,  on  which
the  visions  are  well  seen.  Now  I  should  anticipate  that  the
mass  of  the  mirror  will  prove  to  be  formed  of  some  sub-
stance, either  by  nature  highly  odylic,  or  at  least  capable
of  being,  by  some  means,  strongly  charged  with  odyle,  and
of  retaining  the  charge.

The  enquirer,  in  a  darkened  room,  surrounded  by  all
those  objects  which  act  powerfully  on  a  lively  fancy,  in
perfect  silence,  except  for  the  strains  of  a  solemn  music  from
time  to  time,  and  steeped  in  balsamic  and  narcotic  odors,
is  shown  the  mirror,  on  which  he  is  told  to  look  earnestly,
and  he  will  see  the  absent  friend  or  lover,  and  how  they  are
oceupied.  He  does  so,  and  first,  after  a  time,  sees  a  cloud
on  the  mirror,  which  clears  up,  and  exhibits  the  image  on
which  the  thoughts  are  bent.

Now,  every  circumstance  favorable  to  lucidity  is  here
present.  The  enquirer  is  deeply  interested,  the  accessories
are  all  such  as  promote  tranquillity  and  concentration  of
thought,  while  they  deeply  affect  the  imagination,  and  thus
produce,  with  the  aid,  no  doubt,  of  the  fumigations,  and  of
the  odylic  influence  of  the  mirror,  the  impressible  state  open
to  suggestion.  The  magician,  when  he  judges,  perhaps  by
signs  well  known  to  him,  that  this  state  has  been  induced,
directs  attention  to  the  mirror,  and  perhaps  artfully  sug-
gests the  nature  of  the  vision. Or  he  commands  the  visitor,


240  UNIVERSAL  SYMPATHY.

trembling  with  excitement,  and  now  under  his  control  as
to  his  perceptions,  to  see  the  vision.  Or,  finally,  the  luci-
dity produced  may  be  such  as  to  yield  a  true  clairvoyant
vision.  The  appearance  of  the  cloud,  mentioned  in  all  ac-
counts of  the  crystal,  of  the  mirror,  and  of  the  Egyptian
magic,  is  also  a  circumstance  almost  invariably  attendant
on  clairvoyant  vision,  in  ordinary  magnetism.

Such  are  the  notions  which  I  would  form  of  the  different
kinds  of  magic  described.  I  give  them  only  as  suggestions,
and  to  show  that  we  may  at  least  conceive  these  things  to
depend  on  natural  causes,  and  the  magic  of  former  days,  in
this  point,  as  it  has  been  shown  to  be  in  some  others,  to  be
Natural  Magic.

30.  You  will  easily  perceive,  that  the  preceding  attempt
to  give  an  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  Animal  Mag-
netism, and  especially  of  Clairvoyance,  while  it  excludes,  in
regard  to  lucidity,  the  theory  of  sympathy  with  the  operator,
as  applicable  to  all  cases,  (for  some  facts  and  to  some  cases  it
undoubtedly  does  apply,)  yet  admits  and  requires  another
kind  of  Universal  Sympathy,  existing  at  all  times,  at  all
distances,  and  among  all  things,  the  conducting  medium  and
essential  condition  of  which  is  Odyle.  I  have  the  less  hesi-
tation in  offering  my  views,  as  I  regard  the  existence  of
that  influence,  whatever  name  be  given  to  it,  as  established
by  the  researches  of  Reichenbach,  beyond  all  doubt.

I  have  endeavored  to  show  a  remarkable  agreement  on
many  points,  between  the  statements  of  lucid  somnambulists
and  those  of  Reichenbach's  sensitives,  who  are  in  the  ordi-
nary waking  state.  This  agreement  is,  I  think,  sufficient
to  justify  the  attempts  I  have  made  to  devise  what  may,  by
courtesy,  be  called  an  explanation  of  these  facts.

But  I  am  sure  you  will  do  me  the  justice  to  believe,  that
I  know  the  rules  of  scientific  research  too  well,  to  attach
any  value  to  these  theoretical  considerations.  If  they  shall
be  found  justified,  as  suggestions  merely,  by  the  present  state
of  our  knowledge,  and  if  they  shall,  in  any  degree,  contri-
bute to  enable  any  enquirer  better  to  understand  and  appre-
ciate the  facts,  the  true  explanation  of  which  will  not,  I
fear,  soon  be  attained,  they  will  have  served  the  purpose
for  which  they  were  written.  My  own  conviction  is,  that
nothing  but  an  infinitely  more  extended  investigation  of  the
phenomena  of  the  magnetic  sleep than  has ever  yet  been


LUCID  P84jyiSI0N.  241

made,  can  enable  us  to  make  any  approach  to  a  true  theory
of  these  phenomena ;  and  if  I  have  here  ventured,  for  a
moment,  out  of  the  region  of  fact,  into  that  of  hypothesis,
it  has  been  solely  from  the  desire  to  convince  others,  that
the  pursuit  is  not  a  hopeless  one ;  and  to  stimulate  as  many
well-qualified  observers  as  possible,  to  add  to  the  score  of
well-observed  facts,  waiting  patiently,  till,  out  of  the  fulness
of  experience,  the  true  theory  shall  be  developed,  as  was
Newton's  theory  of  Gravitation  200  years  ago,  and  as  have
been,  in  our  own  day,  the  undulation  theory  of  light,  and
the  atomic  theory  of  chemistry.

31.  You  will  observe,  that  I  have  not  attempted  to  ex-
plain lucid  prevision.  It  would  be  mere  fancy  to  say,  that
future  events,  as  I  have  already  hinted  in  the  form  of  a
query,  "cast  their  shadows  before,"  in  the  same  way  as
past  events  leave  their  traces  behind  them.  Can  we  imagine
that  which  has  not  yet  existed  to  cast  a  shadow,  or  any
thing  else,  before  it?  It  is  true  that  we  may  again  resort
to  a  very  old  opinion,  namely,  that  which  holds,  that  present
events  and  existences  contain  within  them,  to  be  developed
in  necessary  sequence,  the  germs  of  all  that  is  future,  and
that  the  gifted  eye  can  see,  in  a  succession  of  pictures,  all
the  steps  or  some  of  the  steps  of  the  process,  as  regards
the  persons  or  objects  in  whom  the  seer  is  interested.  We
come  here  on  ground,  which  quakes  and  gives  way  beneath
our  feet ;  and  this  is  the  case  also,  in  any  attempt  to  explain
the  phenomena  of  extasis,  or  what  may  be  called  the  spiritual
chapter  of  the  subject.  While  I  freely  admit  my  inability,
in  either  case,  to  throw  any  light  on  the  matter,  I  hold  fast
to  the  facts,  which  I  regard  as  too  well  attested  to  be
sneered  down,  and  too  interesting  to  be  longer  neglected.
I  cannot  waver  in  the  conviction,  that  patient  and  perse-
vering research,  carried  on  in  the  sincere  love  of  truth,
will,  in  the  end,  enable  us  better  to  understand  even  these
obscure  phenomena.


21


242  CONCLUDE  KEMAKKS.


LETTER  XIV.


I  have  now  completed  the  task  which  I  originally  pro-
posed to  myself,  when  you  requested  to  know  my  experience
and  my  views  in  regard  to  Animal  Magnetism.  I  have
endeavored,  all  along,  to  treat  the  matter  as  I  conceive  all
obscure  subjects  of  research  ought  to  be  treated  ;  that  is,  I
have  dwelt  on  and  described  the  facts  to  be  studied,  and
urged,  on  all  men,  the  duty  of  enquiring  into  them  before
pronouncing  an  opinion.  I  have  only  attempted  a  theory
or  explanation,  for  the  reasons  already  given,  and  because
I  find  that  almost  all  persons,  even  those  who  admit  the
facts,  when  I  converse  with  them  on  the  subject,  unite  in
declaring,  that  a  theory  of  some  kind,  even  if  it  be  only  a
temporary  scaffolding,  destined  to  be  swept  away  before  the
completion  of  the  building,  is  necessary  to  enable  them  to
reach  and  grasp  the  facts.

It  would  be  ridiculous  to  deny,  that  I  have  written  these
Letters  with  a  view  to  publication.  In  fact,  I  have  often
been  urged  to  publish  on  the  subject,  but  many  causes  have
hitherto  prevented  me  from  doing  so,  and  but  for  your
request,  might  still  have  continued  to  prevent  me.

It  has  happened,  opportunely,  that  about  the  time  when
these  Letters  were  projected,  the  subject  of  Animal  Mag-
netism occupied  the  attention  of  many  of  my  friends,  espe-
cially since  the  beginning  of  the  winter  1849-1850 ;  and
more  recently,  the  visits  of  Mr.  Lewis,  and  of  Dr.  Darling
to  Edinburgh,  have,  caused  a  much  larger  number  of  persons
to  feel  an  interest  in  the  matter.

Under  these  circumstances,  as  I  have  for  many  years
attended  to  the  subject,  I  have  had  opportunities  of  discussing
it  with  most  of  those  who,  in  Edinburgh,  have  become  in-
terested in  it,  and  I  have  also  corresponded  with  many  in  all
parts  of  the  country.

The  result  has  been  a  conviction,  that  from  want  of  per-
sonal familiarity  with  the  subject,  and  perhaps  from  the
want  of  any  work,  in  the  English  language,  in  which  all
the  branches  of  the  subject  are  briefly  but  systematically
treated, a  great amount  of  misconception  prevails,  even


MEN  OF  SCIENCE.  243

among  such  as  have  seen  enough  to  become  satisfied  of  the
truth  of  the  facts  ;  and  that,  among  those  who  reject,  or
but  lately  rejected  them,  a  still  greater  amount  of  miscon-
ception, and,  consequently,  a  great  deal  of  prejudice,  are  to

be  found.

Acting  on  this  conviction,  I  have  ventured  to  hope,  that
as  having,  for  so  long  a  time,  studied  the  subject,  and  also,
as  having  some  practical  knowledge  of  it,  I  might  be  able
to  produce  a  work,  which  would  teach  the  enquirer  what
has  been  observed,  what  to  look  for,  and  how  to  look  for  it.
The  recent  publication  of  the  researches  of  Reichenbach,
and  their  very  favorable  reception,  have  greatly  encouraged
and  stimulated  me  to  attempt  to  produce  such  a  work ;  but
no  one  can  be  more  sensible  of  its  imperfections  than  I  am.
It  is  not  with  the  view  of  claiming  indulgence  for  these,  but
merely  to  explain  why  I  have  not  undertaken,  and  cannot
hope  to  undertake,  such  an  investigation  of  Animal  Mag-
netism as  that  subject  deserves,  that  I  remind  you  that
other,  and  imperative,  duties  claim  the  greater  part  of  my
time  and  attention.  My  most  earnest  wish,  is  to  see  the
subject  taken  up  by  some  one  fully  qualified  to  do  it  justice;
and  if  these  Letters  should  be  so  fortunate  as  to  stir  up  any
such  observer  to  the  laborious  task,  they  will  amply  repay
me  for  the  pleasant  labor  of  writing  them.

I  rejoice  to  know,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  that
several  distinguished  men  of  science  have  recently  become
convinced  of  the  truth  and  of  the  importance  of  some  of  the
facts  I  have  adduced  above.  There  never  could  be  a  doubt,
that  this  must  sooner  or  later  take  place ;  and  now,  in  re-
ference to  other,  and  still  more  remarkable  facts,  which
several  of  these  gentleman,  not  having  yet  seen  them,  con-
tinue to  reject,  no  one  who  is  familiar  with  the  subject  can
for  a  moment  doubt,  that  these  also,  in  their  turn,  will  be
admitted.  Nay,  I  venture  the  prediction,  that  those  who
have  recently  seen,  and  admitted,  the  beautiful  and  inte-
resting facts  of  suggestion,  as  exhibited  by  Mr.  Lewis  and
Dr.  Darling,  and  who  now  perceive  that  these  facts  are  not
entirely  new,  nor  contrary  to  what  is  known,  will,  ere  long,
if  they  examine  for  themselves,  as  I  have  good  reason  to
believe  they  will,  not  only  meet  with  the  magnetic  sleep,
with  the  irresistible  evidence  of  an  external  influence  capa-
ble of  producing  it,  with  divided  consciousness,  the  power


244  DUE  LIMITS  OF

of  silent  will,  sympathy,  clairvoyance,  and  possibly  also
trance,  extasis,  and  prevision,  but  will  also  then  discover,
that  they  have  hitherto  clothed  these  things  in  an  imaginary
and  repulsive  dress,  from  which,  and  not  from  the  real  facts,
they  have  recoiled;  and  that  not  one  of  these  facts  is  truly
new,  any  more  than  that  of  the  power  of  suggestion ;  al-
though the  knowledge  that  we  may  produce  them  at  plea-
sure, may,  in  both  cases,  be  new  to  them.  This  I  predict
with  confidence,  provided  these  gentlemen  study  for  them-
selves ;  because  I  have  never  known  any  one  who  did  so,
who  did  not  come  to  that  conclusion,  as  far  as  his  experience
went.  We  cannot  insist  on  any  man's  going  further ;  and
I  would  only  venture  to  recommend  to  these,  and  to  all
enquirers,  pending  their  enquiries,  to  refrain  from  expressing
any  decided  opinion,  above  all,  any  opinion  unfavorable  to
the  character  of  preceding  investigators.

It  must  be  admitted,  moreover,  that  while  every  man  is
entitled,  if  he  chooses,  to  withhold  his  assent  to  alleged  facts
of  a  startling  character,  until  he  shall  have  practically  con-
vinced himself  of  their  truth,  there  is  yet  nothing  illogical
or  irrational  in  admitting,  nor  is  it  always  a  proof  of  weak
credulity  to  admit,  even  startling  facts,  if  properly  attested,
without  a  personal  repetition  of  the  necessary  experiments.

For  example,  when  the  power  of  the  vapor  of  ether  to
produce  insensibility  to  pain,  when  inhaled,  was  first  an-
nounced, on  the  testimony  of  gentlemen  certainly  respect-
able, but  altogether  unknown  to  most  of  us,  the  fact  was  at
once  received,  and  is  to  this  day  received,  by  many  persons
who  have  neither  tried  the  experiment,  nor  seen  it  tried  by
others.  In  this,  I  see  no  proof  of  absurd  credulity,  but
only  a  proper  respect  for  the  testimony  of  persons  unknown
to  us,  and  whose  characters  are  therefore  unimpeached,  and
to  be  presumed  respectable.

Yet,  when  a  far  larger  amount  of  even  better  evidence,
inasmuch  as  the  witnesses  were  often  known  to  us,  had  been
produced  in  favor  of  the  same  fact  as  produced  by  magnetic
passes,  the  fact  was  scornfully  rejected.  I  maintain  that
it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  point  out  any  difference  be-
tween the  cases,  as  far  as  concerns  those  who  tried  neither
mode,  which  can  justify  the  opposite  reception  of  the  two
truths,  for  such  they  are.  Nay,  at  this  moment,  many  still
deny  the  magnetic  fact,  and  that,  too,  without  appealing  to
experiment. Even  the admirable  work  of  Dr,  Esdaile  is


SCIENTIFIC  CAUTION.  ^40

often  tossed  aside  with  contempt,  apparently  for  no  other
reason  than  that  he,  in  his  researches,  having  met  with
many  other  magnetic  facts,  has  also  recorded  these.  Did
those  who  now  admit,  that  insensibility  to  pain  maybe  pro-
duced by  suggestion,  admit  or  not  Dr.  Esdaile's  results  be-
fore seeing  Dr.  Darling's  experiments  ?  Nay,  do  they  now
admit  them,  as  proving  that  the  same  thing  may  be  done
by  passes,  &c,  without  suggestion  ?  If  not,  why  not  ?
Surely  the  evidence  of  several  hundred  painless  operations
is  sufficient.  An  hundredfold  less  number,  without  a  trial
of  their  own,  sufficed  to  convince  millions  of  the  power  of
ether.

Now  I  wish  to  point  out,  that  the  treatment  which  such
works  as  the  truly  admirable  one  of  Dr.  Esdaile,  distin-
guished as  it  is  by  care,  caution,  and  good  logic ;  or  as  that
of  Reichenbach,  a  model  of  cautious  scientific  research  into
a  most  obscure  and  difficult  subject ;  as  well  as  many  other
records  of  well-observed  facts  in  magnetism,  have  met  with
from  many  scientific  men,  and  others,  and  indeed  from  some
of  those  to  whom  I  have  referred  as  being  now  satisfied  of
such  magnetic  facts  as  they  have  seen,  goes  far  beyond
what  is  dictated  by  pure  scientific  caution.  Caution  would
have  dealt  with  Morton  and  Jackson  as  with  Esdaile,  had
such  been  her  dictates.  And  he  who  is  not  convinced  by
Dr.  Esdaile's  work,  of  the  truth  of  the  facts  therein  record-
ed, must  labor,  I  say  it  with  all  respect,  under  some  lurking
prejudice,  possibly  unknown  to  himself.  Truly,  such  an  one
would  not  believe,  though  one  rose  from  the  dead.

The  drift  of  all  this  is  to  urge,  on  the  class  of  enquirers
alluded  to,  the  extreme  probability  that  Dr.  Esdaile,  Reich-
enbach, and  others,  whom  they  have  now  discovered  to  be
right  in  certain  points,  in  which  they  agree  with^  other
writers  on  Animal  Magnetism,  will  also  prove  to  be  right  in
those  points  on  which  our  enquirers  have  not  yet  experi-
mented. I  wish  them  all  success  in  their  search  after  truth ;
but  I  wish  also  to  see  them  get  rid  of  that  peculiar  kind
of  incredulity,  if  it  should  yet  lurk  in  their  minds,  which
led  many  men,  to  my  certain  personal  knowledge,  without
a  single  experiment  in  either  case,  to  adopt  at  once  the  con-
clusions of  Jackson  and  Morton,  and  to  reject  those  of  Es-
daile and  Reichenbach,  because,  to  use  their  own  words,  they
were  "impossible."

21*


246  PRACTICAL  HINTS.

I  wish  to  see  every  respectably  alleged  fact  in  Animal
Magnetism  treated  as  was  the  discovery  of  the  power  of
ether ;  that  is,  either  accepted  on  the  faith  of  the  observer,
(an  every-day  occurrence  in  all  other  sciences,)  or  tested  by
a  reference  to  observation  and  experiment.  I  shall  never
cease  to  protest,  in  the  name  of  truth  and  science,  against
the  system,  already  too  long  prevalent,  of  rejecting  such
alleged  facts,  and  branding  the  observers  with  the  charge
of  deceit,  without  a  searching  investigation,  nay,  without  any
investigation  at  all.

I  would  conclude  by  offering  some  practical  considera-
tions to  such  as  may  resolve  to  investigate  Animal  Magnet-
ism for  themselves.

1.  The  first  is,  that,  next  to  an  ardent  and  sincere  desire
to  ascertain  the  truth,  which  is  to  be  presumed  of  every
observer,  he  should  be  armed  with  patience  and  persever-
ance, without  which  nothing  can  be  done  in  these  investi-
gations. He  must  not  allow  himself  to  be  deterred  by  a
few  failures  or  apparent  contradictions,  but  must  remember,
that  it  is  only  through  failures  and  blunders  that  we  can
hope  to  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  phenomena  so  little  under-
stood, and  consequently  so  liable  to  the  action  of  unknown
causes  of  disturbance.  The  conviction  of  the  necessity  of
patience  must  be  a  living  motive,  not  merely  a  belief.  In
my  own  case,  I  had  long  believed  it,  as  strongly  laid  down
by  all  the  writers  on  the  subject ;  but  I  had  failed  to  act  on
it,  and  not  meeting  with  marked  success  in  my  first  inde-
pendent trials,  I  rashly  concluded  that  I  did  not  possess  the
necessary  magnetic  power,  and  contented  myself  with  taking
every  opportunity  of  observing  the  experiments  of  others,
whom  I  held  to  be  more  powerful.  Afterwards,  however,
observing  that  many  of  those  who  were  successful  did  not
exhibit  externally,  any  peculiar  indications  of  unusual  power
or  vigor,  while  they  all  agreed  that,  with  patience,  success
was  almost  certain,  I  took  courage,  tried  again,  and  although
not  at  once  successful,  with  patience  soon  became  so.  In-
deed, I  am  now  inclined  to  believe,  that  any  one,  whether
lady  or  gentleman,  of  average  health  and  vigor,  possesses
enough  of  the  magnetic  or  odylic  influence,  which  indeed  is
generated  in  the  human  body  by  chemical  action,  to  be  able
to  magnetise  any  person  of  average  susceptibility,  provided
patience  and  perseverance  be  practised. Nay,  I  would  go


VARIETY  IN  THE  RESULTS.  247

further,  and  say,  that  I  am  almost  convinced,  that  every
one,  if  the  process  be  continued  and  repeated  for  a  certain
time,  may  be  magnetised,  especially  if  the  operator  be
powerful.  But  it  is  only  the  more  susceptible  who  can  be
magnetised  in  a  few  minutes,  or  at  the  first  trial.

I  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  I  possess  more  than
average  magnetic  power.  Yet,  on  lately  trying,  with  a
view  to  this  question,  three  young  men,  who  had  never  been
magnetised  at  all,  I  wTas  successful  with  all  three.  One  of
them  was  very  slightly  affected  at  the  first  trial,  and  at  the
second  and  third  was  much  more  strongly  acted  on.  The
effect  continued,  after  this,  gradually  to  increase,  but  at  the
end  of  eight  trials,  although  many  marked  effects  had  ap-
peared, sleep,  that  is,  full  magnetic  sleep,  had  not  been
attained.  I  regard  it  as  certain,  that  in  this  case,  a  few
more  operations  will  produce  complete  magnetic  sleep.  In
the  second  case,  some  effect  was  also  produced  in  the  first
trial,  and  on  the  third,  deep  and  sound  sleep  took  place.  In
the  third  subject,  sleep  occurred  in  one  of  the  early  trials,
but  for  some  time  was  not  deep,  but  easily  interrupted  by
speaking  to  him,  and  did  not  become  at  all  deep  till  about
the  ninth  sitting,  after  which  there  was  no  difficulty.

2.  The  second  remark  I  would  make  is,  that  we  are  not
to  consider  it  a  failure,  if  the  sleep  be  not  produced  at  all.
Many  effects,  and  especially  many  of  the  curative  effects,
may  be  fully  brought  out  independently  of  the  sleep,  or  of
divided  consciousness.  It  is  even  possible,  as  we  have  seen,
to  produce  clairvoyance  in  the  ordinary  conscious  state.

3.  The  variety  in  the  minuter  details  of  the  phenomena
is  so  great,  that  no  two  cases  are  exactly  alike.  This  is
just  what  might  be  expected  from  the  fact,  that  no  two
human  beings  are  exactly  alike,  either  in  person  or  in  mind.
If,  then,  in  any  given  case,  we  do  not  obtain  the  same  re-
sults as  were  obtained,  perhaps  in  that  case,  the  seeing  of
which  induced  us  to  take  up  the  subject,  we  are  not  to  ima-
gine, either  that  the  former  case  was  spurious,  or  that  we
have  failed.  Our  duty  is,  to  study  our  own  case,  as  it  is
presented  to  us  by  nature,  and  we  shall  certainly  find,  if  we
do  so,  with  variations  in  many  details,  a  very  great  agree-
ment in  the  leading  and  essential  facts.

4.  Even  in  the  same  case,  the  phenomena  vary  prodi-
giously at  different  times,  more  especially  in  degree. The


248  CONDITIONS  OP  SUCCESS

subject  who,  to-day,  is  highly  lucid  or  sympathetic,  may,
to-morrow,  be  dull  and  irritable,  and  may  fail  in  every  trial.
In  such  cases,  we  should  at  once  desist ;  for  the  patient,  if
urged,  only  becomes  less  lucid,  and,  perhaps,  resorts  to
guessing,  to  satisfy  his  questioner.  If  he  guess  wrong,  this
is  set  down  as  a  proof  that  all  clairvoyance  is  imposture.

5.  Our  experiments  ought  to  be  conducted  with  entire
privacy,  no  one  being  present  but  the  subject,  the  operator,
and  one  or  two  assistants  or  witnesses,  if  experiments  are
intended,  on  which  conclusions  are  to  be  founded.  Some  ex-
perimenters, anxious  to  demonstrate  the  facts,  make  of  every
experiment  a  kind  of  exhibition,  to  which  all  their  friends
are  summoned ;  but  we  should  always  bear  in  mind,  that
every  additional  person  is  possibly  an  additional  cause  of
disturbance  to  a  susceptible  subject.  When  we  have,  in  pri-
vate, satisfied  ourselves  of  any  fact,  we  may  then  try  to
satisfy  others,  but  we  should  take  but  a  few  at  a  time,  and
endeavor  to  diminish  their  influence  on  the  subject  by  keep-
ing them  at  a  certain  distance.

6.  This  precaution  is  more  especially  required,  when  we
wish,  as  many  now  do,  to  repeat  Reichenbach's  experir
ments  on  the  light  from  magnets,  from  crystals,  or  from  the
human  body.  Indeed,  so  many  precautions  are  necessary,
that,  unless  the  experiments  be  directed  by  some  one  who
has  practical  experience,  failure  is  far  more  probable  than
success.

In  order  to  have  the  odylic  light  seen  and  described  to
us,  we  must  strictly  attend  to  the  following  conditions,  and
if  we  neglect  any  of  them,  we  must  not  hope  to  succeed.
1st.  We  must  have  a  truly  sensitive  subject,  one,  for  ex-
ample, who  in  the  darkness  of  night  has  observed  light
from  objects  or  persons.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  subject
be  nervous,  or  hysterical,  or  subject  to  spasmodic  attacks,
although  these  are  things  usually  favorable  to  sensitiveness.
He  should  feel  the  magnet  strongly ;  but  after  all,  we  must
try  him  with  the  light,  before  we  can  pronounce  him  sensi-
tive to  it.  2d;  The  darkness  must  be  absolute.  In  any
ordinary  room,  and  during  the  day,  this  condition  is  not  at-
tainable ;  but  with  care,  it  may  be  secured  at  night.  3d.
The  subject  should  remain  an  hour,  an  hour-and-a-half,  or
even  two  hours,  uninterruptedly,  in  this  total  darkness,  that
the  eye  may  acquire  its  full  sensibility,  and  the  pupil  be


IN  ODYLIC  EXPERIMENTS.  249

enlarged  to  the  utmost,  before  any  trial  be  made.  The  time
varies  in  different  cases.  4th.  Not  a  ray,  nor  even  the
faintest  glimmer,  of  day-light  or  candle-light,  must  be  ad-
mitted after  the  subject  enters  the  dark  chamber.  All  ar-
rangements must  be  previously  made,  and  no  one  must  come
in,  or  go  out,  during  the  whole  time.  For  the  light  ad-
mitted  by  opening  the  door,  &c,  is  sufficient,  even  if  feeble,
to  dazzle  the  subject's  vision,  so  as  to  render  him  blind  to
odylic  light  for.  half-an-hour  or  longer.  5th.  The  magnet
should  be  powerful.  A  permanent  steel  horse-shoe,  carry-
ing 60  or  80  lbs.  will  suffice  for  most  experiments,  and  it
is  easy  to  have  an  electro-magnet  much  more  powerful.
Highly  sensitive  persons  will  see,  in  a  totally  dark  room,
the  light  even  from  a  pocket  horse-shoe  magnet,  if  of  great
intensity,  but  it  is  of  course  a  light  of  small  size.  6th.
No  one  should  hold  the  magnet  in  his  hand,  or  on  his  knee,
or  touch  it  at  all,  while  the  subject  looks  at  it.  When  the
light  is  seen,  the  close  approach  of  the  operator,  or  of  any
one  else,  to  the  magnet  extinguishes  it,  because  his  odylic
influence  neutralizes  that  of  the  magnet,  and  tends  to  cause
a  reversal  of  its  odylic  polarity.  A  straight  bar-magnet,
indeed,  if  held  in  the  right  hand  by  its  northward  or  nega-
tive end,  or  vice  versd,  will  exhibit  a  larger  flame  than  be-
fore at  the  farther  end,  the  two  influences  being  now  com-
bined; but  in  the  case  of  horse- shoe  magnets,  they  should
be  set  upright  on  a  table,  and  the  operator,  after  disarming
them,  should  retire  to  a  distance.  7th.  No  one  should  sit
or  stand  near  or  close  to  the  subject ;  for  if  they  do,  their
influence  destroys  the  sensitiveness  more  or  less.  When
they  retire,  the  subject  often  sees  the  light  for  the  first
time.  8th.  The  subject,  to  see  distinctly  the  odylic  flame,
must  be  at  a  certain  distance  from  the  magnet;  for,  at  a
greater  or  less  distance,  the  light  may  be  invisible,  or  only
seen  as  a  faint  general  luminousness.  Now  this  distance  is
different  in  every  subject.  Some  can  see  at  nearly  40
inches  from  the  magnet,  others  not  till  within  2  or  3  inches
of  it ;  others  again,  at  intermediate  distances,  different  for
each.  Few  see  the  flame  at  a  greater  distance  than  four
feet.  In  each  case,  the  specific  distance  must  be  ascer-
tained, and  ever  after,  strictly  attended  to.  Short-sighted
persons  find  their  vision,  as  regards  odylic  light,  improved
by  the  glasses  they  commonly  use. This condition  of  dis-


250  CAUSES  OF  FAILURE.

tance  is  absolutely  essential,  so  that,  even  if  all  other  con-
ditions be  fulfilled,  the  neglect  of  this  one  will  cause  failure.
9th.  The  subject  should -be  placed,  sitting,  with  the  body
in  the  plane  of  the  magnetic  meridian,  and  the  back  towards
the  north,  the  feet  tending  towards  the  south,  the  head  in
the  opposite  direction,  looking,  however,  to  the  south.

There  is  not  one  of  these  nine  conditions,  the  neglect  of
which  may  not  cause  failure  in  an  ordinary  sensitive  in  the
conscious  state.  With  highly  sensitive  subjects,  some  of
them  exert  only  a  secondary  and  modifying  influence.
Persons  in  the  magnetic  sleep  are,  as  a  general  rule,  so  in-
tensely sensitive  to  odylic  light,  that  they  see  it  in  day-
light.

7.  Magnetic  experiments,  or  those  on  clairvoyance,
should  never  be  tried,  for  the  first  time,  in  the  presence  of
a  crowd  of  eager  spectators,  whose  involuntary  action  on
the  subject  confuses  him,  and  who  are  sure  to  touch  and
speak  to  him,  each  striving  to  clear  up  some  doubt  of  his
own,  and  never  once  reflecting  how  delicate  is  the  suscep-
tibility of  the  subject.  Failure  is  the  almost  unavoidable
result ;  and,  ignorant  of  how  much  of  that  failure  is  to  be
attributed  to  their  own  proceedings,  the  spectators,  who  had
been  rashly  summoned  to  a  trial,  as  if  it  were  an  exhibition
certain  to  succeed,  go  away  under  the  impression  that  the
alleged  facts  are  not  true,  whereas,  in  truth,  the  trial  has
not  been  fairly  made.  When  a  good  case  has  been  found,
and  proves  not  too  susceptible  to  accidental  causes  of  dis-
turbance, the  facts  may  be  exhibited,  even  to  a  considerable
number,  if  kept  at  a  proper  distance,  and  under  strict  dis-
cipline, by  the  operator ;  but,  as  a  general  rule,  two  or
three  spectators  are  as  many  as  can  satisfactorily  see  the
facts  at  one  time.  Such  spectators  should  be  near  enough
to  see  and  to  watch  every  turn  of  the  countenance,  and  to
hear  every  inflection  of  the  voice  in  the  subject,  for  these
things  furnish  by  far  the  most  convincing  evidence  of  his
sincerity,  and  may  often  enable  us  to  judge  whether  he  sees
directly  or  by  sympathy.  At  any  considerable  distance,
this  is  impossible.  To  avoid  the  disturbance  caused  by
a  near  approach,  the  spectator  should  be  placed  by  the
operator  en  rapport  with  the  subject,  who  will  then  become
accustomed  to  the  new  influence,  and  will  no  longer  be


CRUEL  TESTS  UNNECESSARY.  251

confused  by  it. This,  however,  can  only  be  done  to  one  at
a  time.

8.  It  is  sometimes  quite  distressing  to  see  the  measures
pursued  by  some  sceptical  enquirers,  in  cases  where  the  very
idea  of  deceit  is  not  only  absurd,  but  insulting.  They  will
inflict  severe  injuries,  twist  and  pinch  the  arms,  and  suspend
heavy  weights  to  rigid  limbs,  as  if  rigidity  and  insensibility
to  pain  implied  invulnerability.  They  will  cause  the  subject
when  excited,  by  magnetic  attraction,  or  by  suggestion,  to
muscular  effort,  to  contend  against  the  whole  force  of  three
or  four  men,  each  stronger  than  himself;  as  if,  to  prove
muscular  effort,  it.  were  necessary  to  strain  it  beyond  the
subject's  powers.  They  will  feel  his  pulse,  tw?o  at  a  time,
and  then  be  astonished  if  he  faint,  or  fall  into  convulsions,
which,  every  tyro  in  Animal  Magnetism  knows,  are  often
the  results  of  interference  or  cross-magnetism.  All  these
things,  and  a  great  many  more,  among  which  I  may  men-
tion, only  to  protest  against  them,  stuffing  concentrated
ammonia  up  the  nostril,  without  regard  to  its  subsequent
action,  or  applying  corrosive  acids  to  the  hand,  or  thrusting
pins  through  the  skin,  are  the  results,  partly  of  ignorance
of  the  subject,  partly  of  want  of  consideration  in  regard  to
the  mode  of  testing.  It  is  very  easy  to  ascertain  the  pre-
sence of  rigidity  or  of  muscular  effort,  or  the  absence  of
sensibility  to  pain,  without  doing  one  thing  that  can  have  a
painful  or  disagreeable  effect  after  the  patient  is  awakened.
No  good  or  skilful  experimenter  ever  resorts  to  such  cruel-
ties, because  they  are  to  him  quite  unnecessary,  and  prove
no  more  than  can  be  equally  demonstrated  without  them.

9.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say,  that  leading  questions,
and  all  other  forms  of  suggestion,  ought  to  be  carefully
avoided,  except  in  showing  the  power  of  suggestion.  But,
obvious  as  this  rule  is,  many  experiments  are  violated  and
rendered  quite  valueless,  from  neglect  of  it.  The  somnam-
bulist should  be  allowed  or  induced  to  tell  his  own  story,
and  no  questions  should  be  asked,  unless  they  are  indispen-
sable to  understanding  what  he  says,  till  he  has  told  it
fully.

10.  The  observer  should  carefully  abstain  from  doing  or
saying  anything  tending  to  imply  a  belief  that  the  subject
is  dishonest.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  convey  in  words  the
suffering  which  is  often  in  this  way  recklessly,  and  indeed


252  MAGNETISM  A  SERIOUS  THING.

unknowingly,  inflicted  on  persons  whose  sense  of  truth  is  as
pure  as  their  sensibility  to  reproach  is  intense.  Not  only
have  we  no  right  to  inflict  this  suffering,  but  we  shall  find,
if  we  do,  that  it  sadly  mars  all  our  efforts,  and  often  causes
very  simple  and  easy  experiments  to  fail.  Many  subjects
refuse  and  properly,  to  answer  questions  put  in  this  tho-
roughly unscientific  spirit,  while  they  will  readily  and  satis-
factorily answer  the  same  questions,  if  put  by  one  who  has
confidence  in  their  truth.  One  of  the  most  striking  facts  in
Animal  Magnetism,  is  the  ease  with  which  many  subjects
instantly  detect  the  opposite  states  of  mind  referred  to,
even  when  they  are  not  proclaimed  in  any  way;  as  well  as
the  sympathy  and  attraction  they  feel  for  those  who  are
candid,  the  approach  of  whom  is  a  source  of  pleasure  and
of  increased  power ;  and  their  decided  antipathy  to  the  un-
candid,  domineering  sceptic,  whose  mere  approach  dis-
tresses them,  and  diminishes  their  lucidity.

11.  I  would  once  more  repeat,  that  Animal  Magnetism
is  not  a  play-thing,  not  a  toy,  not  the  amusement  for  an
idle  hour,  not  a  means  of  gratifying  a  morbid  craving  for
novelty,  or  for  the  marvellous.  All  such  uses  of  it  I  abjure,
and  protest  against,  as  abuses.  Neither  is  it  a  thing  to  be
exhibited  to  gaping  crowds  for  money ;  to  crowds  who  stare
and  laugh,  and  go  away,  thinking  it  very  strange  or  very
funny.  It  is  a  serious  subject,  well  worthy  of  the  most
earnest  and  devout  attention  we  can  give  to  it.  It  is  painful
to  see  it  abused  to  raise  a  laugh ;  and  so  strongly  do  I  feel
this,  that,  for  my  own  share,  I  object  to  all  exhibitions  of  it,
public  or  private,  and  only  admit  an  exception,  when  the
exhibitor  is  in  earnest,  and  his  object  is  to  convince  those
who  feel  an  equally  sincere  desire  for  the  truth,  of  the  real-
ity of  the  facts  investigated.  All  exhibitions,  in  which
mere  amusement  is  the  objject,  tend  to  degrade  science,  and
to  retard  its  progress.

12.  In  another  sense,  Animal  Magnetism  is  no  play-thing.
I  mean  that  rash  experiments,  by  persons  ignorant  of  the
practical  details  of  the  subject,  may  probably  lead  to  very
unpleasant  results.  I  have  already  discussed  this  matter
fully ;  and  I  would  only  here  repeat,  that  while  such  disa-
greeable consequences  may  arise  from  ignorant  and  rash
meddling,  I  do  not  know  of  any  instance  of  such  results  in
the  hands  of  a  judicious  operator,  well  acquainted  with  the


CAUTIONS  TO  THE  STUDENT.  253

practice  of  Magnetism ;  unless,  indeed,  the  patient  have
been  rashly  interfered  with  by  another.  No  beginner  ought
ever  to  try  such  experiments,  without  the  presence  of  an  ex-
perienced magnetiser ;  but  I  would  have  every  one  know
how  to  magnetise,  as  this  knowledge  may  often  prove  ex-
tremely useful.  Of  course,  this  knowledge  ought  to  be  ac-
quired, not  by  groping  in  the  dark,  but  from  some  expe-
rienced operator,  by  seeing  his  methods,  and  learning  his
rules.


If  the  above  practical  hints  be  attended  to,  every  one  who
makes  the  trial  will  obtain  satisfactory  results.  I  do  not
say  that  all  will  see  the  same  phenomena  manifested  in  the
same  forms,  for  not  only  do  subjects  differ  ad  infinitum,
but  the  operators  also  differ,  so  that  one,  perhaps,  may  never
see,  in  his  own  practice,  clairvoyance  ;  or  another  may  never
meet  with  trance,  or  extasis.  But  few,  if  any,  will  alto-
gether fail,  and  above  all,  most  healthy  persons  will  succeed
in  producing  the  curative  effects,  and  will  often  be  able,  by
means  of  magnetism,  to  assuage  pain  and  to  dissipate  dis-
ease.

There  can,  I  think  be  no  doubt,  that  Animal  Magnetism
will  now  be  studied  like  any  other  science,  and  with  the
same  satisfactory  results.  Let  us  all  do  our  best  to  pro-
mote this  consummation,  so  devoutly  to  be  wished.

Scientific  men  and  learned  bodies  have  neglected  it  long
enough,  to  be  quite  secure  against  the  charge  of  weak  cre-
dulity in  now  directing  their  attention  to  it.  Like  all  new
truths,  it  has  met  with  opposition  here,  and  neglect  there ;
but  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  and  hardly  to  be  regret-
ted. The  tendency  to  oppose  and  reject  new  ideas  is  natural
to  man,  although  it  may  be  pushed  too  far,  and  is  designed,
no  doubt,  to  serve  a  good  end,  probably  to  ensure  the  tho-
rough sifting  of  the  new  ideas,  and  the  rejection,  ultimately,
of  such  as  are  false.

Those  who  cultivate  Animal  Magnetism,  therefore,  if  they
know  any  thing  of  human  nature,  should  be  prepared,  not
only  to  meet  with  opposition  and  prejudice,  but  to  make
allowance  for  these.  There  is  no  occasion  for  them  to  get
angry  about it,  for  anger  never  promotes  the  progress  of

99


254  CONTROVEKSY  TO  BE  AVOIDED.

truth,  but,  on  the  contrary,  by  exciting  additional  prejudice,
greatly  retards  it.

It  is  true  that  human  nature  finds  it  difficult  to  remain
patient  and  cool,  when  not  only  assailed  by  bad  logic,  and
met  by  abuse  instead  of  argument,  but  also  accused  of  fraud
and  falsehood,  though  entirely  innocent  of  such  offences.
But  has  not  this  been  the  fate  of  discoverers  and  innovators,
of  the  advocates  of  new  truths,  in  every  age  ?  Do  we  mend
the  matter  by  returning  abuse  for  abuse,  and  by  retorting
on  those  who  accuse  us  of  deceit,  with  the  charge  of  want
of  candor  ?  For  my  part,  I  think  not.  I  believe  the  op-
ponents of  new  ideas  to  be  sincere,  though  mistaken  ;  and
I  do  not  so  much  object  to  their  caution  and  incredulity  in
reference  to  strange  facts,  as  I  am  amazed  at  their  bound-
less credulity  in  regard  to  fraud,  which,  without  hesitation,
and  without  enquiry,  they  ascribe  to  thousands  of  respecta-
ble men.

But  I  should  regard  any  man's  conviction  of  truth,  as
existing  in  Animal  Magnetism  or  elsewhere,  to  fall  far  short
of  the  deep  earnest  feeling  which  it  ought  to  be,  if  it  did
not  enable  him  to  look  calmly  down,  while  his  science  and
himself  are  passing  through  the  fiery  ordeal  provided  for
all  truth,  on  the  errors  and  prejudices  of  those  who  decide,
as  too  many  do,  without  enquiry.

There  has  been  more  than  enough  of  angry  and  personal
controversy- on  this  subject.  Let  us  try  whether  we  cannot
now  discuss  it  calmly  and  rationally,  as  becomes  men  of
science.  And  let  us  welcome  every  enquirer,  even  were  he
but  yesterday  an  opponent,  who  is  willing  to  aid  in  the
investigation  of  a  subject,  at  once  so  interesting,  so  exten-
sive, and  so  obscure.


PART II.


FACTS  AND  CASES;  WITH  OBSERVATIONS.


PART II.

FACTS  AND  CASES ;  WITH  OBSERVATIONS.


LETTER  XV.


I  now  proceed  to  give  you  some  details  concerning  the
various  phenomena  which  have  been  considered  in  the  pre
ceding  Letters.  These  details  would  have  seriously  inter-
rupted the  course  of  the  general  description,  if  introduced
in  the  midst  of  it ;  and  as  many  of  the  cases  are  more  than
once  referred  to,  it  seemed  best  to  collect  them  separately.
Moreover,  many  of  them  are  derived  from  the  observations
of  others,  and  a  few  have  been  already  published,  although
I  have  referred  to  these  last  only  in  case  of  necessity.

In  general,  however,  the  difficulty  is  not  to  obtain  facts,
but  to  select  from  the  number  that  are  accessible.  I  shall
endeavor  to  lay  before  you  only  as  many  as  may  serve  to  ex-
plain and  illustrate  what  has  been  said ;  but  there  is  hardly
one  fact  in  the  whole  series,  of  which,  did  time  and  space
permit,  many  additional  instances  might  not  easily  be  given.

I  propose  to  arrange  the  facts  and  cases  to  be  adduced,
in  the  following  order.  First :  Those  which  illustrate  the
phenomena  observed  in  the  ordinary  conscious  state ;  that
is,  in  a  state,  differing  from  our  ordinary  waking  state,  in-
asmuch as  it  exhibits  a  high  degree  of  impressibility ;  but
in  which  our  consciousness  is  not  altered,  and  is  continuous
with  our  ordinary  consciousness.  This  section  will  include,
of  course,  the  phenomena  of  suggestion,  whether  produced
by  the  usual  magnetic  process,  or  by  that  of  Dr.  Darling,
so  far  as  these  are  seen  in  the  conscious  state.

Secondly:  The  phenomena  observed  in  the  true  magnetic
sleep,  with  divided  consciousness.  This  will  include  the
production  of  the  sleep ; the  effects  of  suggestion  in the

99*


258  PHENOMENA  OBSERVED

sleep ;  the  phenomena  of  sympathy ;  those  of  direct  clair-
voyance; those  of  trance;  and  those  of  extasis.

Thirdly :  The  foregoing  phenomena,  as  occurring  sponta-
neously. And,

Fourthly :  I  shall  add  a  few  general  remarks  on  the  the-
rapeutic agency  of  Animal  Magnetism.


First,  then,  we  shall  attend  to  the  phenomena  seen  while
the  subject  is  conscious,  that  is,  while  he  retains  his  ordinary
consciousness,  and  is,  therefore,  not  only  sensible  of  all  that
passes,  and  capable  of  conversing  and  reasoning  about  it,
but  able  to  recollect  all  his  sensations,  when  no  longer  in
the  impressible  or  impressed  condition.  I  need  not  here
dwell  on  the  mere  sensations  perceived  in  the  very  first
stage.  These  are  often  slight,  and  always  varied,  so  that
hardly  any  two  subjects  feel  the  same.  The  most  common
sensations  are  heaviness,  drowsiness,  tingling,  numbness,
pricking,  creeping,  and  quasi  electric  or  galvanic  sensations ;
a  warm  or  cold  aura,  or  a  strong  feeling  of  heat  or  cold
without  the  aura.  The  eyes,  especially  when  the  subject  is
made  to  gaze  fixedly  on  a  point,  are  also  affected.  A  dark
veil  often  seems  to  come  before  them,  and  the  object  gazed
at  appears  dark  or  black,  or  becomes  multiplied,  or  vanishes.
Some  of  these  sensations  may  be  observed  in  every  suscepti-
ble case  ;  and  where  they  are  strongly  marked,  we  are  pretty
sure  of  producing  the  sleep  if  we  persevere.  But  if  we  wish
to  study  the  phenomena  of  the  conscious  state,  we  stop  short
of  the  sleep  and  try  the  effect  of  suggestion.  A  case  or  two
will  illustrate  this.

A.  Effects  of  Suggestion  in  the  Conscious  State.

Case  1. — In  a  large  party  at  my  house,  Mr.  Lewis  acted
on  the  company  en  masse,  standing  at  one  end  of  the  room,
while  all  present  were  requested  to  gaze  at  him,  or  at  any
fixed  point  in  the  same  direction,  and  to  keep  themselves  in
as  passive  a  state  as  possible.  Mr.  Lewis  gazed  on  the
company,  beginning  at  one  end  of  the  circle  of  50  per-
sons, and  slowly  carrying  his  gaze  round,  with  the  most
intense  concentration  I  have  ever  seen,  as  expressed  in  his
face,  attitude,  and  gesture. In  much  less  than  five  minutes,


IN  THE  CONSCIOUS  STATE.  259

although  the  necessary  silence  was  but  partially  observed,
several  persons  were  distinctly  affected.  Among  these,  Mr.
D.,  a  student  of  medicine,  very  soon  appeared  to  be  the
most  susceptible.  Mr.  Lewis,  observing  this,  directed  his
attention  more  particularly  to  him,  and  made  a  few  distant
passes,  gradually  approaching  Mr.  D.  The  latter  bent  for-
ward with  fixed  insensible  eyes  and  heaving  respiration,
and  seemed  to  be  attracted  towards  the  operator.  It  soon
appeared,  however,  that  he  was  so  rigid  as  not  to  be  able  to
move  forward,  although  he  evidently  tried  to  do  so.  Mr.
Lewis  then  came  near,  and,  by  a  pass  or  two,  stopped  the
laborious  respirations,  and  removed  the  general  rigidity,
when  the  eyes  became  natural.  Mr.  L>.  was  then  made
to  close  his  eyes,  and  on  being  told  he  could  not  open  them,
he  found  it  impossible  to  do  so.  His  mouth  being  closed,
he  was  then  told  he  could  not  open  it,  nor  speak,  and  this
also  he  found  impossible.  His  right  arm  being  raised,  Mr.
Lewis,  who  had  not  touched  him,  told  him  that  he  could
not  lower  it,  which  proved  to  be  the  case.  It  very  soon
became  hard,  rigid,  and  immovable,  and  was  held  out  hori-
zontally for  a  long  time.  In  fact,  a  pass  or  two,  over  any
limb,  rendered  it  instantly  rigid.  Mr.  Lewis  then  desired
Mr.  D.  to  gaze  at  him  for  a  second  or  two,  he  gazing  in
return;  when  the  eyes  at  once  became  fixed,  the  pupil
dilated,  and  utterly  insensible,  so  that  no  contraction  ensued
when  a  candle  was  passed  close  across  the  eye,  or  held  close
before  it.  The  pulse  being  76,  Mr.  Lewis  pointed  with  one
hand  over  the  heart,  while  a  medical  man  felt  the  pulse.
It  rapidly  rose  to  150,  and  became  so  feeble  as  hardly  to  be
felt,  while  the  patient  became  pale,  and  would  certainly  have
fainted,  had  this  experiment  been  continued  a  minute
longer.  Mr.  Lewis  then  caused  both  the  arms  and  legs  of
the  patient  successively  to  move,  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts
of  the  patient,  according  as  he,  Mr.  L.,  chose  to  direct  them.
They  first  moved  to  a  certain  extent,  and  then  became  rigid,
and  all  this  without  contact.  When  his  hand  was  laid  on
that  of  Mr.  L.,  and  he  was  defied  to  remove  it,  he  found  it
quite  impossible  to  do  so.

Mr.  Lewis,  having  thus  shown  his  control  over  the  mus-
cles, both  voluntary  and  involuntary,  next  showed  his  power
of  controlling  sensation.  A  penknife  being  placed  in  Mr.
D.'s  hand,  he  was  told  that  it  would  soon  become  so  hot


260  EFFECTS  OF  CROSS  INFLUENCES.

that  he  could  not  hold  it.  Within  about  two  minutes  he
began  to  shift  it  from  one  part  of  the  hand  to  another,  and
soon  threw  it  away  as  if  it  had  been  red  hot.  The  knife
was  again  placed  in  his  hand,  and  he  was  told  that  it  would
become  so  heavy  as  to  force  his  hand  down  to  the  floor.  He
very  soon  began  to  make  efforts  to  keep  it  up,  but  in  about
three  or  four  minutes,  in  spite  of  the  most  violent  resistance,
which  caused  him  to  be  bathed  in  perspiration,  and  to  be  out
of  breath,  his  hand  was  forced  down  to  the  floor.

Mr.  Lewis  next  caused  Mr.  D.  to  forget  his  own  name,
and  the  perplexity  of  his  countenance,  while  seeking  for  it
in  vain,  was  very  striking.  In  this,  as  in  all  the  other  ex-
periments, the  effect  was  instantaneously  dissipated  by  a
snap  of  Mr.  L.'s  fingers,  or  by  the  words  "all  right."

This  was  the  first  case  in  which  I  saw  this  peculiar  form
of  experiment  in  the  conscious  state ;  for  Mr.  D.  was  through-
out perfectly  conscious,  and  explained  his  sensations,  except
when,  from  cataleptic  rigidity  of  the  muscles  of  speech,  he
could  not  articulate.  Mr.  Lewis  had  never  seen  him  before,
nor  had  Mr.  D.  ever  seen  any  magnetic  experiments.  In-
deed he  came  to  my  house,  utterly  sceptical  on  the  subject.
I  should  add,  that  when  first  acted  on,  and  when  his  respi-
ration was  so  much  affected,  he  felt  smart  shocks,  like  those
of  a  galvanic  battery,  in  his  arms.  I  had  reason  afterwards
to  think,  that  this  depended  on  his  being  closely  surrounded
by  many  gentlemen  at  that  time,  whose  influence,  crossing
that  of  Mr.  Lewis,  produced  disturbance ;  for  one  evening,
at  the  house  of  Dr.  Simpson,  when  Mr.  Lewis  had  affected
him,  and  had  requested  two  medical  gentlemen,  one  at  each
side,  to  feel  the  pulse,  the  result  was,  an  appearance  of  great
suffering,  which  was  not  fully  removed  for  at  least  a  quarter
of  an  hour.  Mr.  D.  then  told  us,  that  he  had  not  really
suffered  as  much  as  we  supposed  ;  but  that  he  had  felt,  after
the  two  gentlemen  felt  his  pulse,  a  succession  of  severe
shocks,  stronger  than  those  of  Mr.  Kemp's  battery  in  full
action,  which  continued  to  return  at  intervals.  It  was  im-
possible to  doubt  that  the  crossing  of  the  influences  of  three
powerful  men,  acting  on  a  delicate  and  highly  susceptible
frame,  was  the  cause  of  this  singular  disturbance.  When  I
magnetised  Mr.  D.  in  private,  no  unpleasant  sensations
ever  occurred.  Mr.  D.  was,  at  the  time,  in  a  very  delicate
state  of  health,  caused,  as  I  afterwards  discovered,  in  great


CONTROL  OF  8ENSATIONS.  261

part,  by  excessive  study.  He  was,  in  fact,  in  the  first  stage
of  a  severe  illness,  affecting  chiefly  the  chest,  by  which  he
was  soon  after  confined  to  bed  for  some  weeks.  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  his  extreme  susceptibility  was  morbid,  for,
in  the  interval  between  the  above  experiments  and  his  illness,
I  produced  the  magnetic  sleep  with  the  greatest  ease,
whereas,  after  his  recovery,  he  was,  although  still  capable
of  being  magnetised,  far  less  susceptible  in  every  way,  and
exhibited,  when  magnetised,  a  train  of  phenomena  quite
distinct  from  those  I  had  at  first  obtained.

On  various  other  occasions,  Mr.  Lewis  operated  on  Mr.
D.,  and  produced  the  same  results,  as  well  as  others,  includ-
ing various  forms  of  control  over  his  sensations,  perceptions,
and  memory.  Those  above  described,  however,  sufficiently
illustrate  the  conscious  phenomena,  as  they  appeared  in  this
case.  I  found,  as  above  mentioned,  that  Mr.  D.  was  very
easily  thrown  into  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  I  shall  describe
the  phenomena  observed  in  him  in  that  state  in  their  proper
place.

Cases  2  and  3. — Two  lads,  who  were  sent  with  some
message  to  Mr.  Lewis,  one  evening  when  I  was  with  him
and  several  other  gentlemen,  were  tried  in  the  same  way,
and  found  highly  susceptible.  Both  were  stout  and  healthy,
and  about  16  or  17  years  of  age.  They  exhibited  the  whole
train  of  phenomena  connected  with  the  muscular  motions,
and  were  rendered  by  Mr.  Lewis's  expressed  will  or  sug-
gestion, quite  unable  to  perform  any  motion,  no  matter
what  efforts  they  made,  as  for  example,  to  pick  up  anything,
or  to  drop  anything,  to  raise  the  hand  to  the  head,  or  to
take  it  down  when  laid  on  the  head.  They  were  so  strongly
attracted  by  him,  in  spite  of  their  strongest  efforts  at  first,
that  very  soon  these  efforts  of  resistance  changed  into  efforts
to  follow  him,  powerful  enough  to  overcome  those  of  per-
sons who  tried  to  hold  them  back,  while  all  the  time  they
were  urged  to  resist,  and  did  their  utmost  to  resist,  the
tendency  to  move  towards  him.  When  the  point  of  the
middle  finger  of  one  was  laid  against  the  point  of  the  middle
finger  of  the  other,  so  as  just  to  touch  it,  and  Mr.  Lewis
made  a  rapid  pass  over  both,  they  could  not,  with  their
utmost  exertion,  separate  the  fingers.  Nay  one,  being
stronger  than  the  other,  dragged  him  across  the  room  by  no
other  hold,  he  resisting  with  all  his  might.


262  SENSATIONS,  ETC.  CONTROLLED.

Their  sensations  and  perceptions  were  entirely  under
control.  When  they  drank  water,  and  were  told  that  it
was  milk,  coffee,  rum,  whisky,  or  wormwood,  they  tasted  it
as  such.  Nay,  after  drinking  it  as  whisky,  they  were  told
that  they  were  drunk,  and  in  a  minute  or  two  became,  in
every  particular,  very  drunk  indeed.  The  expression  of  the
face  was  perfectly  that  of  intoxication,  and  they  could  not
walk  a  step  without  staggering  or  falling.  They  were
easily  made,  by  suggestion,  to  fancy  themselves  any  other
persons,  and  acted  in  character.  They  shot,  fished,  swam,
lectured,  and  exhibited  every  feeling  suggested  to  them.
They  were  as  easily  made  to  suppose  a  stick  to  be  a  gun,  a
rod,  a  sword,  nay,  a  serpent;  or  a  chair  to  be  a  tiger  or  a
bear.  From  these  animals  they  fled  with  extreme  terror.
They  were  made  to  see,  hear,  and  feel  a  dreadful  storm,
and  to  creep  for  shelter  under  a  table  or  a  chair,  supposed
by  them  to  be  a  house.  From  this,  they  were  soon  expelled
by  the  serpent,  or  by  the  flood  rising,  when  they  swam
lustily  for  their  lives.  This  was  the  first  time  that  either
of  them  had  been  tried ;  and  the  control  exercised  by  Mr.
Lewis  over  their  sensations,  perceptions,  and  emotions  was
perfect,  although  their  consciousness  was  entire.  They
knew  the  suggested  impressions  to  be  false,  but  could  not
resist  them.  It  was  most  interesting  to  watch  closely  their
countenances,  when  an  object,  for  example,  a  handkerchief,
was  placed  in  the  hand,  and,  after  they  felt  quite  sure  of
what  it  was,  they  were  told  it  was  a  rat,  &c.  The  gradual
change  to  doubt,  from  doubt  to  certainty,  and  from  that  to
disgust  or  anger,  was  inimitable,  and  conveyed  at  once,  to
those  near  enough  to  see  it,  complete  conviction  of  their
sincerity.

Case  4. — Mr.  F.,  acted  on  by  Mr.  Lewis  in  the  presence
of  ten  or  twelve  persons,  of  whom  I  was  one,  exhibited  seve-
ral of  the  phenomena.  He  was  sceptical  at  first,  but  soon
found  that  his  perceptions  were  under  control.  For  example,
an  apple  was  given  to  him,  and  he  was  then  told  it  was
an  orange.  At  first  he  denied  this,  but  by  degrees  be  began
to  feel  doubtful.  At  last  he  said,  "It  is  certainly  very
yellow,"  (it  was  dark  brown.)  He  then  took  a  sly  glance
round  the  company,  each  of  whom  had  an  apple,  but  found
them  all  yellow  too.  He  next  cut  out  a  piece  with  his  finger,
looked  at  the  inside,  smelt  and  tasted  it,  and  concluded  with,


RIGIDITY  AND  ATTRACTION.  263

"  Well,  it  is  an  orange,  but  yet  I  know  I  took  an  apple  into
my  hand."

I  could  give  at  least  twenty  similar  cases,  in  which  I  saw
Mr.  Lewis  produce  numerous  effects  of  suggestion  in  the
conscious  state  ;  but  the  above  are  sufficient  to  illustrate  the
effects,  and  it  would  be  tedious  to  give  a  repetition  of  the
same  experiments.  I  shall  add,  however,  one  more  case,  in
which  Mr.  Lewis  produced,  in  my  presence,  very  striking
results.

Case  5. — Mr.  J.  H.,  a  young  and  healthy  man,  could  be
rendered  instantly  and  completely  cataleptic  by  a  glance,
or  a  single  pass.  He  could  be  fixed  in  any  position,  how-
ever inconvenient,  and  would  remain  ten  or  fifteen  minutes
in  such  a  posture,  that  no  man  in  a  natural  state  could  have
endured  it  for  half  a  minute.  Thus  he  stood  for  about  ten
minutes,  fixed  and  rigid,  the  eyes  insensible  to  light,  on  one
foot,  the  body  lying  horizontally,  the  head  forward,  the
other  foot  stretched  out  behind.  He  was  made  to  place  his
feet  without  shoes,  the  toes  pointing  in  opposite  directions
along  the  wall,  and  the  feet  resting  on  a  narrow  foot-board,
about  two  inches  wide,  while  his  back  was  placed  flat  on  the
wall,  and  the  arms  stretched  out  like  a  cross.  In  this
awkward  position,  he  was  rigidified  and  fixed  by  a  pass  or
two,  and  stuck  there  at  least  five  minutes.  Mr.  Lewis  then
demagnetised  the  upper  parts  down  to  the  knees,  when  Mr.
H.  felt  in  great  danger  of  falling  off,  but  the  feet  adhered
so  firmly  to  the  foot-board,  that  I  could  not  move  them.
When  the  feet  were  demagnetised,  he  instantly  fell  down  in
a  heap  in  our  arms.  He  mas  made  to  go  clown  on  all  fours,
and  in  this  position  rendered  rigid,  so  that,  with  all  his
efforts,  he  could  not  lie  down  on  the  floor.  Mr.  Lewis  fixed
him  in  a  standing  posture,  and  left  the  room,  accompanied
by  another  gentleman.  In  their  absence,  I  saw  Mr.  H.
move  his  arms  up  and  down,  and  when  they  returned,  the
other  witness  told  me  that  Mr.  Lewis  had  made  correspond-
ing motions,  willing  the  subject  to  repeat  them.  This  he-
had  done,  but  evidently  to  a  less  extent,  that  is,  where  Mr.
L.'s  hand  moved  two  or  three  feet,  that  of  Mr.  H.  moved
perhaps  only  one  foot  or  six  inches,  but  in  the  same  direc-
tion. At  my  request,  while  Mr.  H.  stood  opposite  the  door,
at  ten  or  twelve  feet  from  it,  Mr.  Lewis  slipped  out,  while
the  company  stood  round  Mr.  H.,  talking  with  him,  and


264  WITH  AND  WITHOUT  SUGGESTION.

tried  to  attract  him  to  the  door  and  into  the  lobby,  of
course  without  a  word  being  said.  In  half  a  minute,  Mr.  H.
began  to  look  fixedly  at  the  door ;  he  then  made  a  step  or
two  towards  it ;  but  becoming  rigid,  he  bent  forward,  resting
on  one  foot,  while  his  arms  were  stretched  towards  the  door,
and  the  other  leg  was  raised  behind  him.  In  this  position,
with  an  expression  of  fixed  and  earnest  desire  to  reach  the
door,  he  was  finally  fixed,  and  rigid  from  head  to  foot ;  and
by  this  time  he  had  got  into  a  position  in  which,  had  the
limbs  been  flexible,  he  must  have  fallen.  As  it  was,  when
the  balance  became  untenable,  he  made  a  hop  forward,  and
did  not  fall,  although  every  one  thought  he  must.  It  was
evident,  that,  but  for  becoming  rigid,  he  would  have  gone
straight  to  where  Mr.  Lewis  was.  This  same  patient  was
made  to  sleep  and  to  wake  by  a  word,  and  when  asleep,  to
fancy  himself  Shakspeare  or  Campbell,  &c,  and  to  recite
long  passages  with  great  earnestness  and  feeling.  He  was
also  made,  by  the  silent  will  of  Mr.  Lewis,  while  talking  to
others,  to  move  towards  Mr.  L.,  and  follow  him,  till  stopped
by  the  rigidity  which  never  failed  to  appear.  When  Mr.
L.  stood  on  a  chair,  and  tried  to  draw  Mr.  H.,  without  con-
tact, from  the  ground,  he  gradually  rose  on  tiptoe,  making
the  most  violent  efforts  to  rise,  till  he  was  fixed  by  cataleptic
rigidity.  Mr.  Lewis  said,  that  had  he  been  still  more  ele-
vated above  Mr.  H.,  he  could  have  raised  him  from  the  floor
without  contact,  and  held  him  thus  suspended  for  a  short
time,  while  some  spectator  should  pass  his  hand  under  the
feet.  Although  this  was  not  done  in  my  presence,  yet  the
attraction  upwards  was  so  strong,  that  I  see  no  reason  to
doubt  the  statement  made  to  me  by  Mr.  Lewis  and  by  others
-who  saw  it,  that  this  experiment  has  been  successfully  per-
formed. Whatever  be  the  influence  which  acts,  it  would
seem  capable,  when  very  intense,  of  overpowering  gravity.
But  of  course  I  cannot  speak  with  certainty  on  this  point.
I  saw,  however,  this  subject  kept  by  Mr.  Lewis'  influence
for  some  time  in  a  position  leaning  backwards,  in  which  he
could  not  have  remained  for  a  second  without  falling,  in  his
usual  state,  and  in  which  he  instantly  fell,  when  Mr.  Lewis's
influence  was  removed.

I  have  given  the  above  cases,  as  instances  of  the  effects
which  I  saw  produced  by  Mr.  Lewis  on  persons  in  the  con-
scious state. I  could  easily  multiply  these  instances,  but


DR.  darling's  experiments.  265

my  space  is  too  limited,  and  what  I  have  given  will  suffice
to  illustrate  the  principle.  With  all  of  the  subjects  except
Mr.  H.  the  experiments  were  often  repeated  on  different
occasions,  when  Sir  David  Brewster  and  many  other  scien-
tific gentlemen  were  present,  all  of  whom  were  satisfied  as
to  the  genuineness  of  the  facts,  as  far  as  they  saw  them.
It  will  be  observed  that  most  of  these  effects  were  the  re-
sult of  suggestion,  acting  on  persons  in  a  peculiarly  impres-
sible state.  But  they  were  not  all  the  effects  of  suggestion ;
for  the  effects  produced  on  the  pulse  and  on  the  eye,  which
were  also  shown  in  many  other  cases,  besides  that  of  Mr.
D.,  were  produced  without  any  suggestion.  Moreover,  the
impressible  state  itself  was  produced  without  direct  sugges-
tion, and  in  such  a  way  as  to  prove,  in  my  opinion,  the
existence  of  an  influence  proceeding  from  Mr.  Lewis.  This
influence  was  further  shewn  in  those  experiments  in  which
he  acted  on  Mr.  H.,  from  the  lobby,  or  from  another  room.
— I  shall  now  proceed  to  give  some  instances  of  what  I  saw
done,  in  the  way  of  suggestion,  on  persons  in  the  conscious
state,  by  Dr.  Darling.  I  have  already  described  his  method
of  producing  the  impressible  state,  for  which  he  cloes^  not
employ  his  own  magnetic  influence,  but  causes  the  subjects
to  gaze  at  a  small  coin  in  the  hand.

Case  6.— Mr.  W.  an  officer,  met  Mr.  Darling  at  my  house.
Col.  Gore  Browne  had  ascertained  some  weeks  before,  that
Mr.  W.  was  susceptible,  but  had  made  no  further  experi-
ments, and  Dr.  D.  had  never  before  spoken  to  him.  lie
was  found,  in  about  two  minutes,  quite  susceptible  or  im-
pressible. His  muscular  motions  were  controlled  in  every
possible  way.  He  was  rendered  unable  to  raise  his  hands,
or  to  let  them  fall ;  he  was  made  unable  to  move  one,  while
he  could  move  the  other ;  unable  to  sit  down  or  to  rise  up ;
or  to  take  hold  of,  or  let  go  an  object.  One  arm  was  de-
prived of  sensation,  or  both  arms,  or  the  whole  frame.  He
was  made  to  feel  a  knife  burning  hot,  and  the  chair  on  which
he  sat  equally  so.  When  he  started  up,  he  was  made  to  feel
the  floor  so  hot  that  he  was  compelled  to  hop  about,  and
wished  to  pull  off  his  boots,  which  burnt  him.  He  was  made
to  feel  the  room  intolerably  warm,  and  actually  perspired
with  the  heat ;  after  which  he  was  made  to  feel  it  so  cold,
that  in  a  minute  or  two  he  buttoned  his  coat,  and  walked
about  rubbing  his  hands.  In  about  five  minutes  his  hand
23


266  EFFECTS  OF  SUGGESTION.

was  really  chilled,  as  I  found,  like  that  of  a  person  exposed
to  frost.  He  was  made  to  forget  his  own  name,  as  well  as
that  of  Col.  Gore  Browne,  who  was  present,  and  to  imagine
Col.  B.  a  total  stranger.  He  was  compelled,  for  a  time,  to
give  a  false  answer  to  every  question  asked ;  and  then  was
forced  to  give  true  answers  to  every  question,  in  spite  of
any  effort  he  might  make  to  do  otherwise.  He  was  told  he
was  on  duty,  at  drill ;  and  began  to  give  the  word  of  com-
mand, as  if  in  the  barrack-yard.  He  was  compelled  to  sing
and  whistle,  in  spite  of  himself;  to  laugh  immoderately,  and
then  to  feel  sad,  and  even  to  weep,  all  in  spite  of  his  own
will.  He  was  told  that  a  stick  was  a  gun,  and  with  it,  he
shot  and  bagged  a  grouse,  which  he  was  made  to  see  before
him.  He  was  told  the  piano-forte  was  a  horse,  and  after
feeling  and  closely  examining  it,  he  specified  its  points  and
defects,  and  appraised  its  value.  He  tasted  water  precisely
as  was  suggested  to  him,  as  lemonade,  tea,  or  wormwood.
He  was  told  that  Dr.  D.'s  hand  was  a  mirror,  and  in  it  he
saw  himself  with  a  black  face,  as  Dr.  D.  told  him  to  do.
He  was  made  to  look  at  his  watch,  and  then  convinced  that
it  pointed  to  a  different  hour  from  the  true  one.  He  was
then  made  to  believe  the  watch  to  be  a  daguerreotype  of  Col.
Browne,  and  again  of  a  lady.  Dr.  D.'s  empty  hand  became
a  snuff-box,  from  which  he  took  a  pinch,  which  made  him
sneeze  violently,  and  this  passed  into  a  most  severe  cough,  as
if  he  had  inhaled  snuff,  which  sensation  was  not  removed  for
about  half-an-hour.  He  was  made  to  go  to  sleep  in  one  minute,
and  in  his  sleep  to  be  deaf  to  the  loudest  sounds.  He  was
made  to  see,  in  Dr.  D.'s  empty  hand,  a  bank  note  for  ^£10,
to  read  its  number,  to  fold  it  up,  and  put  it  in  his  pocket.
And  when  afterwards  asked,  he  declared  he  had  done  so,
and  was  surprised  not  to  find  it  there.  He  was  rendered
quite  unable  to  jump  over  a  handkerchief  laid  on  the  floor;
and  was  compelled,"  according  to  Dr.  D.'s  command,  and  in
spite  of  every  effort,  either  to  come  down  on  it,  or  on  one
or  other  side  of  it,  or  straddling  across  it.  In  every  one  of
these  experiments,  Mr.  W.  was  quite  aware  that  the  sug-
gested idea  was  false,  but  found  it  impossible  to  resist  the
impression.  About  50  persons  were  present,  including  Sir
David  Brewster,  and  other  men  of  science.  On  another
occasion,  Mr.  W.  exhibited  many  of  the  same  as  well  as
other  proofs  of  impressibility,  without  any  preliminary  pro-


DR.  darling's  experiments.  267

cess  whatever.  Dr.  D.  made  him  take  a  gentleman  for  a
lamp-post;  his  watch  for  a  turnip,  the  chain  for  a  string;
he  told  him  that  a  gentleman  was  insulting  him,  when  he
demanded  an  apology.  He  caused  him  to  see  the  great
Nassau  balloon  ascend  from  the  floor  of  my  drawing-room,
&c.  &c.  On  both  occasions,  the  suggested  idea  was  always
instantly  dissipated  by  the  words  "all's  right;''  and  Mr.
W.'s  countenance  then  expressed  confusion  and  shame  at
what  he  had  just  done  or  said.

Case  7. — Mr.  B.  was  discovered  by  Dr.  Darling  to  be  sus-
ceptible, at  the  house  of  a  well-known  and  popular  authoress.
He  was  so  obliging  as  to  meet  Dr.  D.  and  a  large  party  at
my  house.  There  he  exhibited  many  of  the  effects  above
described,  chiefly,  however,  the  control  of  Dr.  D.  over  his
movements,  sensations,  perceptions,  and  memory.  His  move-
ments were  controlled  in  many  ways,  which  it  is  unnecessary
to  repeat.  But  what  rendered  the  case  peculiarly  interest-
ing, was,  that  he  described  his  feelings,  and  reasoned  on
every  experiment  as  it  was  made,  and  told  us  that,  in  spite
of  perfect  consciousness,  he  found  it  impossible,  by  any  efforts,
to  resist  the  suggestions  of  the  operator.  He  was  made  to
forget  his  own  name,  or  that  of  any  other  person;  to  be  un-
able to  recognise  persons  whom  he  knew  quite  well ;  to  forget
and  be  unable  to  name  a  single  letter  of  the  alphabet.  It
seemed  to  him  as  if  he  saw  the  letters  in  motion,  but  could
not  lay  hold  of  one  of  them.  These  experiments  were  very
painful  to  him,  and  he  informed  me,  that  when  thus  com-
pelled to  forget  his  own  name,  not  only  was  the  sensation
most  unpleasant,  but  he  felt  ill  for  a  day  or  two  in  conse-
quence. This  rarely  happens,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  such  violent  and  false  impressions  may  do  harm,  and
that  such  experiments  should  be  made  with  great  reserve
and  caution,  or  not  at  all,  at  least  for  the  mere  gratification
of  curiosity.  Mr.  B.  was  rendered  insensible  to  pain  in  one
arm  only,  while  the  other  arm  and  the  rest  of  the  body  re-
tained their  sensibility.  Dr.  D.  wished  to  render  the  arm
insensible  even  to  touch,  but  at  first,  a  slight  degree  of  that
sensibility  remained.  Even  this  was  removed  by  a  second
suggestion,  and  the  arm  became  utterly  insensible.  The
hand  was  well  pinched  and  pricked  with  pins,  but  Mr.  B.
was  not  even  aware  of  this,  except  when  he  looked  and  saw
it  done. He  wished,  for  his  own  satisfaction,  to  be  cut  or


268  OTHER  PERSONS  SUCCEED

burned  to  the  bone.  I  declined  this,  however,  and  contented
myself  with  forcing  a  blunt  pin  through  a  thick  fold  of  skin
on  the  back  of  the  hand,  which  is  a  very  painful  operation.
To  this  he  was  utterly  insensible,  and  indeed  would  not  be-
lieve that  he  had  been  fairly  tried,  till,  after  the  insensibility
was  removed,  I  applied  the  pin  gently,  when  he  quickly  with-
drew his  hand,  and  declared  himself  satisfied.  Mr.  B.  was
also  made  to  sleep  in  one  minute,  and  rendered  deaf  to  the
loudest  noises,  till  the  magic  words  "all  right"  awoke  him.

Case  8. — Mr.  H.  B.  was  found  susceptible,  at  least  in  so
far  as  concerned  the  control  of  his  movements  by  Dr.  D.
The  case  was  remarkable,  from  the  very  violent  efforts  made
by  Mr.  EL  B.  to  act  in  opposition  to  the  suggestions  of  Dr.
D.  Thus,  when  he  was  told  he  could  not  rise  up  from  his
seat,  he  made  the  most  desperate  exertion  of  all  the  muscles
of  his  body,  but  could  not  combine  them  so  as  to  rise  in  the
usual  way.  Once  he  projected  himself  into  the  air  by  a
violent  effort  against  the  sofa,  but  instantly  fell  down.
Another  time,  he  again  succeeded  in  forcing  himself  up  by
a  jerk  from  an  ottoman,  but  fell  down  on  his  back  on  the
seat.  He  made  such  efforts  as  I  have  never  seen  made,  but
always  failed  to  perform  the  movement  which  he  was  told
he  could  not  make,  while  any  other  motion  was  quite  easy.
I  am  not  certain  whether  the  experiment  was  tried  with  Mr.
H.  B.,  but  I  think  it  was,  and  it  certainly  was  tried  with
the  preceding  subjects  and  with  several  others,  of  defying
them  to  hit  Dr.  D.  a  blow  on  the  face  with  the  closed  fist.
In  every  case,  the  blow  fell  to  one  side  or  the  other,  and
never  touched  the  face.  In  most  of  the  cases  I  saw,  the
subjects  were  also  rendered  unable  to  pick  up  a  handker-
chief from  the  floor,  although  they  could  touch  it;  and
when  they  had  it  in  the  hand,  they  were  rendered  equally
unable  to  drop  it.  I  could  adduce  ten  or  a  dozen  similar
cases,  in  which  I  saw  Dr.  Darling  operate ;  but  the  above
are  sufficient,  and  I  have  selected  them,  without  in  any  in-
stance detailing  all  the  experiments,  which  would  be  tedious,
as -fair  examples,  all  of  which  occurred  in  my  own  drawing-
room,  in  the  presence  of  large  parties,  including  many  sci-
entific and  medical  gentlemen,  all  of  whom  were  perfectly
satisfied  of  the  facts.

In  these  experiments  of  Dr.  Darling,  as  I  have  formerly
explained,  the  impressible  state was  not  produced  by  his


IN  THESE  EXPERIMENTS.  2G9

magnetic  influence,  but  by  the  subjects  gazing  at  a  small
coin,  placed  in  the  left  hand.  If  Dr.  D.'s  influence  was  at
all  exerted,  it  was  to  a  very  limited  extent,  as  he  occasion-
ally made  the  subject  gaze  for  a  moment  at  him,  while  he
gazed  in  return,  perhaps  holding  one  hand,  or  laying  his
finger  on  the  middle  of  the  lower  part  of  the  subject's  fore-
head.

It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  many  persons  have  found  it
quite  easy  to  produce  the  same  effects,  in  susceptible  cases.
The  Earl  of  Eglinton  and  Col.  Gore  Browne  have  been
quite  as  successful  as  Dr.  Darling,  and  I  know  of  many
others  who  have  also  succeeded.  I  have  myself  found  no
difficulty,  by  his  method,  in  producing  similar  results,  but
have  merely  satisfied  myself  that  it  could  be  done,  without
pushing  the  experiments  very  far.

These  experiments  demonstrate  only  the  power  of  sugges-
tion on  persons  in  the  impressible  state,  which  state,  as  we
have  seen,  may  be  produced,  either  in  the  method  of  Dr.
Darling,  or  in  that  of  Mr.  Lewis,  in  which  it  is  done  by  the
direct  influence  of  the  operator.  This  also  I  have  tried
with  success ;  but  I  find  that,  as  a  general  rule,  Dr.  Dar-
ling's method  is  the  easier  of  the  two.  We  must  bear  in
mind,  however,  that  the  other  method  enables  us,  not  only
to  obtain  the  phenomena  of  suggestion  in  the  conscious  im-
pressible state,  but  also,  if  carried  further,  the  magnetic
sleep,  with  its  peculiar  phenomena  and  its  divided  conscious-
ness.

It  is  self-evident,  that  the  power  of  suggestion,  thus  ac-
quired, over  persons  in  the  conscious  state,  may  be  usefully
applied  in  medicine.  Thus,  Dr.  Simpson,  who  has  made
many  experiments  with  success,  has  been  enabled  to  cause
patients,  by  a  command  given  in  that  state,  to  sleep  for  a
certain  number  of  hours  at  a  subsequent  period,  in  cases
where  sleeplessness  had  long  prevailed.  I  am  informed  by
the  Earl  of  Eglinton,  that  he  was  enabled,  while  travelling
by  railway  with  a  party,  one  of  whom,  a  lady,  was  very
deaf,  to  restore  her  hearing  to  such  an  extent,  that  she
heard  whispers  inaudible  to  him.  This  proved  at  once  that
the  deafness  was  not  hopeless,  and  it  was  found,  that  the
improvement  lasted  for  some  hours  after  that  single  trial.
It  is  probable  that  a  course  of  such  treatment  might  perma-

23*


270  CONSCIOUS  LUCIDITY.

nently  restore  the  hearing,  and  at  all events  it  is  worth
while  to  make  the  attempt.

B.  Clairvoyance  in  the  Conscious  State,  by  Passes,
or  by  Simple  Concentration.

It  is  generally  supposed  that  clairvoyance  belongs  only
to  the  higher  stages  of  the  magnetic  sleep ;  but  it  now  ap-
pears, that  it  may,  in  certain  cases,  be  produced  without
the  sleep,  and  when  the  subject  is  in  a  state  of  ordinary
consciousness.  Indeed,  if  we  are  to  regard  clairvoyance,
as  I  am  disposed  to  do,  as  simply  the  power  of  noticing  or
observing  certain  very  fine  or  subtle  impressions,  conveyed
from  all  objects  to  the  sensorium,  by  the  medium  of  a  very
subtle  agent,  influence,  fluid,  or  imponderable,  which  we
may  call  Vital  Magnetism,  or,  with  Reichenbach,  Odyle,
the  impressions  caused  by  which  are  usually  overpowered
by  the  coarser  impressions  conveyed  to  the  sensorium
through  the  external  organs  of  the  senses,  it  is  evident,  that
the  essential  condition  of  clairvoyance  is  not  the  sleep,  but
the  shutting  out  of  the  impressions  of  the  senses.  This
occurs,  no  doubt,  in  the  sleep,  but  it  also  occurs  in  the  state
of  reverie  and  abstraction,  and  may,  in  some  cases,  be
effected  at  pleasure  by  voluntary  concentration.  I  have
not  myself  had  many  opportunities  of  seeing  this  pheno-
menon, but  as  it  is  extremely  interesting,  I  shall  give  a
brief  account  of  the  experiments  of  Major  Buckley,  which
appear  to  have  been  made  in  a  manner  perfectly  satisfactory,
and  on  a  large  number  of  persons.  It  would  certainly  ap-
pear that  Major  B.  has  a  rare  and  very  remarkable  power
of  producing  conscious  clairvoyance  in  his  subjects.

Before  describing  Major  Buckley's  method,  I  should  men-
tion that  he  had  been  for  some  time  in  the  habit  of  pro-
ducing magnetic  sleep  and  clairvoyance  in  the  sleep,  before
he  discovered  that,  in  his  subjects,  the  sleep  might  often
be  dispensed  with.  The  following  details  are  abridged  from
letters  with  which  Major  B.  has  very  kindly  favored  me.

Major  Buckley  first  ascertains  whether  his  subjects  are
susceptible,  by  making  with  his  hands,  passes  above  and
below  their  hands,  from  the  wrist  downwards.  If  certain
sensations,  such  as  tingling,  numbness,  &c.  are  strongly
felt,  he  knows  that  he  will  be  able  to  produce  the  magnetic


MAJOR  BUCKLEY'S  METHOD.  271

sleep.  But  to  ascertain  whether  he  can  obtain  conscious
clairvoyance,  he  makes  slow  passes  from  his  own  forehead
to  his  own  chest.  If  this  produce  a  blue  light  in  his  face,
strongly  visible,  the  subject  will  probably  acquire  conscious
clairvoyance.  If  not,  or  if  the  light  be  pale,  the  subject
must  first  be  rendered  clairvoyant  in  the  sleep.  Taking
those  subjects  who  see  a  very  deep  blue  light,  he  continues
to  make  passes  over  his  own  face,  and  also  over  the  object,
a  box,  or  a  nut,  for  example,  in  which  written  or  printed
words  are  enclosed,  which  the  clairvoyant  is  to  read.  Some
subjects  require  only  a  pass  or  two  to  be  made,  others  re-
quire many.  They  describe  the  blue  light  as  rendering  the
box  or  nut  transparent,  so  that  they  can  read  what  is  inside.
(This  reminds  us  of  the  curious  fact  mentioned  by  Reichen-
bach,  that  bars  of  iron  or  steel,  seen  by  conscious  sensitives,
without  any  passes,  shining  in  the  dark  with  the  odylic
glow,  appeared  to  them  transparent  like  glass.)  If  too
many  passes  be  made  by  Major  B.,  the  blue  light  becomes
so  deep  that  they  cannot  read,  and  some  reverse  passes
must  be  made,  to  render  the  light  less  deep.  Major  Buck-
ley has  thus  produced  conscious  clairvoyance  in  89  persons,
of  whom  44  have  been  able  to  read  mottoes  contained  in
nut-shells,  purchased  by  other  parties  for  the  experiment.
The  longest  motto  thus  read,  contained  98  words.  Many
subjects  will  read  motto  after  motto  without  one  mistake.
In  this  way,  the  mottoes  contained  in  4860  nut-shells  have
been  read,  some  of  them,  indeed,  by  persons  in  the  mes-
meric sleep,  but  most  of  them  by  persons  in  the  conscious
state,  many  of  whom  have  never  been  put  to  sleep.  In
boxes,  upwards  of  36,000  words  have  been  read;  in  one
paper,  371  words.  Including  those  who  have  read  words
contained  in  boxes  when  in  the  sleep,  148  persons  have  thus
read.  It  is  to  be  observed  that,  in  a  few  cases,  the  words
may  have  been  read  by  thought-reading,  as  the  persons  who
put  them  in  the  boxes  were  present ;  but  in  most  cases,  no
one  who  knew  the  words  has  been  present,  and  they  must
therefore  have  been  read  by  direct  clairvoyance.  Every
precaution  has  been  taken.  The  nuts,  inclosing  mottoes,
for  example,  have  been  purchased  of  40  different  confec-
tioners, and  have  been  sealed  up  until  read.  It  may  be
added,  that  of  the  44  persons  who  have  read  mottoes  in
nuts  by  waking  or  conscious  clairvoyance,  42  belong  to  the


272  MAJOR  BUCKLEY'S  EXPERIMENTS

higher  class  of  society;  and  the  experiments  have  been
made  in  the  presence  of  many  other  persons.  These  ex-
periments appear  to  me  admirably  contrived,  and  I  can  per-
ceive no  reason  whatever  to  doubt  the  entire  accuracy  of
the  facts.  It  would  of  course  be  tedious  to  enumerate  so
many  experiments,  all  of  the  same  kind;  but  I  shall  select
one  or  two  of  the  most  striking  as  examples.

Case  9. — Sir  T.  'Willshire  took  home  with  him  a  nest  of
boxes  belonging  to  Major  Buckley,  and  placed  in  the  inner
box  a  slip  of  paper,  on  which  he  had  written  a  word.  Some
days  later  he  brought  back  the  boxes,  sealed  up  in  paper,
and  asked  one  of  Major  Buckley's  clairvoyantes  to  read  the
word.  Major  B.  made  passes  over  the  boxes,  when  she  said
she  saw  the  word  "Concert."  Sir  T.  Willshire  declared
that  she  was  right  as  to  the  first  and  last  letters,  but  that
the  word  was  different.  She  persisted,  when  he  told  her
that  the  word  was  "Correct."  But  on  opening  the  boxes,
the  word  proved  to  be  "Concert."  This  case  is  very  re-
markable ;  for,  had  the  clairvoyante  read  the  word  by
thought-reading,  she  would  have  read  it  according  to  the
belief  of  Sir  T.  Willshire,  who  had  either  intended  to  write
"correct,''  or  in  the  interval,  forgot  that  he  had  written
"concert,"  but  certainly  believed  the  former  to  be  the  word.

Case  10. — A  lady,  one  of  Major  Buckley's  waking  clair-
voyantes, read  103  mottoes,  contained  in  nuts,  in  one  day,
without  a  pass  being  made  on  that  occasion.  In  this,  and
in  many  other  cases,  the  power  of  reading  in  nuts,  boxes,
and  envelopes,  remained,  when  once  induced,  for  about  a
month,  and  then  disappeared.  The  same  lady,  after  three
months,  could  no  longer  read  without  passes ;  and  it  took
five  trials  fully  to  restore  the  power.  This  may  be  done,
however,  immediately,  by  inducing  the  mesmeric  sleep  and
clairvoyance  in  that  state,  when  the  subjects,  in  the  hands
of  Major  Buckley,  soon  acquire  the  power  of  waking  clair-
voyance.

Case  11. — The  words,  "Can  you  see  inside?"  were  writ-
ten on  a  narrow  slip  of  paper,  which  was  then  laid  on  a
quarter  sheet,  and  folded  over  11  times.  The  folded  paper
was  placed  in  a  thick  envelope,  and  sealed  with  three  seals,
in  such  a  way  that  it  could  not  be  opened  undetected.  It
was  then  sent  to  a  clairvoyante,  who  returned  it  with  the
seals  uninjured,  having  read  the  contents  in  waking  clairvoy-


IN  CONSCIOUS  CLAIRVOYANCE.  273

ancc.  Mr.  Chandler  has  published  an  account  of  a  precisely
similar  experiment,  in  which  the  sealed  envelope,  after  the
contents  had  thus  been  read,  was  shown  to  many  persons,
all  of  whom  were  quite  satisfied  that  it  could  not  have  been
opened.  I  have  in  my  possession  one  of  the  envelopes  thus
read,  which  has  since  been  opened,  and  I  am  convinced
that  the  precautions  taken,  precluded  any  other  than  lucid

vision.

I  regard  the  experiments  of  Major  Buckley  as  not  only
well  devised,  but  of  very  great  value,  as  proving  the  exist-
ence of  waking  or  conscious  clairvoyance,  which,  as  I  have
mentioned  in  Part  I.,  undoubtedly  occurs  as  a  spontaneous
natural  fact.  Indeed,  it  is  to  the  occurrence  of  this  state
that  we  must  refer  many  well-attested  instances  of  persons
acquiring  intuitively  a  knowledge  of  distant  events,  many  of
which  are  recorded.

The  case  of  the  lady,  mentioned  in  Part  I.,  is  far  from
being  the  only  case  in  modern  times,  of  spontaneous  and
waking  clairvoyance.  Mr.  Atkinson,  to  whom  I  owe  that
case,  in  the  work  recently  published  by  himself  and  Miss
Martineau,  gives  an  instance  of  its  occurrence  in  his  own
person.  I  have  also  mentioned,  in  Part  I.,  that  Mr.  Lewis,
by  concentrating  his  thoughts,  can  produce,  in  himself,  the
state  of  waking  clairvoyance,  and  has  frequently  thus  seen
persons,  myself  among  the  number,  at  the  time  quite  un-
known to  him.  I  shall  here  give  an  instance  of  Mr.  Lewis's
power  in  this  way,  on  the  testimony  of  the  gentleman  who
made  the  experiment,  who  is  well  known  to  me,  and  on
whose  accuracy  the  utmost  reliance  may  be  placed.

Case  12. — Mr.  B.,  the  gentleman  alluded  to,  arranged  with
another  gentleman,  that,  at  a  certain  hour,  the  latter  should
be  present  in  the  drawing-room  of  his  aunt,  Miss  C,  with
that  lady  and  another,  these  three  being  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  house,  except  servants.  At  the  same  hour,  Mr.  B.,
in  his  own  house,  at  a  distance  of  14  miles,  requested  Mr.
Lewis,  who  had  never  seen  Miss  C.  nor  any  of  her  family,
nor  her  house,  to  try  to  magnetise  that  lady.  Mr.  Lewis
proceeded  to  concentrate  his  thoughts  on  the  subject,  and
soon  saw  and  described  the  house,  its  situation,  the  house-
dog, the  drawing-room,  and  the  persons  in  it,  all  quite  accu-
rately. But  he  saw  in  the  room  not  only  the  three  inhabit-
ants of  the  house,  but  two  other  persons. While  this  was


274  CONSCIOUS  LUCIDITY.

going  on,  two  visitors  had  previously  come  into  the  room  in
Miss  C.'s  house,  and  Miss  C,  who  was  susceptible  to  mag-
netism, just  at  the  time  when  Mr.  Lewis  saw  her,  described
her,  and  endeavored  to  magnetise  her,  was  so  strongly  af-
fected, that  she  declared  her  nephew  must  be  magnetising
her,  and  begged  him  not  to  do  so.

I  mention  this  case,  as  a  proof  of  the  power  possessed  by
Mr.  Lewis  in  a  certain  state  of  concentration,  not  only  of
seeing,  but  of  acting  on  persons  whom  he  has  never  seen.  I
have  already,  in  Part  L,  described  a  case  in  which  he  acted
on  a  lady  in  my  house,  whom,  however,  he  had  before  seen,
from  a  distance  of  500  or  600  yards.  In  that  case  also,  he
saw  the  lady  when  acting  on  her  from  a  distance,  and  sub-
sequently pointed  out  accurately  where  she  sat,  and  the  di-
rection in  which  he  saw  her  move  away  from  the  piano-forte,
when  compelled  to  leave  it  and  to  lie  down.

On  the  whole,  it  must,  I  think,  be  admitted,  and  the  expe-
riments of  Major  Buckley  are  alone  sufficient  to  decide  this
point,  that  conscious  or  waking  clairvoyance  may  be  pro-
duced artificially ;  and  this  being  the  case,  it  is  in  the  highest
degree  probable  that  it  may  also  occur  spontaneously,  even
if  its  spontaneous  occurrence  had  never  been  observed.  I
consider  it  highly  probable,  that  many  dreams,  concerning
events  passing  at  the  time,  or  just  before,  which  prove  cor-
rect, depend  on  the  spontaneous  occurrence  of  this  state
during  sleep  or  reverie.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted,  that  if
the  subject  be  duly  investigated,  very  interesting  results
must  be  obtained.  But  we  must  not  expect  to  find  that  all,
or  many,  magnetisers  possess  the  power  of  inducing  conscious
clairvoyance  in  the  same  way,  or  in  the  same  degree,  as
Major  Buckley.  On  the  contrary,  that  gentleman  appears
to  have  a  very  peculiar  influence  on  his  subjects.  Yet  it  is
not  probable  that  he  is  the  only  person  possessed  of  this
power.

There  is  another  method  of  producing  conscious  clairvoy-
ance, or,  at  least,  phenomena  which  appear  to  me  to  be  the
same ;  namely,  gazing  at  what  is  called  the  Magic  Crystal,
or  at  the  Magic  Mirror,  or  other  objects.  It  will  be  observed,
that  as  the  magnetic  sleep  may  be  caused  either  by  passes
or  by  the  patient  gazing  at  an  object,  so  it  is  quite  conceiv-
able that  gazing  at  an  object,  as  well  as  passes  by  the  ope-
rator, may  produce conscious or  waking  clairvoyance. I


THE  MAGIC  CRYSTAL.  275

shall  now,  therefore,  adduce  a  few  facts  connected  with  the
production  of

C.  Conscious  Clairvoyance  by  gazing  at  an  object.

Many  persons,  especially  the  young,  who  are  more  suscep-
tible, when  they  are  made  to  gaze  steadily  at  an  object,  pass,
without  going  into  sleep,  into  a  state,  in  which  they  see  per-
sons or  things  not  present.

1.  The  Magic  Crystal. — This  is  generally  a  round  or
oval-shaped  piece  of  clear  glass.  Several  exist,  and  one  is
now  in  my  hands,  which  were  made  long  ago,  and  used  for
the  purpose  of  divination,  as  in  the  case  of  the  crystal  of
Dr.  Dee.  It  is  said  that  Dr.  Dee's  crystal  is  still  extant,
and,  according  to  some,  it  was  a  polished  mass  of  jet;  but
it  does  not  appear  that  the  nature  of  the  substance  is
of  much  importance,  or  rather,  it  would  appear  that  Dr.
Dee  had  a  globe  of  glass  or  of  rock  crystal,  and  also  a
magic  mirror,  j)robably  the  piece  of  jet  alluded  to.  The
essential  point  is  that  persons  who  gaze  earnestly  on  the
crystal,  often  see  the  figures  of  absent  persons,  nay,  as  in
ordinary  clairvoyance,  of  such  as  are  unknown  to  them.
The  crystal  of  which  I  speak,  is  of  the  size  and  shape  of  a
large  turkey's  egg,  and  was  sold  some  years  since,  by  a
dealer  in  curiosities,  as  an  old  magic  crystal,  with  a  paper
containing  certain  mystical  and  magical  rules  for  its  use.
In  the  few  experiments  I  shall  mention,  it  was  used  by
simply  desiring  the  person  to  gaze  earnestly  at  it.

Case  13. — A  boy,  quite  ignorant  of  what  was  expected,
after  gazing  at  the  crystal  for  about  half  an  hour  very
steadily,  saw  a  dark  cloud  appear  in  it,  which  soon  cleared
up,  and  he  then  saw  his  mother  in  her  room.  By  and  bye,
his  father  appeared.  I  then  asked  him  to  look  for  a  lady,
whom  he  saw  walking  in  the  street  in  which  she  lived,  and
accurately  described  her  walking  dress,  which  he  had  never
seen,  although  he  may  have  seen  the  lady  for  a  moment  in
the  evening.  I  then  asked  for  a  boy  and  a  servant  whom  I
was  sure  he  had  never  seen.  He  saw  and  described  most
accurately  the  persons  and  dress  of  both.  I  asked  for
another  servant,  whom  he  saw  opening  the  street-door .  to
admit  the  lady. I  marked  the  time,  and  found  that  this


276  THE  MAGIC  CRYSTAL

lady  had  been  walking  in  the  dress  described,  and  had
entered  her  house  at  the  time  when  the  boy  had  seen  her.

In  all  this,  I  could  see  nothing  but  conscious  or  waking
clairvoyance,  produced  by  long  gazing.  I  conclude,  that
the  figures  appeared  in  the  crystal,  because  the  boy  was
looking  there,  and  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt,  that  by  intense
gazing  on  some  other  objects,  he  might  have  been  made  to
see  the  same.  I  made  several  similar  experiments,  both
with  that  crystal,  and  with  others,  two  of  which  I  knew  to
have  been  recently  made,  one  several  years  ago,  the  other
only  a  week  or  two  previously.  The  experiments  were  also
made  with  two  other  boys,  and  the  general  result  was,  that
when  they  gazed  long  and  steadily,  they  generally  saw
figures  of  some  sort,  sometimes  of  a  father,  mother,  or
brother,  but  sometimes  also  of  persons  quite  unknown  to
them,  without  such  persons  being  asked  for,  and  of  course,
in  such  cases,  I  could  not  tell  who  the  persons  seen  were.
But  when,  as  often  happened,  their  attention  wandered,
they  saw  nothing.  I  could  not  observe,  in  any  one  of  these
boys,  the  slightest  tendency  to  deceive  me.  On  the  con-
trary, I  was  surprised  as  well  as  pleased  at  the  patience
with  which  they  submitted  to  these  tedious  experiments,
and  at  their  reserve  in  declaring  that  they  saw  anything.
It  often  happened,  that  they  saw  nothing  during  the  whole
time ;  but  when  they  did  see  anything,  they  were  very  pre-
cise in  stating  how  much  or  how  little  they  saw.  I  gene-
rally asked  no  questions,  but  encouraged  them  to  tell  their
own  story.

The  impression  made  on  my  mind  by  these  trials  was,  that
the  gazing  produced  an  impressible  state,  (as  I  ascertained
several  times  by  trying  some  of  Dr.  Darling's  experiments
on  them,)  and  that  when  they  gazed  very  steadily,  conscious
clairvoyance  was  developed,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent.  I
resolved  to  investigate  the  matter  more  fully,  but  as  the
means  of  doing  so  have  only  very  recently  been  in  my
possession,  I  must  wait  until  I  shall  have  time  to  pursue  the
investigation.  In  the  meantime,  I  consider  it  as  certain,  not
from  these  experiments  alone,  but  from  many  others  of  which
I  have  been  informed  on  good  authority,  that  conscious
clairvoyance  may  be  thus  produced.  I  shall  here  mention
some  other  instances  of  visions  seen  in  crystals.

Case  14. — A  globular  mass  of  crystal,  rather  larger  than


PRODUCES  CONSCIOUS  LUCIDITY.  277

an  orange,  was  lying  on  a  table,  when  a  little  girl  entered
the  room,  and  accidentally  looked  at  it.  She  exclaimed,
"  There  is  a  ship  in  it,  with  its  cloths  (sails)  all  in  rags.
Now  it  tumbles  down,  and  a  woman  is  looking  at  it,  and  leans
her  head  on  her  hand."  Her  mother  afterwards  came  into
the  room,  and  without  having  heard  what  the  child  had  seen,
immediately  saw  the  ship  and  the  woman.  This  accidental
observation  was  communicated  to  Earl  Stanhope  by  the  per-
son in  whose  room  it  happened,  and  by  his  Lordship  to  me.

Earl  Stanhope  informs  me  that  he  has  made  experiments
with  three  crystals,  in  one  or  other  of  which  visions  have  been
seen  by  fifteen  children  of  both  sexes  and  of  different  ages,
and  by  seven  adult  females,  one  of  them  upwards  of  sixty
years  of  age.  In  regard  to  these  visions,  his  Lordship  ob-
serves that  "  In  many  cases  it  is  very  remarkable,  that  they
could  not  have  been  presented  by  memory  to  the  imagina-
tion ;  as,  for  instance,  visions  of  a  dog  wearing  a  crown  ;  of
a  bed  with  a  black  counterpane  ;  of  a  house  with  126  win-
dows and  33  doors,  &c.  &c."  All  this  corresponds  with  the
strange  visions  of  ordinary  clairvoyance.

"  The  objects  seen  in  succession  were  often,  as  in  dreams,
unconnected  with  each  other,  and  while  they  were  exhibited,
no  other  objects  in  the  room  were  visible  to  the  seers."
This  proves  that  the  power  of  seeing  them  was,  as  in  ordinary
clairvoyance,  connected  with  abstraction  or  reverie,  the  re-
sult of  long  and  concentrated  gazing.  Earl  Stanhope  adds,
that  very  often  those  who  had  previously  seen  visions  saw
nothing,  and  that  none  of  the  persons  he  tried  showed  any
disposition  to  deceive.  This  agrees  perfectly  with  my  own
experience,  in  the  few  trials  I  have  made.

Case  15. — We  have  seen  that  Mr.  Lewis  possesses,  at
times,  the  power  of  conscious  clairvoyance,  by  simple  con-
centration of  thought.  He  finds  that  gazing  into  a  crystal
produces  the  state  of  waking  clairvoyance  in  him  much
sooner  and  more  easily.  On  one  occasion,  being  in  a  house
in  Edinburgh  with  a  party,  he  looked  into  a  crystal,  and
saw  in  it  the  inhabitants  of  another  house,  at  a  considerable
distance.  Along  with  them,  he  saw  two  gentlemen,  entire
strangers  to  him.  These  he  described  to  the  company.
He  then  proceeded  to  the  other  house,  and  there  found  the
two  gentlemen  whom  he  had  described.

Case  16. — On  another  occasion,  he  was  asked  to  see  a
24


278  THE  MAGIC  MIRROR.

house  and  family,  quite  unknown  to  him,  in  Sloane  Street,
Chelsea,  he  being  in  a  house  in  Edinburgh  with  a  party.
He  saw  in  the  crystal,  the  family  in  London,  described  the
house,  and  also  an  old  gentleman  very  ill  or  dying,  and
wearing  a  peculiar  cap.  All  was  found  to  be  correct,  and
the  cap  was  one  which  had  lately  been  sent  to  the  old  gen-
tleman. On  the  same  occasion,  Mr.  Lewis  told  a  gentleman
present,  that  he  had  lost  or  mislaid  a  key,  of  a  very  par-
ticular shape,  which  he,  Mr.  L.,  saw  in  the  crystal.  This
was  confirmed  by  the  gentleman,  a  total  stranger  to  Mr.
Lewis.

Mr.  Lewis  is  distinctly  of  opinion,  that  the  crystal  is  only
a  means  of  producing  conscious  clairvoyance  by  gazing  at
it;  and  from  what  I  have  seen,  such  is  my  own  opinion.
But  it  is  quite  possible,  that,  besides  the  gazing,  the  mag-
netic or  odylic  influence  of  the  crystal,  or  rather  glass,  may
assist  in  producing  the  effect.  Mr.  Lewis  has  frequently
been  so  kind  as  to  look  into  crystals  for  me,  and  although,
this  has  chiefly  been  done  in  reference  to  persons  and  things
at  a  distance,  and  in  cases  in  which  what  he  saw  cannot  yet
be  verified,  I  am  convinced  that  he  saw  what  he  described
to  me.  Whether  the  things  he  saw,  in  these  cases,  were
only  dreams,  or  whether  his  visions  were  of  actual  facts,  is
another  point,  which,  after  a  time,  I  may  be  enabled  to
ascertain.  But  I  may  here  state,  that  a  very  large  crystal
globe,  belonging  to  myself,  had,  in  a  short  time,  so  strong
an  effect  on  him,  as  nearly  to  throw  him  into  magnetic
sleep,  while  a  much  smaller  one  had  no  such  effect.  This
seems  to  indicate  that  the  odylic  influence  of  the  crystal
may  assist  in  producing  the  effect.

2.  The  magic  mirror.  Of  this,  I  have  no  experience ;
but  I  conceive  its  action  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  crys-
tal. The  mirror  may  be  of  jet,  as  Dr.  Dee's  is  said  to  have
been,  or  of  metal,  or  even  a  simple  black  surface,  blackened
by  charcoal.  It  is  at  all  events  an  object  which  must  be
gazed  at  for  same  time,  before  visions  appear.  Now  we
know,  that  both  metals  and  charcoal  act  strongly  on  sus-
ceptible persons.  M.  Dupotet  has  found,  that  many  per-
sons, on  gazing  for  a  while  at  a  surface  of  charcoal,  see
visions  of  a  most  exciting  kind,  the  nature  of  which  they  are
generally  most  unwilling  to  disclose.  But  sometimes  they
do  mention  what  they  see. In  one  case,  a  lady  saw  a  ship


MAGNETISED  WATER.  279

in  a  storm,  and  described  it,  in  the  presence  of  my  informant,
who  is  a  lady  of  very  high  rank,  and  of  the  highest  character.
When  these  experiments  of  M.  Dupotct  with  his  mirrors  are
long  continued,  the  subjects  not  only  become  much  excited
by  what  they  see,  but  are  frequently  rendered  quite  uncon-
scious of  what  is  passing  around  them.  The  experiments
are  indeed  very  remarkable,  but  must  be  tried  with  great
caution,  in  consequence  of  the  violent  effects  produced.  I
am  disposed  to  agree  with  M.  Dupotet,  in  thinking  that  he
has,  in  this  discovery  of  the  powers  of  the  mirror,  redis-
covered a  part  of  the  magic  of  the  middle  ages,  which,  like
all  magic,  is  founded  on  natural  facts.  The  whole  subject
requires  a  thorough  investigation.

3.  Water.  It  is  found  that  susceptible  persons  may  be
made  to  see  visions,  by  gazing  into  a  glass  of  water,  espe-
cially if  the  water  be  magnetised,  in  which  case  we  know
that  it  acts  on  the  susceptible.

Case  17. — Major  Buckley  caused  a  lady  to  look  into  a
bottle  of  magnetised  water,  who  had  been  found  to  be  ren-
dered consciously  clairvoyante  by  looking  into  a  crystal.  She
saw  an  alligator  in  the  water.

Case  18. — A  lady  of  rank  caused  a  clairvoyante  to  look
into  a  bottle  of  magnetised  water,  when  she  let  the  bottle
fall  from  fright,  declaring  that  she  saw  a  serpent  in  it.

All  the  facts  above  mentioned  tend  to  prove,  that  con-
scious clairvoyance,  or  visions,  or  dreams,  may  be  produced
by  gazing  at  a  variety  of  objects,  and  probably  most  easily
by  gazing  at  crystals,  metallic  or  carbonaceous  surfaces,  and
magnetised  water.  But  it  will  probably  be  found,  on  trial,,
that  many  other  substances  will  produce  a  similar  effect.

Many  persons,  on  reading  the  accounts  that  have  been
published  of  the  visions  seen  in  crystals,  &c.  are  disposed  to
reject  the  whole  as  sheer  imposture.  But  it  appears  to  me,
that  we  cannot  thus  get  rid  of  the  subject.  It  is  quite  con-
ceivable that  some  seers  may  have  endeavored  to  deceive  ;
but  it  is  not  conceivable  that  all  should  have  done  so.  If
some  of  the  statements  which  have  appeared  seem  very  ab-
surd, it  must  be  remembered,  that  the  subject  has  not  yet
been  scientifically  investigated,  and  that  wThile  most  of  the
seers  are  children,  often  very  young  and  ignorant,  the  opera-
tors have  also  frequently  been  unaccustomed  to  experiment,
and  may  have  vitiated  true  phenomena  by  suggesting  their


280  EGYPTIAN  MAGIC.

own  ideas.  It  appears  certain,  that  many  children  and
adults  in  different  places  have  seen  visions  in  crystals  ;  many
of  them  have  been  not  only  trustworthy,  but  have  been
much  alarmed  and  agitated  by  what  they  saw ;  the  visions
have  very  often  been  exactly  such  as  are  seen  in  ordinary
clairvoyance  ;  and  on  the  whole,  it  appears  that  there  are
very  interesting  facts,  whatever  be  their  true  nature,  which
require  and  deserve  the  most  careful  investigation.

I  have  not  alluded  to  those  still  more  wonderful  visions
said  to  have  been  seen  in  crystals,  &c.  of  persons  long  dead,
of  good  and  evil  spirits,  and  of  answers  to  questions  ex-
hibited in  written  or  printed  characters.  I  have  had,  as  yet,
no  opportunity  of  investigating  these  matters,  and  I  can
easily  see  many  sources  of  fallacy.  But  even  here,  I  do  not
feel  myself  entitled  to  reject,  summarily,  and  without  inves-
tigation, all  that  has  been  asserted.  Believing,  as  I  do,  that
the  state  of  clairvoyance  may  be  induced  by  gazing  at  crys-
tals, &c,  I  think  it  quite  possible  that  higher  states,  such  as
that  of  extasis,  may  also  be  so  produced.  Now,  as  clair-
voyance and  extasis  are  states  as  yet  hardly  studied,  and
certainly  not  fully  investigated,  I  cannot  affirm  the  impossi-
bility of  things  far  more  strange  than  any  I  have  yet  seen.
But  I  dare  not  venture  to  bring  forward  such  things  as  facts,
until  I  shall  have  been  enabled  to  investigate  them,  which
I  hope  to  be  able  to  do.

In  concluding  what  I  have  to  say  on  the  subject  of  con-
scious clairvoyance,  as  produced  by  gazing,  it  is  unnecessary
to  do  more  than  to  advert  to  the  method  employed  by  the
Arabian  sorcerers  in  Egypt  at  the  present  day,  as  that  has
been  fully  detailed  by  Miss  Martineau,  and  other  authors,
who  have  seen  it.  Every  one  knows,  that  a  boy  is  made  to
gaze  on  a  large  drop  of  ink  (a  liquid  mirror)  in  his  hand,
while  fumigations  and  magnetic  manipulations  are  employed.
There  appears  to  be  no  good  reason  to  doubt  that,  in  this
way,  which  is  merely  a  variation  of  the  crystal,  boys  have
seen  and  accurately  described  absent  persons  quite  unknown
to  them.  In  many  cases,  I  conceive  thought-reading  to  have
been  the  medium,  as  when  Shakspeare  was  seen,  as  he  is
generally  represented.  But  I  have  already,  in  Part  I.,
shown  that  thought-reading,  or  the  highest  degree  of  sym-
pathy, is,  in  truth,  not  less  wonderful  than  direct  clairvoy-


THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  281

ancc.  Both  sympathy  and  direct  clairvoyance  occur  in  the
magnetic  sleep,  and  both  may  also  occur,  as  clairvoyance
does,  in  the  conscious  state,  under  favorable  circumstances.


LETTER  XVI.

I  now  proceed,  secondly,  to  give  some  illustrations  of  the
magnetic  sleep  and  its  phenomena.

A.  Production  op  the  Sleep.

The  method  which  I  have  generally  employed  consists  in
sitting  opposite  and  close  to  the  subject,  a  little  higher  than
he  is,  pressing  gently  his  thumbs  with  mine,  and  gazing
steadily  in  his  eyes,  or  in  one  of  his  eyes.  As  soon  as  some
effect  is  produced,  which  may  be,  when  it  happens,  in  a  few
minutes,  or  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  or  half  an  hour,  I
make  passes  with  both  hands  downwards  over  the  forehead
and  face  to  the  chest.  Sometimes  I  begin  with  passes,  and
frequently  I  alternate  gazing  and  passes.

Case  19. — Mr.  D.,  a  student  of  medicine,  nineteen  years
of  age,  in  delicate  health,  had  been  found  by  Mr.  Lewis
very  susceptible  in  the  conscious  state,  as  already  described,
Case  1.  I  wished  to  try  whether,  as  he  was  susceptible,  I
could  produce  in  him  the  magnetic  sleep.  In  the  first  trial,
after  25  or  30  minutes  of  gazing,  as  above  described,  alter-
nated with  passes,  he  slept,  but  not  deeply,  and  was  easily
roused  when  spoken  to.  I  persevered  with  similar  results,
for  nine  successive  trials,  during  which  the  sleep  was  gra-
dually produced  in  a  shorter  time,  and  on  the  eighth  trial,
in  15  minutes.  Finding  that  he  was  still  disturbed  by  noises
in  the  street,  I  silently  willed  that  he  should  not  hear  them,
and  thus  succeeded  in  producing  a  deeper  sleep,  so  that  in
the  ninth  trial  he  slept  in  twelve  minutes,  and  was.  for  the
first  time,  perfectly  unconscious,  on  waking,  of  what  passed
during  his  sleep.  He  spoke  now,  which  he  had  not  done
before,  in  a  voice  quite  different  from  his  usual  voice,  and,
in  answer to  questions,  said  he  would  sleep deeper  every

21*  *


282  PRODUCTION  OF  THE  SLEEP

time,  and  would  be  able  to  see ;  but  at  present  a  thick  mist
prevented  him  from  doing  so.  I  desired  him  to  sleep
exactly  half  an  hour,  which  he  promised  to  do,  and  when
the  time  came,  which  happened  to  be  five  P.  M.,  he  woke
suddenly  while  the  clocks  were  striking.  I  commanded
him,  before  he  woke,  to  sleep  next  day  in  five  minutes,
which  he  promised  to  do,  and  did.  From  this  time  I  found
it  quite  easy  to  produce  the  sleep,  and  by  the  thirteenth
trial  I  had  got  him  to  sleep  in  one  minute.  In  this  case
the  full,  true,  magnetic  sleep  was  not  obtained  till  the  ninth
day,  after  which  it  was  easily  produced,  and  gradually  be-
came deeper,  presenting  many  interesting  phenomena,  to  be
mentioned  in  their  proper  place.

Case  20. — Mr.  T.,  a  student  of  chemistry,  aged  21.
Having  found  that  this  gentleman,  who  enjoys  perfect
health,  was  easily  rendered  impressible,  in  the  conscious
state,  by  about  seven  minutes  gazing  at  a  coin  in  his  hand,
as  in  Dr.  Darling's  process,  I  tried  next  day  to  produce  the
sleep  in  him,  and  in  this  first  trial,  by  alternate  gazing  and
passes,  succeeded  in  putting  him  to  sleep  in  about  twenty
minutes.  The  sleep  was  not  very  profound.  I  proceeded
with  him  as  with  Mr.  D.,  and  soon  reduced  the  time  neces-
sary to  cause  sleep  from  twenty  minutes  to  two  minutes.
In  this  case  also  I  was  able  to  fix  the  length  of  the  sleep.
He  was  quite  unconscious,  after  waking,  of  all  that  passed
during  the  sleep,  but  I  found  that,  by  telling  him  to  remem-
ber anything,  I  could  cause  him  to  do  so.

Case  21. — Mr.  H.  W.,  a  German,  blind,  having  lost  his
sight  from  a  complication  of  diseases.  The  left  eye  is  en-
tirely destroyed,  having  been  operated  on  unsuccessfully
for  cataract.  The  right  eye  is  said  to  be  affected  with
opacity  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  capsule,  and  also  with
amaurosis.  During  the  last  two  years,  he  has  only  been
able  to  distinguish,  very  feebly,  between  day-light  and
darkness,  and  he  is  to  all  practical  purposes  stone-blind.
On  looking  at  the  eye,  it  appeared  to  me  that  the  opacity
in  the  capsule,  which  had  been  expected  to  form  into  cata-
ract, had  not  yet  proceeded  to  any  great  extent  ;  and  as
the  iris  was  to  a  certain  extent  moveable,  although  gene-
rally much  dilated,  I  had  some  hopes  that  the  retina  might
not  be  quite  insensible  to  light.  Not  being  familiar  with
diseases  of  the  eye,%and  not  thinking  at  the  time  of  trying


IN  A  BLIND  SUBJECT.  Zoo

to  restore  the  sight,  the  state  of  the  eye  was  not  particu-
larly examined  till  nearly  two  months  after  I  first  magnetised
Mr.  W.  At  that  period,  as  I  shall  afterwards  mention,  a
considerable  improvement  had  taken  place,  and  Sir  D.  Brew-
ster, who  kindly  examined  the  eye,  thought  he  saw  some
degree  of  separation  of  the  layers  of  the  lens,  caused  by
deficient  moisture.  By  that  time,  the  iris  contracted  very
decidedly  when  the  eye  was  suddenly  exposed  to  strong
day-light,  after  having  been  shaded  by  the  hand.  My  chief
reason  for  trying  to  magnetise  Mr.  W.  was,  that  I  thought
I  might  improve  thereby  his  general  health,  which  was  de-
licate ;  and  as  he  was  most  anxious  to  make  the  trial,  I
also  felt  very  desirous  to  ascertain  the  effects  that  might  be
produced  on  a  blind  patient.

I  operated  on  him  exactly  as  on  the  two  gentlemen  above
mentioned,  and  soon  produced  decided  effects  and  strong
sensations,  without,  however,  at  first  causing  sleep. It  was
not  till  the  twelfth  sitting,  that  I  succeeded  in  inducing  the
true  magnetic  sleep,  after  which  I  found  it  quite  easy  to  do
so  ;  and  in  this  also,  the  time  required  was  soon  reduced  to
two  or  three  minutes. I  beg  here  particularly  to  point  out,
that  as  far  as  I  could  see,  the  blindness  of  Mr.  W.  was  no
obstacle  to  his  being  affected. On  the  contrary,  the  sensa-
tions produced  were  from  the  first  much stronger  than  in
the  other  cases,  and  indeed  it  was  a  very  peculiar  and  strong
quasi-galvanic  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  lumbar  ver-
tebrae which  kept  him  from sleeping  so long,  in  spite  of
great  drowsiness. When  I  knew  this,  I  removed  it  by  a
few  passes,  and  thus  obtained  the  sleep. I  may  here  add,
briefly,  that  from  the  first  trial,  Mr.  W.'s  health  rapidly  im-
proved, and  that by  the  fifth operation,  long  before  sleep
was  produced,  not  only  had the eyes,  previously  dry?>  red,
and  unhealthy-looking,  become of  a natural color,  with  a
due  proportion  of  moisture,  but  also  a  very  copious,  tough,
and  extremely  offensive  discharge  from  the  nose,  from  which
he  had  suffered  more or  less  for  years,  (but  which  he  had
not  mentioned  to  me,)  having  been  very  severe  when  I  first
magnetised  him,  had  disappeared  entirely,  and  been  replaced
by  a  perfectly  natural  secretion. Nor  has  this  distressing
affection  once  returned  since,  although  Mr.  W.  has  had  fre-
quent  slight  catarrhs,  which,  till  I  magnetised  him,  invari-
ably  aggravated the offensive discharge. I regard  that


284  PRODUCTION  OF  THE

affection  as  permanently  cured,  and  it  must  be  borne  in
mind,  that  I  was  not  even  aware  of  its  existence,  while  Mr.
W.  had  never  thought  that  it  was  to  be  removed  by  mag-
netism. He  declares  that  it  had  rendered  his  life  burden-
some to  him,  and  no  words  can  express  the  relief  he  has
experienced.  Such  was  the  effect  produced,  by  five  opera-
tions, on  the  state  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  eyes  and
nose.  But  this  was  not  all.  His  general  health  and  spirits,
from  the  time  of  the  first  trial,  rapidly  improved,  so  that
the  change  was  visible  to  every  one,  while  he  himself  was
so  sensible  of  it,  that  he  daily  longed  for  the  hour  at  which
he  was  to  be  magnetised.  When  this  had  been  done  fifteen
times,  he  found  that  his  sight  had  begun  to  improve,  so  that
he  saw  the  full  moon,  which  for  two  years  he  had  been  un-
^)le  to  do,  and  about  the  same  time  began  to  perceive  the
gas  lights  in  large  shops,  so  as  sometimes  to  be  able  to
count  them.  It  was  only  when  he  mentioned  this,  that  I
ventured  to  hope  that  by  perseverance  his  sight  might  be
permanently  improved ;  and  in  hopes  of  this,  I  have  con-
tinued to  magnetise  him,  till,  when  I  write,  he  has  been
magnetised  40  times,  at  first  daily,  more  recently  every
other  day.  A  slow  improvement  in  the  sight  continues  to
appear,  but  in  such  a  case,  to  obtain  a  satisfactory  result,
if  that  be  possible,  the  treatment  must  be  persevered  in  for
a  long  period.  I  have  mentioned  in  this  place  the  effects  of
a  short  course  of  magnetism  on  the  health  of  Mr.  W.,  be-
cause, from  his  being  blind,  it  was  necessary  to  describe  the
case.  When  I  come  to  make  some  remarks  on  the  thera-
peutic agency  of  magnetism,  I  shall,  instead  of  repeating
what  has  here  been  said,  simply  refer  to  it.

Case  22.— Mr.  C.  M.  a  student  of  Natural  Philosophy.
This  young  gentleman  was  acted  on  in  the  same  way,
and  in  the  first  sitting  had  convulsive  twitches  of  the  eye-
lids, and  of  the  arm,  but  no  sleep.  In  the  second,  after  I
had  gazed  at  him,  holding  his  hands,  for  fifteen  minutes,  he
slept  for  five  minutes.  After  this  I  got  him  to  sleep  in  three
minutes,  but  was  only  able  to  do  so  four  times,  as  he  left
town.  I  could,  in  this,  as  in  the  preceding  cases,  fix  the
duration  of  the  sleep.

None  of  these  four  gentlemen  had  ever  been  put  to  sleep
by  magnetism  before  I  tried  them,  except  Mr.  D.,  Case  17,
whom  Mr.  Lewis,  at  my  request,  tried  one  night  to  put  to


MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  285

sleep  at  my  house,  as  I  wished  to  ascertain  whether  he
could  he  put  to  sleep  before  beginning  my  experiments.
Mr.  Lewis  soon  produced  a  sleep,  which  was,  however,  im-
perfect, similar  to  that  which  I  also  produced  in  the  few
first  trials,  so  that,  even  in  that  case,  the  true,  deep  mag-
netic sleep,  or  state  of  somnambulism,  had  never  been  pro-
duced until  I  succeeded  in  producing  it. — These  cases  will
give  a  fair  idea  of  what  I  experienced  as  to  the  induction
of  that  state.  They  are  not  selected,  but  are  simply  the
first  four  cases  which  I  tried  this  season,  and  in  which  I
persevered  till  sleep  took  place.  In  all  of  them,  had  I
stopped  short  after  one  or  only  a  few  trials,  I  should  have
failed  as  to  the  sleep,  and  I  think  the  results  are  sufficient
to  justify  the  conclusion,  that  most  persons,  if  not  all,  may
be  thrown  into  somnambulism  by  perseverance  and  patience
on  the  part  of  the  operator.  I  possess  no  unusual  mag-
netic power,  probably  less  than  the  average,  and  in  most  of
the  cases  in  which  I  had  previously  tried  to  cause  the  sleep
in  persons  not  yet  magnetised  by  others,  I  had,  just  as  in
these,  failed  to  do  so  on  the  first  or  second  trial,  and  had
therefore  supposed  that  I  had  not  the  requisite  power.

I  may  here  mention  that  I  have  this  season  tried  to  pro-
duce the  sleep  in  five  other  persons,  not  previously  magnet-
ised, and  have  succeeded  in  all  but  one.  Thus,  out  of  nine
persons,  not  before  magnetised,  I  have  put  to  sleep  eight.
The  ninth  was  only  tried  three  times,  which  is  not  nearly
enough  to  show  that  I  should  have  ultimately  failed  with  him.
Among  those  with  whom  I  succeeded  was  another  blind
man.  But  as  I  was  unable  to  make  further  trials,  except
with  the  four  cases  first  enumerated,  I  refrain  from  detail-
ing the  others.  The  method  was  the  same,  and  the  results
exhibited  nothing  peculiar.

I  need  not  dwell  longer  on  this  subject,  nor  need  I  quote
the  published  experience  of  others  on  this  point.  Enough
has  been  said  to  show  that  the  peculiar  state  called  the
magnetic  sleep  may  be  easily  induced,  in  a  large  proportion
of  persons,  with  the  aid  of  patience  and  perseverance.  I
have  seen  Mr.  Lewis  produce  the  sleep  in  numerous  instances,
generally  by  gazing  alone,  without  even  holding  the  hands.
But,  as  I  have  already  said,  his  power  of  concentration  is
very  remarkable,  and  from  what  I  have  seen,  I  believe  that
there  are  very  few  persons  whom  Mr.  Jjewis  could  not  put


286  PRODUCTION  OF  THE  SLEEP.

to  sleep,  if  not  at  the  first  trial,  as  very  often  happens  with
him,  at  all  events  after  a  few  trials.  It  is  quite  obvious
that  such  experiments  succeed  infinitely  better  in  private
than  in  public,  or  in  a  large  party,  because  in  the  latter
cases,  the  excitement  of  the  patient,  or  his  alarm,  and  the
proximity  of  other  persons,  very  much  interfere  with  the
result.

It  may  be  proper  here  to  state,  that  in  the  case  of  Mr.
D.,  who  was  frequently  put  to  sleep  in  half  a  minute,  or
even  a  quarter  of  a  minute,  I  found  that  I  could  pro-
duce the  sleep  not  only  without  contact,  but  without  his
knowing  my  intention.  On  one  occasion,  while  he  was
intently  engaged  in  conversation,  and  looking  another  way,
I  gazed  steadily  at  him,  from  the  side,  at  a  distance  of
five  or  six  feet,  with  the  intention  of  putting  him  to  sleep;
in  about  25  seconds  his  eyes  closed,  and  he  was  found
in  a  sleep  as  deep  as  I  have  ever  seen.  I  desired  him
to  sleep  an  hour,  which  he  did,  and  on  waking,  his  first
words  were  to  complain  that  I  had  not  told  him  what  I
intended  to  do.  Finding  him  thus  susceptible,  I  intended
to  make  a  series  of  experiments  in  regard  to  the  power  of
causing  sleep  at  a  distance,  but  unfortunately,  Mr.  D.  was
about  this  time  seized  with  a  severe  illness,  which  had  been
impending  over  him  for  some  time,  in  consequence  of  too
severe  study.  It  was  chiefly  an  affection  of  the  chest,  which
confined  him  to  bed  for  some  weeks,  and  after  his  recovery,
his  extraordinary  susceptibility  was  gone,  having  evidently
depended  on  a  morbid  state.  It  was  therefore  in  my  power
only  to  make  two  experiments ;  one,  similar  to  that  just .
described,  and  with  the  same  result ;  the  other,  in  which,
at  a  distance  of  about  half  a  mile,  I  attempted  to  put  him
to  sleep  by  concentrating  my  thoughts  on  him  with  that
intention.  I  was  interrupted  before  I  had  done  so  for  more
than  two  minutes  ;  but  when  I  saw  him,  he  spontaneously
told  me  that,  precisely  at  the  time  at  which,  unknown  to
him,  I  made  the  trial,  he  had  felt  an  inclination  to  sleep,
as  well  as  the  usual  sensation  when  magnetised.  I  very
much  regret  that  I  was  unable  to  repeat  this  experiment ;
for  after  his  recovery,  I  found  it  far  more  difficult  to  mag-
netise him  than  before  his  illness,  although  I  could  still
produce  full  sleep.


SUGGESTION  IN  THE  SLEEP.  287


B.  Effects  of  Suggestion  in  the  Sleep.

Here  it  is  only  necessary  to  say,  that  every  effect  above
described,  as  being  produced  by  suggestion  in  the  conscious
impressible  state,  may  be  even  more  easily  produced  in  the
sleep.

Case  23. — When  Mr.  D.  was  asleep,  I  could  render  any
limb,  or  the  whole  body,  rigid  at  pleasure.  I  did  not  mul-
tiply experiments  of  this  kind,  but  only  satisfied  myself  that
suggestion  acted  on  him  as  well  when  asleep,  as  it  had  done
in  the  conscious  state.  I  could  also,  with  ease,  fix  the  dura-
tion of  the  sleep  by  a  command.

Case  24. — Mr.  J.  I).,  (a  different  subject,)  put  to  sleep
in  my  presence  by  Mr.  Lewis,  exhibited,  in  great  perfec-
tion, all  the  effects  of  suggestion.  Whatever  Mr.  Lewis
told  him,  he  acted  on  it  with  a  perfect  conviction.  He  was
thus  made  to  fish,  to  shoot,  to  sing,  to  imagine  himself  a
general  or  a  lecturer,  to  take  a  stick  for  a  sword  or  gun,  a
chair  for  a  wild  beast,  to  feel  the  pelting  of  a  pitiless  storm,
to  hear  the  thunder,  to  be  drenched  with  rain  or  frozen
with  cold,  to  swim  for  his  life  in  the  flood,  to  taste  water  as
beer,  milk,  lemonade,  or  whisky ;  and  when  he  had  taken  a
little  under  the  last-named  form,  to  be  so  utterly  drunk,
that  he  could  not  stand  without  support.  Indeed  he  con-
tinued so  perseveringly  drunk,  that  it  took  Mr.  Lewis  a
quarter  of  an  hour  to  sober  him.  This  subject  exhibited  a
remarkable  tendency  at  all  times  to  persevere  in  any  state
in  which  he  was  put,  so  that  it  was  often  difficult  to  get  him
under  the  influence  of  a  new  suggestion,  or  to  wake  him
when  asleep,  unless  by  causing  him  to  promise  that  he  would
awake  when  desired  to  do  so.  On  one  occasion,  this  sub-
ject was  exhibited  in  public  with  great  success.

Not  only  are  most  subjects  strongly  influenced  by  sug-
gestion while  asleep,  but  they  may  in  general  be  strongly
influenced  in  the  waking  state,  by  a  command  given  in  the
sleep.

Case  25. — Thus,  I  could  cause  either  Mr.  D.  or  Mr.  T.
to  forget  everything  that  passed  during  the  sleep,  or  to
remember  a  part,  or  the  whole  of  it,  by  commanding  them
to  do  so.  I  could,  also,  by  a  command  given  in  the  sleep,
of  which  they  had  no  recollection,  fix  the  time  necessary  to


288  PHRENO-MAGNETIC  PHENOMENA.

put  them  to  sleep  next  day,  and  I  made  use  of  this  power,
to  reduce  that  time  from  20  or  80  gradually  down  to  2
minutes  or  less.  I  could  further  determine  the  kind  of  feel-
ing they  should  have  after  waking.  Having  observed  that
Mr.  D.  occasionally  felt  languid,  he  being  unknown  to  me,
in  bad  health,  I  used,  in  the  sleep,  to  desire  him  to  wake
without  that  feeling  of  languor,  and  I  found  that  when  I
did  so,  he  always  felt  light  and  well.  When  I  omitted  it,
his  habitual  languor  prevailed.  In  his  case,  as  in  all  the
others,  when  the  subjects  were  in  good  health,  (and  Mr.  D.
was  so  after  his  severe  illness,)  I  found  the  effect  of  the
sleep  always  to  be,  that  the  patient  was  refreshed  and  felt
happier.

I  have  not  myself  made  many  experiments  of  this  kind,
having  very  soon  seen  enough  to  convince  me  that  impres-
sions made  in  the  sleep  are  retained  in  the  waking  state,  so
as  to  influence  the  sensations  and  even  the  actions  of  the
subject.  Indeed,  this  phenomenon  is  one  which  presents
itself  so  frequently,  that  it  is  found  recorded  in  a  large  pro-
portion of  published  cases.  My  space  will  not  permit  me
to  quote  such  cases,  as  I  require  it  all  for  what  I  have  seen
and  done  in  regard  to  other  phenomena,  as  well  as  for  some
interesting  cases  kindly  communicated  to  me  by  others.  I
therefore  pass  on  to  another  branch  of  the  subject.

C.  Phreno-magnetic  Phenomena  in  the  Sleep.

I  have  already,  in  Part  I.,  pointed  out  that  there  is  con-
siderable variety  in  these  phenomena.  We  find  many  cases
in  which  touching  the  head  has  no  effect  in  exciting  mani-
festations of  any  kind.  This  is  the  case  with  Mr.  D.,  Mr.
T.,  Mr.  H.  W.,  and  Mr.  C.  M.,  at  least  in  that  state  in
wThich  I  have  examined  these  gentlemen.  There  is  another
class  of  cases,  in  which  the  subject  sympathises  to  such  an
extent  with  the  operator,  that  the  expressed  and  sometimes
the  silent  will  of  the  latter  will  produce  any  desired  mani-
festation, whatever  part  of  the  head,  or  even  of  the  body  be
touched.  Such  cases,  of  which  however  I  have  seen  little
or  nothing,  fall  under  the  head  of  sympathy,  where  the
silent  will  operates,  and  of  suggestion,  where  the  volition
is  expressed.  I  shall  not  dwell  on  these,  but  shall  only
say,  that  I  think  there  is  good  evidence  of  the  existence  of


PHRENO-MAGNETIC  PHENOMENA.  289

such  cases,  and  that  of  course  they  can  furnish  no  evidence
whatever  of  the  localisation  of  the  cerebral  organs.

But  there  is  a  third  class  of  cases,  in  which,  so  far  as  I
can  perceive,  no  other  explanation  is  possible  but  this,  that
touching  any  part  of  the  head  excites  to  action  the  corres-
ponding part  of  the  brain.  This  I  have  often  seen.  I
have  already  stated  that  no  such  effect  took  place  with  the
four  gentlemen  on  whom  I  have  lately  operated,  but  I  shall
here  give  a  case  or  two  to  illustrate  the  phenomenon  in
question.

Case  26. — A.  F.,  a  young  man,  was  put  to  sleep  by  me
in  a  few  minutes.  In  this  state,  every  part  of  the  head
that  was  tried,  yielded  striking  manifestations  of  the  cor-
responding phrenological  faculty.  I  had  no  reason  to
think  that  this  young  man  knew  the  position  of  the  organs
nor  anything  about  phrenology ;  but  even  if  he  had  some
general  notions  on  the  subject,  the  effects  produced  appeared
so  rapidly  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  have  simulated
them,  even  had  he  been  disposed  to  do  so,  which  I  am  sure
was  not  the  case.  Benevolence,  Destructiveness,  Combat-
iveness,  Secretiveness,  Acquisitiveness,  Self-Esteem,  Love
of  Approbation,  Veneration,  Cautiousness,  Adhesiveness,
Philoprogenitiveness,  Tune,  &c,  were  all  tried,  first  in  rapid
succession,  and  all  yielded  strong  manifestations,  although
very  often  they  were  quite  different  from  what  I  had  ex-
pected, or  were  distinct  when  I  had  no  clear  idea  of  how
they  were  to  be  manifested.  Benevolence  being  touched,
he  instantly  began  to  give  away  all  his  money  to  me,  taking
me  for  an  object  of  charity,  and  when  I  continued  the  con-
tact, took  off  his  coat  to  give  me.  This  is  the  almost  uni-
versal manifestation  of  Benevolence,  obviously  because,
when  the  feeling  is  excited,  its  most  natural  result  is  to  give
to  those  in  want.  Cautiousness  produced  the  most  vivid
picture  of  terror  I  ever  saw ;  he  said  there  was  a  fearful
abyss  before  him,  and  felt  as  if  he  was  to  fall  into  it.  Tune
instantly  caused  him  to  sing ;  Imitation,  to  imitate  not
only  every  sound  he  heard,  but  also,  with  closed  eyes,  the
gestures  made  by  those  near  him.  It  is  impossible  here  to
give  all  the  details,  suffice  it  to  say,  that  although  it  all
looked  like  first-rate  acting,  a  close  study  of  his  counte-
nance showed  the  most  entire  truthfulness.  Besides,  as  I
moved  my  hand  from  one  organ  to  another,  so  rapidly  as  to
25


290  PHENOMENA  AND  CASES

confuse  any  one  not  very  much  in  the  habit  of  guessing
what  organ  is  touched,  the  effects  never  failed  to  follow.
To  test  him  further,  I  tried  touching  two  organs  at  once,
and  invariably  obtained  combined  manifestations.  Thus
when  Benevolence  and  Acquisitiveness  were  touched,  he  put
his  hands  into  his  pockets  as  before,  but  instead  of  giving
me  the  contents,  he  treated  me  to  a  lecture  on  the  heinous-
ness  of  begging,  and  declared  that  he  thought  giving  money
the  worst  kind  of  charity.  Veneration  alone  caused  him
to  pray  humbly  and  devoutly ;  Veneration  and  Self-Esteem
combined,  gave  rise  to  a  prayer,  in  a  standing  position,  in
which  he  returned  thanks  for  having  been  made  so  superior
to  other  men  in  religious  knowledge.  This  combination
was  accidental,  Self-Esteem  having  been  first  much  excited,
with  very  amusing  results,  and  Veneration  having  been
touched  before  the  excitement  of  Self-Esteem  had  subsided,
with  the  desire  of  reproducing  the  former  humble  devotion.
Many  similar  trials  yielded  analogous  results.  I  found  also,
that  when,  intending  to  touch  one  part,  my  hand  accident-
ally glided  to  another,  the  manifestation  was  always  that  of
the  part  really  touched,  not  of  that  which  I  intended  to
touch.  In  the  region  of  the  supposed  organ  of  Alimentive-
ness,  I  found,  within  a  small  space,  three  different  points,
the  touching  of  one  of  which  produced  excessive  desire  to
eat,  of  another,  the  desire  to  drink,  of  the  third,  sensations
of  smell.  To  obtain  these  results,  which  could  not  be
known  to  the  subjects,  since  they  were  not  then  published,
nor  generally  known  to  phrenologists,  although  I  had  heard
of  them,  it  was  necessary  only  to  move  the  point  of  the
finger  one-fourth  or. one-eighth  of  an  inch,  the  three  points
certainly  lying  in  less  than  the  surface  of  a  shilling.  In
all  these  trials  it  did  not  signify  what  I  wished,  nor  what  I
said,  only  such  organs  were  excited  as  I  touched.  I  had
complete  evidence  that  the  subject  did  not  sympathise  with
me  or  with  my  thoughts,  but  that  my  touch  excited  the
faculty  corresponding  to  the  part  touched.

This  case  occurred  to  me  in  1843,  and  at  that  time  I  had
three  other  similar  cases,  in  persons  absolutely  ignorant  of
phrenology,  nay  one  of  them,  a  girl  of  ten  or  eleven,  of  the
lowest  class,  ignorant  of  everything,  and  very  nearly  im-
becile. In  some  of  these  cases,  certain  organs  could  not
be  excited,  while  others  were  easily  brought  into  action.


OF  PIIRENO-MAGNETISM.  291

In  all  of  these,  I  assured  myself  that  neither  sympathy  nor
suggestion  played  a  part.  I  shall  now  adduce  a  recent
case.

Case  27. — Mr.  C,  a  young  man,  had  been  several  times
magnetised  four  years  ago,  but  not  since.  I  put  him  to
sleep  in  one  minute,  and  found  him  even  more  susceptible
to  the  touch  than  A.  F.  The  manifestations  were  very
similar,  but  came  out  so  rapidly,  that  it  was  hardly  possible
to  be  sure  that  a  part  was  touched  before  the  effect  was  pro-
duced. If,  while  Benevolence  was  in  action,  1  touched  Ac-
quisitiveness, he  instantaneously  collared  me  to  recover
what  he  had  given  me;  if  Combativeness  were  touched,  before
I  could  remove  the  finger  he  had  struck  out  with  his  fist,
and  assumed  a  very  pugnacious  attitude.  When  I  combin-
ed Benevolence  and  Acquisitiveness,  he  pulled  out  money
and  offered  it,  but  on  my  attempting  to  take  it,  always  with-
drew it,  his  eyes  being  closed,  and  told  me  he  required  it
more  himself.  In  short,  whatever  he  Avas  doing,  the  slight-
est touch,  even  accidental,  or  with  the  cuff  of  my  coat,  on
any  organ,  at  once  arrested  him,  and  changed  his  action
and  expression.  When  in  the  act  of  falling  on  his  knees,
Veneration  being  touched,  the  slightest  touch  on  Self-Esteem
sent  him  up  like  a  shot,  or  Combativeness  made  him  attack,
in  the  fraction  of  a  second,  whoever  happened  to  be  before
him.  In  short,  I  could  play  on  him,  exactly  as  on  an  organ,
producing  any  expression,  gesture,  or  action  I  pleased,
simple  or  combined.  There  was  no  silent  or  occult  sym-
pathy with  me,  and  my  expectations  or  wishes  had  no  effect
in  modifying  the  results.  It  was  quite  impossible  to  doubt
the  entire  sincerity  of  Mr.  C,  who  was  besides,  in  a  deep
magnetic  sleep.  This  case,  like  that  of  A.  F.,  could  only
be  explained  by  supposing  that  touching  the  head  excited
to  action  the  subjacent  parts  of  the  brain.

But  this  case  presented  some  other  peculiarities.  I  could
excite  laughter  by  touching  the  organ  of  Gaiety  or  Mirth-
fulness.  But  I  could  also  cause  laughter  by  touching  the
angles  of  the  mouth,  when  it  often  became  very  violent.
In  either  case,  I  had  only  to  touch  the  middle  of  the  chin,
in  order  instantly  to  change  the  laugh  into  the  profoundest
gravity.  This  fact  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  Mr.  Bruce,
who  had  studied  the  case  four  years  before.  He  also  told
me,  that  touching  a  certain  part  of  the  leg  caused  the  young


292  SENSITIVENESS  TO  TOUCH.

man  to  dance.  I  tried  this,  but  probably  did  not  touch  the
right  spot,  or  touched  it  too  strongly,  for  the  result  was  a
sudden  and  most  violent  kick,  fortunately  received  by  a  table,
and  accompanied  by  a  very  angry  pantomime.  This  I  saw
several  times.  When  I  placed  my  finger,  for  less  than  half
a  second,  on  his  left  breast,  he  instantly  sank  down  as  if
fainting ;  but  observing  this,  I  placed  my  hand  on  Self-
Esteem  and  Firmness,  when  he  instantly  rose  into  a  posture
of  defiance.  I  am  convinced  that  I  could  have  caused  him
to  faint  entirely  in  a  few  seconds;  nay,  I  think,  in  that  state
death  might  be  produced  by  keeping  the  hand  over  the  heart.
The  effect  of  touching  certain  parts  of  the  body,  no  doubt
depends  on  their  nervous  connection  with  the  brain.

Case  28. — P.  G.,  a  boy  who  has  a  bad  impediment  in  his
speech.  I  put  him  to  sleep  in  two  minutes,  and  found  him
susceptible  to  touch  over  the  cerebal  organs,  but  not  so  in-
stantaneously as  Mr.  C.  His  stammer  was  much  diminished.
The  only  peculiarity  was,  that  when  I  touched  the  spine,
about  the  third  or  fourth  cervical  vertebra,  all  the  symptoms
of  intoxication  appeared,  particularly  an  absolute  inability
to  keep  his  balance.

These  cases  will  suffice  to  illustrate  this  part  of  the  sub-
ject. They  appear  to  me  especially  interesting,  from  the
evidence  they  afford  of  the  existence  of  an  external  influ-
ence, which  passes  from  the  operator's  hand  to  the  subject.
I  may  add,  that  in  the  case  of  Mr.  C,  contact  is  not  indis-
pensable. Pointing  with  the  finger  often  brings  out  the
effects.  But  even  where  contact  is  employed,  the  very
marked  and  violent  effects  in  so  short  a  time,  prove  that  an
influence  passes,  to  which  the  subjects,  in  a  certain  state,
are  particularly  sensitive,  as  in  the  experiment  of  placing
the  finger  over  the  heart  of  Mr.  C.

If  it  be  asked  why  these  effects  did  not  occur  in  Messrs.
D.,  T.,  H.  W.,  and  C.  M.,  I  can  only  say,  that  I  report  the
facts  as  I  have  found  them ;  but  that  I  think  it  probable,
that  the  sensitiveness  to  touch  over  the  cerebal  organs  be-
longs to  a  particular  stage  of  the  sleep,  into  which  these
four  gentlemen  did  not  come,  but  which  occurred  in  the
others.  There  is  some  reason  to  think  that  it  is  a  stage  not
so  deep  as  that  in  which  Sympathy  and  Clairvoyance  appear.
But  we  are  not  yet  able,  at  pleasure,  to  produce  the  stage
we  desire,  and  while  some  easily  pass  into  clairvoyance,


SYMPATHETIC  CLAIRVOYANCE.  293

others  only  exhibit  that  stage  in  which  the  cerebral  organs
are  excitable  by  touching  the  head  or  other  parts.  We  now
proceed  to

D.  Sympathetic  Clairvoyance  in  the  Magnetic  Sleep.

This  is  a  phenomenon  which  is  exhibited  in  various  forms,
such  as  Thought-reading,  the  power  of  perceiving  the  state
of  health  of  those  directly  or  indirectly  in  communication,
or  en  rapport,  with  the  sleeper,  and  sympathetic  or  mediate
Clairvoyance.  The  cases  which  I  have  myself  magnetised,
have  not  exhibited,  as  yet,  this  power,  but  I  have  seen  it  in
subjects  magnetised  by  others.  It  is  found  either  alone,  or
combined  with  the  power  of  direct  clairvoyance.  E.,  the
girl  mentioned  in  Part  I.,  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Haddock
at  Bolton,  possesses  both  powers  to  a  high  degree,  and  in
particular,  exhibits  sympathetic  clairvoyance,  and  the  in-
tuitive perception  of  the  state  of  health,  in  regard  to  those
placed  in  communication  with  her,  either  directly,  that  is,
by  contact,  or  indirectly,  by  means  of  their  writing,  or  a
lock  of  hair.  As  Dr.  Haddock  very  kindly  afforded  me
opportunities  of  examining  this  interesting  case,  I  shall
mention  a  few,  out  of  many  instances  in  which  I  tried  her
powers.

Case  29. — 1.  Before  I  had  seen  E.,  I  sent  to  Dr.  Had-
dock the  writing  of  a  lady,  without  any  details,  requesting
merely  to  know  what  E.  should  say  of  it.  I  did  not  even
say  it  was  a  lady's  writing,  and,  indeed,  as  the  hand  is  a
strong  bold  one,  Dr.  H.  supposed  it  was  that  of  a  man.  E.
took  it  in  her  hand,  she  being  in  the  sleep,  and  soon  said,
"  I  see  a  lady.  She  is  rather  below  middle  height,  dark
complexioned,  pale,  and  looks  ill."  She  then  proceeded  to
describe  the  house,  the  drawing-room  in  which  the  lady  was,
her  dress,  and  the  furniture,  all  with  perfect  accuracy  as
far  as  she  went.  She  said  the  lady  was  sitting  at  a  long
table  close  to  the  wall,  something  like  a  sideboard,  writing
a  letter  ;  that  on  this  table  were  several  beautiful  glasses,
such  as  she  had  never  seen.  (In  fact,  this  lady  writes  at  a
long  sofa-table  at  the  wall,  on  which  stood  then  several
Bohemian  glasses.)  She  further  detailed,  with  strict  ac-
curacy, all  the  symptoms  of  the  lady's  illness,  mentioning
several  things,  known  to  the  lady  alone. She  also  described

25*


294  SYMPATHETIC  CLAIRVOYANCE.

the  treatment  which  had  been  followed,  and  said,  among
other  things,  that  the  lady  had  gone  over  the  water,  to  a
place  where  she  drank  "morning  waters"  for  her  health  ;
that  the  waters  had  a  strange  taste,  but  had  done  her  good.
(The  lady  had  been  at  a  mineral  water  in  Germany,  and  had
derived  benefit  from  it.  The  water  was  always  taken  in  the
morning.)  I  need  not  enter  into  all  the  details ;  it  is  enough
to  state,  that  not  only  Dr.  H.  did  not  know  the  lady,  nor
even  her  name,  but  that  he  had  had  no  means  of  knowing
any  one  of  the  details  specified,  and  indeed  rather  supposed
E.  was  wrong  when  she  spoke  of  a  lady,  until  he  found  that
she  was  positive  on  that  point.  I  received  his  answer,  with
the  above  and  many  more  details,  almost  by  return  of  post,
and,  in  short,  I  was  perfectly  satisfied  that  E.  had  seen  or
perceived  somehow,  from  the  handwriting,  all  that  she  said,
as  I  knew  she  had  done  in  other  cases.

2.  Some  months  later,  I  went  with  the  same  lady  to
visit  E.  She  had  never  been  told  the  lady's  name,  and  was
introduced  to  her  and  me  as  to  two  strangers.  When  she
was  put  asleep,  Dr.  H.  desired  her  to  take  the  lady's  hand.
As  soon  as  she  did  so,  she  said,  "  Oh !  you  are  the  lady  I
went  to  see.''  "  Which  lady?"  said  Dr.  H.  "Don't  you
remember?  The  lady  who  sat  at  the  table  with  the  pretty
glasses."  She  then  proceeded  to  say,  that  the  lady  had
been  lately  again  at  a  place,  over  the  water,  where  she  took
morning  waters,  and  where  the  people  spoke  gibberish;
that  she  was  better  now,  but  had  been  worse,  and  that  a
doctor  had  repeatedly  put  something  down  her  throat,
which  hurt  her  very  much.  (The  throat  had  been  cau-
terised with  lunar  caustic.)  She  specified  exactly  the  pre-
sent symptoms,  and  entered  into  various  minute  details
concerning  what  she  had  formerly  seen,  many  of  which
Dr.  H.  had  forgot,  but  which,  on  referring  to  his  notes,
made  nearly  six  months  before,  he  found  to  be  correct.
Whenever  she  wished  to  recall  anything  of  the  former  ex-
periment, if  she  could  not  at  once  do  so,  she  referred  to
her  book,  as  she  called  it,  that  is,  her  right  fore-arm,
(I  think,)  on  which,  at  the  time,  she  makes  notes,  in  the
shape  of  imaginary  signs  to  aid  her  memory.  With  the
help  of  her  book,  she  now  proceeded  to  describe,  as  she  had
formerly  seen  them,  the  exterior  of  the  house  in  Edinburgh,
where  she  has  never  been; the  street,  (Prince's Street,)


SYMPATHETIC  RETRVOISION.  295

which  she  said  she  had  looked  down  upon  from  a  point
where  she  saw  also  houses  above  her.  (The  Earthen  Mound.)
She  spoke  of  the  long  street,  with  a  garden,  and  trees,  and
a  deep  hollow  between  it  and  the  height  opposite,  and  spoke
of  it  all  as  if  she  were  then  looking  at  it,  having,  by  refer-
ence to  her  booh,  recalled  her  former  vision.  While  engaged
in  this,  her  book  recalled  to  her  a  circumstance,  which  she
had  not  mentioned  to  Dr.  H.  at  the  time,  because,  as  she
said,  it  had  given  her  a  fright,  and  she  said  nothing  of  it.
Dr.  H.,  much  surprised,  enquired  what  it  was;  when  she
told  us,  (for  she  answered  my  questions  readily,)  that  on
her  way  to  my  house,  something  had  induced  her  to  enter
an  old  house  on  the  height  opposite  the  long  street.  I
could  not  make  out  the  precise  spot,  whether  the  upper
part  of  the  High  Street,  the  Castle-hill,  or  the  Castle  itself.
She  said  that  she  found  her  way  into  a  room,  in  which  sat
a  lady,  richly  dressed  in  a  strange  fashion ;  that  on  seeing
this  lady,  she  felt  as  if  the  lady  was  fond  of  having  people's
heads  cut  off,  and  thinking  her  own  would  be  cut  off,  she
got  out  as  fast  as  she  could,  and  proceeded  on  her  journey.
3.  I  mention  this  vision,  to  which  I  have  briefly  alluded
in  Part  I.,  because  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  was  not  a
mere  ordinary  dream,  but  that  she  had,  somehow,  got  into
sympathy  with  a  past  period,  a  phenomenon  which  now  and
then  presents  itself.  Being  curious  to  enquire  into  this,  I
requested  permission  to  ask  a  few  questions,  and  E.  agreed,
if  Dr.  H.  would  take  her,  to  go  again  to  this  house,  and
tell  us  more  about  it.  He  then,  by  some  trifling  manipula-
tion, brought  her  into  the  travelling  stage,  in  which  she
can  go,  mentally,  to  any  distance,  but  only  hears  what  is
spoken  with  the  lips  touching  the  points  of  her  fingers,  and
is  stone  deaf  to  all  other  sounds.  She  now  described  the
room  she  had  seen.  The  walls  were  of  stone,  covered  with
loose  hangings,  on  which  she  saw  pictures  of  beasts,  &c.
(evidently  tapestry.)  The  lady  was  on  a  peculiar  kind  of
sofa,  and,  as  before,  dressed  in  a  strange  but  rich  fashion.
She  wore  a  stiff  ruff,  standing  up  about  her  neck,  and  a
cap,  with  a  point  down  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  and
rising,  curved,  over  the  temples.  This  she  explained,  by
drawing  the  shape  of  it  with  her  finger.  She  was  a  great
lady,  and  cried  much  over  a  baby.  Her  husband  and  she
did  not  agree ;  they  differed  on  religious  matters,  and  the


296  SYMPATHETIC  RETRO  VISION.

lady  was  very  fond  of  priests,  Catholic  priests.  Thinks  the
lady  was  imprisoned  in  one  of  the  highest  houses,  (qu?  in
the  Castle  ?)  at  all  events  she  was  there.  Here,  in  answer
to  questions,  she  said  that  she  saw  the  child  let  down  in  a
basket  from  a  window,  and,  she  thinks,  the  lady  also,  or  at
least  a  lady.  The  lady  left  that  place,  down  below,  after
walking  a  short  distance,  in  a  strange  kind  of  carriage ;
(from  the  description,  a  horse-litter.)  She  could  see-  that
the  great  lady  was  kept  confined  in  another  place,  in  a
house  with  trees  round  it.  Could  not  see  beyond  the  trees.
Saw  the  lady,  another  time,  on  horseback,  riding  very  fast,
to  a  water,  which  she  crossed,  and  then  gave  herself  up  to
people  there.  When  asked,  why  she  did  so  ?  said,  "  Oh,
you  know,  she  thought  they  were  friendly,  but  they  were
not."  As  some  of  these  details  led  me  to  suppose  that.E.
had  got  on  the  trace  of  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  I  asked  her
to  tell  me  what  more  she  could  see.  She  said  that  the
people  whom  the  great  lady  supposed  to  be  friendly,  put
her  in  confinement.  I  then  asked,  what  the  lady  died  of  ?
E.  said  she  could  not  then  see,  being  tired,  but  would  be
able  to  tell  next  morning.  Next  day,  when  put  into  the
same  state,  Dr.  H.  asked  the  question  again;  when,  after
looking  for  a  short  time,  E.  said,  "  Oh  !  dear,  she  died  of
this,"  drawing  her  hand  across  her  neck,  and  added,  with
a  smile,  "  I  dare  say,  as  she  liked  to  cut  people's  heads  off,
they  cut  off  hers,  to  see  how  she  would  like  it  herself."
She  had  told  us,  on  being  asked,  when  she  first  saw  the
lady,  that  she  was  shelled,  that  is,  dead ;  for  E.,  like  many
other  subjects,  will  never  use  the  word  death  or  dead.  She
had  also  told  us,  that  the  house  was  no  longer  as  she  saw
it,  but  that  the  large  room  in  which  she  saw  the  great  lady
was  subdivided,  by  partitions,  into  smaller  rooms,  and  en-
tirely changed ;  that  she  saw  it  as  it  had  been  formerly.

Now,  even  if  we  regard  this  vision  as  a  mere  dream,  it
is  curious.  Her  whole  manner,  and  the  way  in  which  she
answered,  proved  to  me  that  she  was  describing  what  she
saw,  and  was  as  much  surprised  as  I  was.  I  conjecture,
that  having  somehow  been  brought  into  sympathy  with  past
events,  and  persons  long  dead,  she  saw  confusedly,  and
mixed  up  together  different  persons.  It  appears  to  me,
that  some  part  of  what  she  saw  refers  to  Mary,  and  the
rest  to  other  persons  ;  that  she  had  no  distinct  idea  of  dates,


SYMPATHETIC  RETIIOVISION.  297

and  confused  various  periods  and  events,  but  that,  on  the
whole,  she  was,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  sympathy  with  the
past.  The  question  is,  if  this  be  so,  how  was  she  brought
into  this  sympathy?  and  the  only  conjecture  I  can  form  is,
that  Dr.  H.,  who  had  passed  through  Edinburgh  some  little
time  before,  having  visited  the  Castle,  and  there  heard  a
variety  of  traditions,  more  or  less  erroneous,  about  Mary,
sympathy  with  his  thoughts  had  led  E.,  when  in  the  travel-
ling stage,  in  which  her  power  of  sympathy  is  singularly
developed,  to  diverge  from  the  direct  route  to  my  house,
and  to  enter,  mentally,  some  room  in  the  Castle,  probably
that  in  which  James  YI.  was  born,  and  that  she  had  there
found  traces  of  past  events  and  persons.  I  must  observe,
that  at  this  time  E.  could  neither  read  nor  write,  and  in  her
ordinary  waking  state,  appeared  to  have  no  knowledge
whatever  of  history.  Even  if  she  had,  which,  however,  I
do  not  believe,  many  of  the  details  are  not  such  as  are  found
in  popular  histories ;  for  example,  when  she  spoke  of  the
great  lady  as  confined  in  a  house,  surrounded  by  trees,  she
could  not,  even  after  I  asked  her,  see  water  near  it.  Now
any  one,  who  was  dreaming,  or  pretending  to  dream,  from
a  knowledge  of  popular  history,  would  naturally  have  thought
of  Lochleven  Castle,  and  the  escape  of  Mary  from  it,  the
most  popularly  known  of  all  the  events  of  her  history,  not
excepting  the  murder  of  Rizzio,  which  also  was  not  alluded
to.  I  conclude,  therefore,  that  whether  this  be  a  mere
dream  or  not,  E.  was  not,  consciously  or  unconsciously,
thinking  of  Mary,  or  dreaming  of  her,  from  what  she  knew
of  her,  but,  by  means  of  some  vague  sympathy  with  Dr.  H.,
was  brought  into  a  confused  state  of  perception  of  past
events.  I  would  repeat,  that  having  observed  her  very
closely,  I  am  thoroughly  satisfied  of  her  sincerity,  and  that
I  have  every  reason  to  believe  her  utterly  ignorant  of  every
thing  relating  to  Scotland  and  Scottish  history.  If  I  were
fortunate  enough  to  possess  the  handwriting  of  Mary,  or  a
genuine  lock  of  her  hair,  or  any  trinket  which  certainly  had
belonged  to  her,  I  should  try  E.  with  it,  and  I  am  confident,
from  what  I  have  seen,  that  she  would  then  be  able  to  per-
ceive more  clearly.

4.  I  gave  E.  a  letter,  which  Dr.  H.  supposed  to  be  written
by  a  lady.  E.  did  not  look  at  it,  but  felt  it  in  her  hand,
and  laid  it  on  her  head. She  began  to  speak  of  a  lady,


298  CLAIRVOYANCE  BY  HANDWRITING.

who  kept  coming  before  her,  but  was  not  the  writer  of  the
letter.  On  the  contrary,  this  lady  prevented  her  from  dis-
tinguishing the  writer.  She  requested  Dr.  H.  to  remove
this  influence,  which  he  did  by  blowing  on  the  letter,  and
passing  his  hand  briskly  over  it  several  times.  She  then
put  it  on  her  head,  and  said  that  it  was  written  by  a  little
boy,  whom  she  described  very  accurately,  dwelling  particu-
larly on  the  peculiarities  of  his  disposition,  his  old-fashioned
ways,  as  she  called  them,  his  love  of  reading  and  various
other  points  all  more  or  less  characteristic.  His  dress  as-
tonished her  very  much,  and  she  described  it  most  minutely
in  every  part.  It  was  the  Highland  dress,  and  she  gave
the  colors  and  pattern  of  the  tartan,  as  well  as  every  other
detail  of  the  boy's  dress  and  accoutrement.  It  appeared
that  she  had  never  seen  the  Highland  dress  worn,  and  she
thought  it  must  be  very  cold.  The  boy  was  my  own  son,
then  in  Edinburgh,  and  neither  E.  nor  Dr.  H.  knew  that  I
had  a  son,  or  that  he  wore  the  Highland  dress.  She  told
us  that  the  lady  she  had  first  seen  was  one  who  was  much
attached  to  the  boy,  and  described  her  accurately.  This
lady  had  charge  of  the  boy  during  my  absence,  and  his
letter  had  been  enclosed  in  one  from  her,  from  which  it  had
just  been  taken  when  it  was  given  to  E.  This  accounted,
Dr.  H.  told  us,  for  her  seeing  the  lady.  When  E.  was
asked  whether  she  could  see  or  discover  the  mother  of  the
boy,  she  said  that  she  had  at  first  supposed  the  lady  whose
figure  first  came  before  her  to  be  the  mother,  but  had  soon
discovered  that  she  was  not.  She  said  she  would  try  to
find  her  out,  and  would,  as  she  said,  ask  the  boy  to  tell
her  where  his  mother  was.  After  a  silence,  she  said,  "  the
mother  left  home  some  time  since,  and  went  over  the  water,
but  I  cannot  see  her  there  now,  although  I  see  her  marks
in  the  place  where  she  was.  If  Dr.  H.  will  bring  me  back
to  Bolton,  I  shall  be  able  to  find  her."  Dr.  H.  then,  by  a
few  manipulations,  brought  her  back  to  her  original  mag-
netic state,  and  the  boy's  mother,  who  was  present,  having
touched  her  hand,  she  exclaimed  with  surprise,  "  why,  you
are  the  mother  of  the  little  boy."  She  then  said  that  she
had  been  looking  for  the  lady  over  the  water,  and  had
asked  the  people  whom  she  saw  to  tell  where  she  was,  but
that  they  spoke  gibberish  which  she  could  not  understand.
She  felt,  however,  that  on  returning  to  Bolton  she  would


SYMPATHETIC  CLAIRVOYANCE.  299

be  able  to  find  that  lady.  I  have  mentioned  these  experi-
ments with  E.  in  some  detail,  (although  I  have  omitted
many  particulars,)  because  they  gave  me  the  opportunity
of  ascertaining  that  E.  was  perfectly  honest  and  sincere,
and  could  be  put  into  a  genuine  and  very  deep  magnetic
sleep,  in  which  her  sympathetic  clairvoyance  was  truly
remarkable,  being  exercised  at  great  distances  with  the  same
facility  as  on  the  spot,  provided  a  means  of  communication
were  provided.  I  also  saw,  that  Dr.  Haddock  operated
with  great  care  and  judgment.

After  I  returned  to  Edinburgh,  I  had  very  frequent  com-
munication with  Dr.  H.,  and  tried  many  experiments  with,
this  remarkable  subject,  sending  specimens  of  writing,  locks
of  hair,  and  other  objects,  the  origin  of  which  was  perfectly
unknown,  to  Dr.  H.,  and  in  every  case,  without  exception,
E.  saw  and  described  with  accuracy  the  persons  concerned.
In  other  cases,  two  of  which  are  very  interesting,  I  sent
writing  or  hair,  belonging  to  persons  unknown  to  myself,
and  obtained  accounts  of  them,  which  I  cannot  yet  verify.
But  possibly  I  may  be  able  to  do  so,  in  time  for  a  note,  to
be  added  at  the  end  of  this  work.  It  would  be  entirely
useless  to  publish  her  statements  in  those  cases,  until  I  shall
have  ascertained  whether  they  are  correct  or  not.  But
from  what  I  have  seen  of  her  powers,  I  expect  that  these
statements  will  be  found  correct.  I  shall  here  adduce  one
case,  in  which  E.  exhibited,  not  only  sympathetic,  but  direct
clairvoyance.

Case  30. — A  nobleman  of  high  rank,  much  devoted  to
science,  found  one  day,  among  the  gravel  in  his  garden- walk,  a
small  flint  arrow-head,  such  as  was  in  former  ages  used  by  the
Britons,  and  is  often  called  a  "  celt."  This  I  folded  in
several  folds  of  thick  white  blotting-paper,  enclosed  it  in
an  envelope,  which  was  sealed,  and  placed  this  in  a  second
envelope.  I  then  sent  it  to  Dr.  H.,  requesting  him  to  ask  E.
to  look  at  it,  and  tell  us  what  she  could  about  it.  When
given  to  her,  the  sealed  envelope  was  inclosed  in  a  second,
and  from  the  way  in  which  I  had  folded  it  up,  no  one,  out
of  several  whom  I  tried,  could  guess  the  form  of  the  arrow-
head by  feeling  it.  E.  first  held  it  in  her  hand,  and  then
laid  it  on  her  head,  and  very  soon  drew  an  outline  of  the
form  of  the  object,  which  she  said  was  enclosed  in  several
folds  of  blotting  paper,  nearly  white. As  it  was  very  small,


300  SYMPATHETIC  CLAIRVOYANCE.

only  about  an  inch  long,  and  very  sharp  at  one  end,  E.  at
first  took  it  for  the  tooth  of  some  large  animal.  She  said
its  color  was  yellowish  white,  with  a  few  dark  streaks,  and
pointed  out  where  the  edges  were  chipped.  On  pursuing
her  examination,  she  said  that  it  could  not  be  a  tooth,  as  it
was  made  of  stone,  and  after  (mentally)  biting  it,  in  doing
which  she  merely  approached  the  packet  to  her  mouth,  and
appeared  to  be  biting  something,  she  declared  without
further  hesitation  that  it  was  made  of  flint.  Every  detail
she  gave  I  found  perfectly  accurate,  and  as  the  packet  was
returned  to  me  intact,  I  have  no  doubt  that  E.  saw  the  ob-
ject perfectly  by  direct  clairvoyance.  She  could  not,  how-
ever, tell  its  use,  but  by  sympathy,  she  went  on  to  say,  that
a  gentleman  had  found  it  in  a  gravel  walk  in  a  garden ;
that  he  had  worn  it,  that  is,  carried  it,  in  his  waistcoat
pocket,  (I  think  she  said  the  left,)  for  some  time ;  that  this  gen-
tleman was  a  very  great  gentleman,  and,  in  answer  to  suc-
cessive questions,  she  gave  the  title  appropriate  to  his  rank.
She  was  asked  to  observe  more  about  him,  and  then  said
she  saw  him  in  a  palace  house ;  she  spoke  in  whispers  out
of  respect,  and  when  her  attention  was  drawn  to  the  point,
described  the  nobleman's  person  very  correctly.  This  was
done  on  a  subsequent  occasion,  as  I  had  requested  Dr.  H.,
when  I  found  E.  had  discovered  the  finder  of  the  arrow-
head, to  ask  her  further  questions  about  him.  In  sending
the  packet  to  Dr.  H.,  and  until  I  had  heard  all  that  E.  had
to  say,  I  carefully  avoided  giving  the  slightest  information,
either  as  to  the  object  or  the  finder.

Case  31. — Sir  Walter  C.  Trevelyan,  Bart.,  having  re-
ceived a  letter  from  a  lady  in  London,  in  which  the  loss  of
a  gold  watch,  supposed  to  have  been  stolen,  was  mentioned,
sent  the  letter  to  Dr.  H.  to  see  whether  E.  could  trace  the
watch.  She  very  soon  saw  the  lady,  and  described  her  ac-
curately. She  also  described  minutely  the  house  and  fur-
niture, and  said  she  saw  the  marks  of  the  watch  (the  phrase
she  employs  for  the  traces  left  by  persons  or  things,  pro-
bably luminous  to  her)  on  a  certain  table.  It  had,  she  said,
a  gold  dial-plate,  gold  figures,  and  a  gold  chain  with  square
links ;  in  the  letter  it  was  simply  called  a  gold  watch,  with-
out any  description.  She  said  it  had  been  taken  by  a
young  woman,  whom  she  described,  not  a  habitual  thief,
who  felt alarmed  at  what  she  had  done,  but  still  thought


CLAIKVOYANT  PERCEPTION.  301

her  mistress  would  not  suspect  her.  She  added  that  she
would  be  able  to  point  out  the  writing  of  the  thief.  On  this
occasion,  as  is  almost  always  the  case  with  E.,  she  spoke  to
the  person  seen,  as  if  conversing  with  her,  and  was  very
angry  with  her.  Sir  W.  Trevelyan  sent  this  information,
and  requested  the  writing  of  all  the  servants  in  the  house
to  be  sent.  In  answer,  the  lady  stated  that  E.'s  descrip-
tion exactly  applied  to  one  of  her  two  maids,  but  that  her
suspicions  rested  on  the  other.  She  also  sent  several  pieces
of  writing,  including  that  of  both  maids.  E.  instantly  se-
lected that  of  the  girl  she  had  described,  became  very  angry,
and  said,  "  You  are  thinking  of  pretending  to  find  the  watch
and  restoring  it,  but  you  took  it,  you  know  you  did."  Be-
fore Sir  W.  Trevelyan's  letter,  containing  this  information,
had  reached  the  lady,  he  received  another  letter,  in  which
he  was  informed  that  the  girl  indicated  as  the  thief  by  E.
had  brought  back  the  watch,  saying  she  had  found  it.  In
this  case,  Sir  W.  Trevelyan  was  at  a  great  distance  from
Bolton ;  and  even  had  he  been  present,  he  knew  nothing  of
the  house,  the  watch,  or  the  persons  concerned,  except  the
lady,  so  that,  even  had  he  been  in  Bolton,  and  beside  the
clairvoyante,  thought-reading  was  out  of  the  question.  I
have  seen,  in  the  possession  of  Sir  Walter,  all  the  letters
which  passed,  and  I  consider  the  case  as  demonstrating  the
existence  of  sympathetic  clairvoyance  at  a  great  distance.
In  Part  I.,  I  have  alluded  to  various  other  instances,  in
which  E.  has  traced,  and  been  the  means  of  recovering,  lost
or  stolen  property  and  documents,  when  put  in  communica-
tion with  the  proprietors  of  them.  I  shall  now  proceed,
merely  referring  to  these  cases,  some  of  which  have  been
published,  to  describe  some  experiments,  also  alluded  to  in
Part  I.,  which  were  made  by  Sir  W.  C.  Trevelyan,  to  test
E.'s  power  of  sympathetic  clairvoyance,  with  the  view  of
ascertaining  whether  it  was  effected  with  or  without  thought-
reading,  and  also  her  power  of  observing  the  hour  of  day
at  distant  places,  visited  mentally  by  her  in  the  magnetic
sleep.  These  experiments  were,  I  think,  extremely  well
devised,  and  satisfactory  in  their  results.

Case  32. — Sir  W.  T.  requested  the  Secretary  of  the  Geo-
graphical Society  to  send  him  the  writing  of  several  per-
sons, unknown  to  him,  and  without  their  names,  they  being
26


302  OF  TIME  IN  DISTANT  PLACES.

in  different  parts  of  the  world. Three  handwritings  were
sent.

1.  E.  soon  discovered  No.  1,  and  described  his  person,
as  well  as  the  city  in  which  he  was,  and  the  surrounding
country.  When  asked  the  hour  there,  she  looked,  but  said
she  could  not  tell.  It  appeared  on  subsequent  enquiry,  that
No.  1  was  in  Rome,  and  that  E.'s  description  of  him,  as
well  as  of  the  city,  &c.  was  exact.  As  she  generally  finds
the  hour  by  looking  at  some  clock  or  watch,  it  would  appear
that  she  had  been  puzzled  by  the  clocks  of  Rome,  which
have  24  hours,  instead  of  12.

2.  In  the  case  of  No.  2,  E.  soon  discovered  where  he
was,  and  gave  the  hour  there ;  but  it  is  remarkable,  that
she  could  not  see  the  person  himself.  She  described  the
country,  and  spoke  of  crops  of  large  yellow  corn  then
standing  (late  in  October).  The  longitude,  calculated  from
the  hour  she  gave,  corresponded  to  that  of  a  part  of  Tus-
cany ;  and  on  enquiry  it  was  found,  that  No.  2  resided
in  Florence,  but  was  in  the  habit  of  travelling  about  the
country.  The  corn  appears  to  haA^e  been  the  second  crop  of
maize,  which  was  then  standing  in  Tuscany.

8.  In  the  case  of  No.  3,  E.  found  and  described  him,  and
said  he  was  in  a  street  which  she  described,  in  a  large  city ;
the  time  she  gave  differed  from  that  of  Bolton  by  2J  or  3
minutes  only,  and  indicated  the  longitude  of  London.  On
enquiry  it  appeared,  that  when  the  writing  was  sent,  No.  3,
whose  person  was  accurately  described,  was  supposed  to  be
at  a  much  greater  distance  than  the  others  ;  but  that,  before
E.  saw  his  writing,  he  had  unexpectedly  returned,  and  was
then  in  London.

In  these  experiments,  which  were  communicated  to  me
by  Sir  W.  Trevelyan,  thought-reading  was  out  of  the  ques-
tion ;  for  Sir  W.  T.  did  not  know  even  the  names  of  the
persons,  and  if  he  had  known  all  about  them,  he  was  not  at
Bolton,  but  in  Edinburgh.  Dr.  Haddock  had  no  knowledge
whatever  of  the  persons  whose  writing  was  sent. — I  include
these  and  the  preceding  cases  under  sympathetic  clairvoy-
ance, because  in  all,  a  communication  of  some  kind,  by
writing  or  otherwise,  was  established.  But  it  would  appear
as  if  this  were  only  necessary,  in  order  to  put  the  clairvoy-
ante  on  the  trace  of  the  person  seen ;  and  that  when  that
trace  is  found,  it  is followed  up,  in  E.'s  case,  by  direct


■ THE  BOLTON  CLAIRVOYANTE.  303

clairvoyance.  At  least,  she  always  speaks  as  if  she  saw
before  her  what  she  describes,  or  rather,  as  if  she  were  in
the  place  described;  and  in  Sir  W.  Trevelyan's  experiments,
that  form  of  sympathetic  clairvoyance  which  consists  in
thought-reading,  is  excluded  by  the  circumstances.  It  is
possible,  that  when  E.  examined  the  letter  of  my  son,  she
might  have  read  my  thoughts,  as  I  was  present;  but  I  do
not  think  this  was  the  case,  for  the  letter  was  given  to  her
by  Dr.  H.,  who  supposed  it  to  be  from  a  lady,  and  during
the  whole  conversation,  although  we  were  thinking  and
speaking  of  the  same  subject,  I  could  not  observe  any  rela-
tion between  what  I  thought  and  what  she  said,  beyond  the
subject  of  our  conversation.  On  the  contrary,  her  atten-
tion was  constantly  attracted  to  details  of  which  I  was  not
then  thinking.  But  even  if  E.  did  exhibit  the  power  of
thought-reading,  which  she  very  probably  may  do  at  times,
we  must  not  forget,  that  that  power  is  really  as  wonderful,
and  as  difficult  to  explain,  as  sympathetic  or  direct  clairvoy-
ance.

I  have  mentioned,  in  the  first  Part  of  this  work,  a  re-
markable case,  in  which  this  same  clairvoyante,  with  the
aid  of  handwriting,  traced  the  progress  of  a  gentleman,  Mr.
W.  Willey,  then  in  California,  as  well  as  of  another  person
who  accompanied  Mr.  W.,  and  whose  writing  was  also
shown  to  her.  In  this  case,  which  was  published  in  the
newspapers,  E.  gave  a  multitude  of  details  in  regard  to  the
persons,  their  voyage,  their  occupations,  and  various  occur-
rences, the  whole  of  which  details  were,  in  so  far  as  con-
cerned the  period  subsequent  to  their  embarking  at  Liverpool,
entirely  unknown  to  their  families,  but  were  afterwards  fully
confirmed  in  every  point  by  Mr.  W.  on  his  return.  It  is
worthy  of  remark,  that  E.  minutely  described  the  country,
the  houses,  and  the  mode  of  life  of  the  place  in  which  she
saw  these  persons.  It  was  evidently  St.  Erancisco  and
California;  but  although  she  spoke  of  their  digging  sand,
and  even,  when  desired  to  look,  said  she  saw  shining  par-
ticles in  the  sand,  and  gave  its  value  in  dols  or  dollies,  as
she  called  them,  which  information  she  seemed  to  obtain  by
conversing  with  the  people  she  saw,  she  never  spoke  of  gold,
and  wondered  much  why  Mr.  W.  took  the  trouble  to  go  so
far,  to  dig  sand,  which  he  might  have  found  at  home.  Had
she  been  dreaming  of  California  from  ideas  suggested  to


304  THE  BOLTON  CLAIRVOYANTE.

her  mind,  she  certainly  would  have  noticed  the  gold.  I
conclude,  therefore,  that  she  merely  described  what  she
saw,  and  did  not  understand  it.  That  her  descriptions  of
the  persons,  the  places  they  had  passed  through,  and  the
events  that  had  happened  to  them,  both  in  the  voyage  out
to  Panama,  in  crossing  the  Isthmus,  and  in  the  voyage  to
St.  Francisco,  as  well  as  in  that  city,  were  exact,  cannot
possibly  be  accounted  for  by  any  suggestion,  even  had  such
been  attempted,  or  in  any  other  way  than  by  the  same
power  of  sympathetic  or  of  direct  clairvoyance,  which  I
found  her  to  possess  in  the  cases  in  which  I  tried  her.  It
was  in  this  case  that  E.  spoke  of  Mr.  Morgan,  the  com-
panion of  Mr.  Willey,  as  having  had  a  fever,  and  having
also  had,  during  his  illness,  a  vision  or  dream  of  his  wife
coming  to  see  him.  She  also  said  that  he  had  fallen  over-
board. All  these  details,  and  many  others,  were  exact,  but
quite  unknown  to  any  one  in  England  at  the  time,  and  she
gave  them  as  if  they  were  Mr.  M.'s  answers  to  her  questions.
I  have  mentioned,  that  E.  always  speaks  to  the  persons  she
sees,  and  holds  long  conversations  with  them.

Case  33. — It  is  pretty  generally  known,  that  this  clair-
voyante  was  tried  with  the  writing  of  Sir  John  Franklin,
and  a  part  of  what  she  said  has  appeared  in  the  newspapers.
I  had  the  opportunity  of  becoming  acquainted  with  what  she
did  really  say,  and,  although  of  course  the  greater  part  of  it
cannot  be  verified  until  the  return  of  Sir  John,  yet  I  am
bound  here  to  testify,  although  she  has  probably  mixed  up
and  confused  many  things,  which  we  have  not  the  means  of
distinguishing,  that  E.  has  said  nothing  concerning  him  which
may  not  prove  correct.  It  appears  that  some  clairvoyants,  of
whom  I  know  nothing,  went  so  far  as  to  predict  the  return  of
Sir  John  during  last  autumn.  If  such  predictions  were  made,
by  genuine  and  honest  clairvoyants,  I  conjecture  that  they
have  been  of  that  class,  who  are  strongly  affected  by  sympathy
with  the  feelings  and  wishes  of  those  who  consult  them,
which  feelings  and  wishes  they,  as  it  were,  reflect.  But  this
is  not  the  case  with  E.  She  has  made  no  prediction  in  the
matter,  but  has  simply,  at  various  times,  with  the  aid  of  Sir
John's  handwriting,  gone,  in  her  phrase,  to  see  him.  She
was  not  told,  and  does  not,  I  believe,  even  yet  know,  whose
writing  it  was ;  but  she  found  the  writer  in  one  of  two  ships,
fixed  in  ice,  and  surrounded  with  walls  of  snow. These  ships


IIER  VISIONS  OF  SIR  JOHN  FRANKLIN.  305

she  first  saw  in  the  winter  of  1849-50,  I  believe ;  I  saw
several  of  Dr.  Haddock's  letters  about  it  in  February  and
March  1850.  Since  E.  had  been  right  in  so  many  cases  at
a  distance,  it  was  probable  that  she  was  also  right  in  this
one.  She  described  the  dress,  mode  of  life,  food,  &c.  of  the
crews.  She  saw  and  described  Sir  John,  and  said  that  he
still  hoped  to  get  out,  but  was  much  surprised  that  no  ves-
sels had  come  to  assist  him.  She  frequently  spoke  of  his
occupations,  and  when  asked  the  time  of  day,  found  it  either
by  looking  at  a  timepiece  in  the  cabin,  or  by  consulting  Sir
John's  watch.  During  the  winter  and  spring  of  1849-50,
and  part  of  the  summer  of  1850,  she  uniformly  indicated  the
same*difference  of  time,  which  I  cannot  at  present  give  pre-
cisely, but  which  was  nearly  seven  hours.  At  whatever  hour
she  was  magnetised  and  sent  there,  she  always  made  the
same  difference.  Nay  more,  when  the  time  there  was  nine
or  ten  A.  m.  (four  or  five  p.  m.  at  Bolton)  she  would  say  that
such  was  the  hour,  but  that  it  was  still  dark,  and  lights  were
burning  in  the  early  part  of  summer.  Now  it  is  quite  absurd
to  suppose  that  this  totally  uneducated  girl  has  any  notion
of  the  relation  of  longitude  to  time,  or  of  the  difference  be-
tween an  arctic  day  and  one  in  our  latitude.  E.  also,  being
shown  the  handwriting  of  several  of  the  officers  of  the  expe-
dition, found  and  described  them.  One  was  dead  (shelled,
as  she  said,)  when  she  was  asked.  Another,  at  a  later  pe-
riod, was  dangerously  frostbitten,  but  recovered.  She  said,
that  in  one  of  the  ships  the  provisions  were  exhausted,  but
that  the  other  contained  provisions.  She  described  the  fish,
seals,  and  other  animals  hunted  and  killed  for  food  and  oil
by  the  crews.  Of,  or  rather  to,  one  officer  she  said  that  he
was  the  doctor,  although  not  dressed  like  a  doctor,  but  like
the  rest,  in  skins  ;  that  he  was  a  first-rate  shot,  and  was  fond
of  killing  animals  to  preserve  them.  (This  is  really  the  case
with  Mr.  Goodsir,  whose  writing  she  was  then  examining.)
She  added  a  multitude  of  curious  details,  for  which  I  have
no  space,  and  they  will  no  doubt  be  published  by  Dr.  Had-
dock. But  I  may  mention,  that  on  a  Sunday  afternoon  in
February  1850,  she  said  it  was  about  10  A.  M.  there,  and
described  the  captain  (Sir  John)  as  reading  prayers  to  the
crew,  who  knelt  in  a  circle,  with  their  faces  upwards,  look-
ing to  him,  and  appearing  very  sorrowful.  She  even  named
the  chapter  of  St.  Mark's  gospel  which  he  read  on  that  occa-

26*


306  THE  BOLTON  CLAIR  VOYANTE.

sion.  She  also  spoke,  on  one  occasion,  of  Sir  John  as  de-
jected, which  he  was  not  before,  and  said  that  the  men  tried
to  cheer  him  up.  She  further  spoke  of  their  burning  coarse
oil  and  fish  refuse  for  warmth,  and  drinking  a  finer  oil  for
the  same  purpose.  All  this  time,  she  continued  to  give  the
same  difference  of  time,  from  which  the  longitude  might  be
calculated.  This  time,  seven  hours,  or  nearly,  from  Bolton,
gives  a  west  longitude  of  about  100°  to  115°,  which  cor-
responds very  well  with  the  probable  position  of  Sir  John.
But  at  a  later  period,  all  of  a  sudden  she  gave  a  difference
of  time  of  somewhere  between  six  and  seven  hours,  indicat-
ing that  the  ships  had  moved  eastward.  She  was  not,  after
this,  quite  so  uniform  in  the  difference  of  time  as  before,  and
seemed  not  to  see  it  so  clearly ;  but  she  persisted  that  they
had  moved  homeward,  and  if  we  take  about  6J  hours  as  the
later  difference,  this  would  indicate  a  longitude  of  about  97°
30'  W.  After  this  change,  she  also  said  that  Sir  John  had
been  met  and  relieved,  and  has  always  since  then  seen  three
ships,  which,  for  a  long  time  past,  are  said  by  her  to  be  frozen
up  together.  The  last  observation  of  which  I  have  heard,
17th  February  1851,  gave  a  longitude  of  101°  45'  W.  At
the  same  time,  from  Captain  Austin's  writing,  which  has  also
been  frequently  tried,  she  gave,  for  him,  the  longitude  of
95°  45'  W.  She  does  not  know  whose  ship  it  is,  that,  ac-
cording to  her,  has  met  with  Franklin,  but  she  still  speaks
of  three  ships  together.  I  should  add,  that  when  E.  has
been  sent  there  at  such  an  hour  and  season  that  it  was  night
in  those  latitudes,  she  has,  quite  spontaneously,  described
the  aurora  borealis,  which  she  once  saw,  as  an  arch,  rising
as  if  from  the  ground  at  one  end,  and  descending  to  it  again
at  the  other.  From  this  arch,  colored  streamers  rose  up-
wards, and  some  of  these  curved  backwards.  She  was  much
surprised  and  delighted  with  it,  and  asked  if  that  was  the
country  the  rainbow  came  from.  She  had  never  been  told
any  thing  whatever  about  the  aurora,  and  knows  nothing
of  it.

Now,  in  all  these  details,  and  many  others  of  a  similar
nature,  there  is  nothing  impossible,  nothing  which  may  not
be  found  correct.  Many  of  E.'s  observations  on  this  subject
have  been  published,  and  all  have  been  communicated  to
various  persons  by  Dr.  Haddock,  so  that,  when  the  ships
return,  her  accuracy  or  inaccuracy  may  be  tested. I  have


SYMPATHETIC  KETROVISION.  307

lately  heard,  that  she  speaks  of  a  second  officer  as  dead,  and
thinks  he  died  about  six  months  ago.  Considering  what  I
have  myself  seen  E.  do,  and  the  numerous  cases  in  which  I
know  her  to  have  been  correct  in  her  visions,  I  am  disposed
to  think  that  she  may  possibly  be  found  right  in  many  points,
with  regard  to  Sir  John  Franklin.  Certainly,  it  is  not  easy
to  see  any  greater  difficulty  in  his  case,  than  in  that  of  Mr.
W.,  whose  proceedings  in  California  were  accurately  de-
scribed. But  it  is  not  likely  that  she  has  always  been  right,
and  it  is  probable  that  she  may  often  have  been  misunder-
stood, and  may,  as  I  have  already  said,  have  confused  dif-
ferent persons  and  times.

I  might  give  many  more  instances  of  E.'s  powers,  but  the
instances  I  have  given  are  sufficient,  I  think,  to  illustrate
the  form  of  clairvoyance,  as  it  occurs  in  this  very  remarkable
subject.

I  mentioned  in  case  29,  the  singular  circumstances  of  E.
having  been  led,  while  on  her  way,  mentally,  to  visit  my
house  in  Edinburgh,  to  enter  some  old  house,  where  she  was,
as  it  were,  transported  to  past  times.  In  order  to  show  that
this  is  not  an  isolated  fact,  I  shall  here  quote  a  very  remarka-
ble case,  of  a  very  similar  kind,  which  occurred  to  Major
Buckley,  and  which  he  has  kindly  allowed  me  to  take  from
his  notes.

Case  34. — What  follows  is  transcribed  from  Major  Buck-
ley's Note-book.  B.  denotes  the  patient,  M.  the  magnetiser.
Mr.  B.,  the  patient,  was  a  young  officer,  whom  Major  Buck-
ley magnetised  for  his  health,  and  who  became  lucid  on  the
first  occasion.  He  almost  instantly  acquired  the  power  of
visiting  distant  places,  and  of  reading  through  opaque
bodies.  He  used  also  to  go  into  a  deeper  state,  which  he
liked,  probably  because  he  had,  in  that  state,  very  vivid  and
agreeable  visions.  On  the  15th  of  Nov.  1845,  Major  Buck-
ley, at  his  request,  allowed  him  to  go  into  that  deeper  state
for  about  ten  minutes,  after  which  he  awoke,  so  to  speak,
into  his  usual  clairvoyant  state,  in  which  he  could  converse
readily  with  his  magnetiser.  His  first  remark  was:  "B.
I  have  had  a  strange  dream  about  your  ring,  (a  medallion
of  Antony  and  Cleopatra.)  It  is  very  valuable."  M.  "Yes ;
it  is  worth  60  guineas."  B.  "  Oh  !  it  is  worth  a  great  deal
more."  Placing  the  ring  in  his  hand,  Major  B.  said,  M.
u  Can  you  tell  me  its  history  ?" B.  "  Oh  !  now  I  see  it  all


308

again.  If  what  I  say  be  true,  it  is  very  valuable.  It  has
belonged  to  royalty."  M.  "In  what  country?"  B.  "I
see  Mary  Queen  of  Scots.  It  was  given  to  her  by  a  man,
a  foreigner,  with  other  things  from  Italy.  It  came  from
Naples.  It  is  not  the  same  gold  (that  is,  the  setting  is  not
that  which  it  once  had).  She  wore  it  only  once.  The  person
who  gave  it  to  her  was  a  musician."  M.  "  Can  you  tell  me
his  name-?"  B.  "It  begins  with  an  R.  Oh!  I  see  his  sig-
nature. After  the  II  there  is  an  I,  then  there  is  a  letter
which  looks  like  Z,  then  another  Z,  then  an  I,  then  there
is  something  which  looks  like  an  E,  with  a  curious  flourish
over  it.  I  can  write  it."  (He  went  to  a  table,  and  wrote
the  name,  then  added),  "There  is  something  more.  All
this  is  secret."  He  then  wrote  at  long  intervals,  until  the
paper  marked  1.  was  finished.  Once  when  I  looked  over
his  shoulder,  he  said  I  had  caused  him  to  make  a  mistake.
It  was  while  he  was  writing  to  the  left  of  the  signature
marked  2.  B.  "  The  writing  (that  which  he  saw,  and  was
copying)  is  on  vellum.  Here  (pointing  to  the  middle)  I  see
a  diamond  cross ;  the  smallest  diamond  is  larger  than  this
(pointing  to  one  of  about  four  carats).  It  was  worn,  out  of
sight,  by  Mary.  The  vellum  has  been  shown  in  the  House
of  Lords  (c{u. ?  of  Scotland? — W.  Gr.);  not  the  cross.  They
were  afterwards  placed  where  I  now  see  them,  in  the  wall
of  a  stone  building,  erected  before  the  reign  of  Elizabeth.
It  is  now  in  ruins,  and  used  as  a  farm-house."  M.  "  Who
are  living  in  it?"  B.  "  Only  an  old  man.  It  is  a  place
of  concealment  in  the  wall,  opened  by  an  iron  spring.  Oh !
I  see  how  to  open  it.  You  push  in  a  small  stone  near  it.
There  are  many  valuable  things  there.  Nobody  knows  of
them  but  myself.  .  .  .  The  ring  was  taken  off  Mary's
finger  by  a  man."  M.  "Did  he  steal  it?"  B.  "No;  he
took  it  off  in  anger  and  jealousy,  and  threw  it  into  the  water.
When  he  took  it  off",  she  was  being  carried  in  a  kind  of  bed,
with  curtains  (a  litter).  I  now  see  the  man  who  gave  her
the  ring  ;  he  is  in  a  room.  I  see  many  more  men.  There
is  a  secret  door.  I  see  a  man  with  a  dagger."  Here  he
shuddered  very  much ;  and  added,  "  They  have  murdered
him.  There  is  a  gash  here  (pointing  to  his  throat).  Oh,
Mary  is  screaming  dreadfully.  That  man  (probably  the
•one  who  took  away  the  ring. — W.  G.)  has  seized  her  by  the
hair." Here  he  was  very  much  agitated. M.  "  Don't  think


OF  SYMPATHETIC  RETROVISION.  309

any  more  about  it.''  B.  (after  a  pause)  "  I  am  looking  back
about  300  years.  M.  "  Where  are  you?"  B.  "In  Scot-
land."

He  was  again  magnetised,  three  weeks  afterwards.  On
placing  the  ring  in  his  hand,  he  said :  B.  "  You  thought  I
would  forget  about  the  ring?"  M.  "No,  but  I  wish  you
to  show  me  where  you  made  a  mistake  in  copying  this''
(producing  the  paper  marked  No.  1).  B.  "  It  was  here."
He  then  rewrote  the  words  marked,  separately,  3,  adding
the  letters  PAR  after  the  word  AMEZ.  "  Between  PAR
and  YOUS  some  letters  are  covered  with  something  green
and  wet."  He  dotted  round  the  spot  (of  mould)  marked  4.
"  I  see  some  letters  on  the  cross.  There  is  an  M,  an  S,
then  a  small  word ;  then  a  large  R.  The  ornaments  on  the
corners  of  the  vellum  are  in  gold."  Major  B.  did  not
enquire  what  they  represented.  Those  on  the  right  of  the
signature  resemble  the  leaves  of  the  thistle,  those  on  the
left  the  flowers.  Major  Buckley  appended  to  his  letter  a
rough  copy  of  the  drawing  or  copy  made  by  Mr.  B.  from  the
vellum  he  saw  in  his  vision ;  to  this  sketch  the  numbers  refer.
It  represents  an  oblong  sheet,  apparently  of  small  size,  in
the  copy  sent  to  me  about  5  inches  by  2J.

1.  The  signature.  2.  The  words  on  the  left,  as  first
written.  The  second  copy  he  made  of  these  words,  adding
PAR,  is  given  at  the  foot,  No.  3.  No.  4  is  the  spot  of
mould,  concealing  some  letters.  (The  sentence  most  pro-
bably runs  thus,  "Vous  amez  (aimez)  parceque  vous  etes
bonne."  I  do  not  know  whether  Mr.  B.  saw  only  a  small
bit  of  vellum,  like  that  here  sketched,  or  whether  he  saw
only  the  end  of  a  larger  portion,  to  which  the  signature  was
attached.  It  would  appear  that  Mr.  B.  saw  the  writing  so
distinctly  as  to  be  able  to  copy  it,  but  the  sketch  here  given
only  gives  a  general  idea  of  the  style  of  it,  as  I  have  not
seen  the  original  drawing  of  Mr.  B. — W.  Gr.)

I  regard  this  vision  as  a  most  remarkable  one,  because  it
was  quite  spontaneous,  and  nothing  was  known,  even  to
Major  Buckley,  of  the  history  of  his  ring,  except  that  his
father,  in  1829,  had  had  it  for  60  years,  having  purchased
it  at  the  sale  of  the  effects  of  a  gentleman.  The  ideas  in
the  vision,  therefore,  could  not  have  been  suggested  by
Major  B.,  nor  read  in  his  thoughts.  Then  the  very  minute
detail  of  the  writing,  and  the  intense  agitation  of  the  sleeper
on  seeing,  acted  before  him,  the  murder  of  Rizzio,  tend  to


310


MAJOR  BUCKLEY  S  CASE.


4tmy

3  » X  o  A


VQUS  AYi-Hl-


9-

i
<


;>


>


o


OF  SYMPATHETIC  RETRO  VISION.  611

show  that  the  vision  was  at  all  events  genuine.  As  to  its
accuracy,  little  can  now  be  said ;  but  it  is  conceivable  that,
if  properly  tried,  the  clairvoyant  might  be  able  to  discover
the  place  where  the  vellum  lies.  If  liizzio  ever  presented
Mary  with  a  ring,  or  cross  (although  so  very  valuable  a
present  as  the  diamond  cross,  is  more  likely  to  have  been
from  the  Pope  through  Rizzio),  accompanied  by  such  a  manu-
script, it  is  probable  enough,  that  it  (the  MS.)  may  have
been  produced  against  her  by  her  enemies,  in  the  House  of
Lords  or  Privy  Council  of  Scotland,  nay  possibly  even  in
England,  and  afterwards  concealed.  Unfortunately  Major
Buckley  has  not  been  able,  on  account  of  Mr.  B.'s  absence
from  England,  to  magnetise  him  again.  Other  clairvoyants
have  been  tried  with  the  ring,  and  have,  without  the  least
knowledge  of  each  other,  or  of  what  had  been  said,  corro-
borated the  main  facts  about  the  ring.  This,  as  Major
Buckley  was  the  operator,  might  possibly  depend  on  thought-
reading,  since  he  now  had  those  ideas ;  but  it  would  appear
that  this  was  not  the  case,  as  they  have  added  new  details
of  the  history  of  the  ring.  Thus,  one  traced  it  from  the
time  it  was  thrown  into  the  water.  It  was  fished  up  by  a
man  in  a  boat,  something  like  a  wooden  box  (a  punt) ;  that
he  kept  it  for  some  years,  and  then  gave  it  to  his  son,  who
lost  it  by  shifting  his  stick  from  one  hand  to  another  as  he
walked.  It  remained  lost  for  many  years,  till  found  by  a
man  with  two  dogs,  described  by  the  clairvoyant ;  by  him  it
was  sold,  and  finally  came  into  the  possession  of  a  gentleman
who  shot  himself.  The  suicide  was  seen  and  described,  both
by  this  and  another  clairvoyante,  who  were  much  affected
and  agitated  by  it.  (Indeed  the  sight  of  blood  or  death  in
their  visions,  almost  invariably  produces  the  most  painful
effects  on  clairvoyants,  as  was  the  case  with  Mr.  B.  on
seeing  Bizzio's  murder.)  They  said  it  took  place  in  his
drawing-room,  and  that  the  ball  passed  through  his  body.
One  or  both  of  these  clairvoyants  added,  that  at  the  sale  of
the  effects  of  the  suicide,  the  ring  had  been  bought  by  Major
B.'s  father,  who  had  kept  it  for  60  years,  and  that  Major
B.  had  had  it  upwards  of  15  years.  It  must  be  admitted,
then,  that  there  is  considerable  probability  that  the  vision
of  Mr.  B.  may  have  been  a  true  vision  of  past  events.  Not
only  are  the  chief  statements  as  to  its  early  history  con-
firmed by  others,  but  the  only  part  of  its  history  that  can


312  MAJOR  BUCKLEY'S  CASE.  312

at  present  be  ascertained,  proves  to  be  as  described  by  the
clairvoyants.  For,  till  they  mentioned  it,  Major  Buckley
did  not  know  that  his  father  had  obtained  it  at  the  sale  of
the  effects  of  a  gentleman  who  had  committed  suicide  ;  but
he  has  since  ascertained  that  this  was  really  the  case.  And
although  what  Mr.  B.  said  of  the  murder  of  Rizzio  corre-
sponds with  the  history  of  that  tragedy,  yet  all  the  rest  of
the  details  are  such  as  no  history  could  suggest.

It  appears  to  me  highly  probable,  that  if  those  who  are
fortunate  enough  to  meet  with  clairvoyants  of  such  a  kind
as  Mr.  B.,  and  to  be  allowed  to  study  them,  were  to  try
them  with  trinkets,  &c,  which  are  known  to  have  belonged
to  historical  personages  (as  Mr.  B.  was  tried  with  this  ring  by
accident),  many  curious  details  might  be  discovered.  Hair,
hand-writing  and  articles  of  dress  worn  by  the  persons,
would  probably  answer  equally  well.  In  this  way  it  is  pos-
sible that  missing  historical  documents  might  be  recovered,
where  they  still  exist;  and  I  know  that  the  girl  E.  has  been
the  means  of  recovering  or  finding  three  registers  which
had  been  sought  for  in  vain.


LETTER  XVII.

Before  passing  on  to  another  branch  of  the  subject,  I
would  point  out,  that  those  subjects  who  exhibit  clairvoy-
ance in  the  forms  hitherto  described,  are  not  always  found
accurate  in  their  visions.  I  have  already  mentioned  in
Part  I.,  that  there  are  many  known  and  some  unknown
causes  of  confusion  in  the  results,  so  that,  where  we  cannot
verify  them,  we  must  be  cautious  of  attaching  too  much
credit  to  these  visions.  One  frequent  source  of  error  is,
that  the  subject  may  see  past  events,  and  suppose  that  they
are  present.  Sometimes,  by  urging  the  clairvoyant  to  at-
tend very  closely,  we  may  discover  that  he  is  speaking,  not
of  passing  events,  but  of  what  has  happened,  a  shorter  or
a  longer  time  before.  But  notwithstanding  this,  and  other
sources  of  error,  there  are  cases,  in  which  the  clairvoyant
sees  so  clearly,  and  sympathises  so  intensely  with  the  person


DIRECT  CLAIRVOYANCE.  41  &

seen,  as  to  be  able  to  speak  without  hesitation.  •  As  a
general  rule,  we  ought  to  verify  the  vision,  before  admitting
it  as  an  instance  of  genuine  clairvoyance.

E.  Direct  Clairvoyance  in  the  Magnetic  Sleep.

Under  this  head  I  include  cases,  in  which  the  clairvoyant,
without  any  means  of  communication  whatever,  such  as
contact  with  the  person,  or  with  his  hair,  or  his  handwriting,
or  any  other  object  connected  with  him,  exhibits  the  same
powers  as  are  mentioned  under  the  preceding  head,  that  of
Sympathy.  I  include  here  also,  those  cases  in  which  the
sleeper  is  able  to  describe  or  read  the  contents  of  closed
and  sealed  packets  and  envelopes,  just  as  we  have  seen  that
some  can  do  in  the  conscious  state.

Case  35. — At  the  house  of  Dr.  Schmitz,  Rector  of  the
High  School  here,  I  saw  a  little  boy,  of  about  nine  years
of  age,  put  into  the  magnetic  sleep  by  a  young  man  of
seventeen.  As  the  boy  was  said  to  be  clairvoyant,  T  re-
quested him,  through  his  magnetiser,  whom  alone  he  heard,
to  visit,  mentally,  my  house,  which  was  nearly  a  mile  off,
and  perfectly  unknown  to  him.  He  said  he  would,  and
soon,  when  asked,  began  to  describe  the  back  drawing-room,
in  which  he  saw  a  sideboard  with  glasses,  and  on  the  side-
board a  singular  apparatus,  which  he  described.  In  fact,
this  room,  although  I  had  not  told  him  so,  is  used  as  a  din-
ing-room, and  has  a  sideboard,  on  which  stood  at  that
moment  glasses,  and  an  apparatus  for  preparing  soda  water,
which  I  had  brought  from  Germany,  and  which  was  then
quite  new  in  Edinburgh.  I  then  requested  him,  after  he
had  mentioned  some  other  details,  to  look  at  the  front  room,
in  which  he  described  two  small  portraits,  most  of  the  fur-
niture, mirrors,  ornamental  glasses,  and  the  position  of  the
piano-forte,  which  is  very  unusual.  Being  asked  whom  he
saw  in  the  room,  he  replied,  only  a  lady,  whose  dress  he
described,  and  a  boy.  This  I  ascertained  to  be  correct  at
that  time.  As  it  was  just  possible  that  this  might  have
been  done  by  thought-reading,  although  I  could  detect  no
trace  of  any  sympathy  with  me,  I  then  requested  Dr.  Schmitz
to  go  into  another  room,  and  there  to  do  whatever  he  pleased,
while  we  should  try  whether  the  boy  should  see  what  he  did.
Dr.  S.  took  with  him  his  son,  and  when  the  sleeper  was
27


314  DIRECT  CLAIRVOYANCE

asked  to  look  into  the  other  room,  he  began  to  laugh,  and
said  that  Theodore  (Dr.  S.'s  son)  was  a  funny  boy,  and  was
gesticulating  in  a  particular  way  with  his  arms,  while  Dr.
S.  stood  looking  on.  He  then  said  that  Theodore  had  left
the  room,  and  after  a  while  that  he  had  returned;  then
that  Theodore  was  jumping  about ;  and  being  asked  about
Dr.  S.,  declined  more  than  once  to  say,  not  liking  to  tell,
as  he  said,  but  at  last  told  us,  that  he  also  was  jumping
about.  Lastly,  he  said  Dr.  S.  was  beating  his  son,  not
with  a  stick,  although  he  saw  a  stick  in  the  room,  but  with
a  roll  of  paper.  All  this  did  not  occupy  more  than  seven
or  eight  minutes,  and  when  Dr.  S.  returned,  I  at  once  gave
him  the  above  account  of  his  proceedings,  which  he,  much
astonished,  declared  to  be  correct  in  every  particular.  Here,
thought-reading  was  absolutely  impossible ;  for  neither  I,
nor  any  one  present,  had  the  least  idea  of  what  Dr.  S.  was
to  do,  nor  indeed  had  Dr.  S.  himself,  till  I  suggested  it,
known  that  such  an  experiment  was  to  be  tried.  I  am,
therefore,  perfectly  satisfied,  that  the  boy  actually  saw  what
was  done  ;  for  to  suppose  that  he  had  guessed  it,  appears
to  me  a  great  deal  more  wonderful ;  besides,  his  manner
was  entirely  that  of  one  describing  what  he  saw.  I  regret
much,  that  I  was  unable  to  pursue  further  the  investigation
of  this  case,  which  would  no  doubt  have  presented  many
interesting  phenomena.  I  have  mentioned  it  as  a  recent
one,  and  because  Dr.  Schmitz  and  others  saw  the  facts  and
can  attest  them.

Case  36. — After  I  had  produced  in  Mr.  D.  (Case  1,  and
others)  the  deep  mesmeric  sleep,  I  found  that  he  exhibited
some  forms  of  clairvoyance.  Thus  he  often  saw  light
flowing  from  my  fingers,  when  my  hand  was  held  over  his
head,  and  his  eyes  were  close  shut.  He  also  saw,  in  the
same  position,  light  from  magnets,  from  a  loadstone,  and
from  many  crystals.  But  the  form  in  which  clairvoyance
was  best  developed  in  him,  at  least  when  I  made  these  ex-
periments, was  that  of  visiting  and  describing  distant  places,
both  known  and  unknown  to  him.  Having  observed  that
he  spontaneously  described  places  which  he  said  were  quite
unknown  to  him,  I  first  tried  him  by  asking  him  to  look  at
my  house  in  Prince's  Street,  he  being  then  in  the  south  side
of  the  town  ;  and  although  at  first  he  saw  it  but  dimly,
owing  to  a  thick  mist  of  which  he  complained  much,  by  de-


IN  THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  315

grees  he  came  to  see  and  describe  it  very  plainly.  He  had
several  times  been  in  the  house,  and  might  therefore  be  able
to  recall  it  in  a  general  way  ;  but  I  found  that  he  could  do-
scribe  in  detail  any  room,  or  part  of  a  room,  to  which  I
directed  his  attention,  and  among  these,  some  rooms  that
he  had  never  seen.  I  next  asked  him  to  tell  me  whether
he  saw  people  in  the  rooms  ?  Sometimes  he  did,  at  other
times  he  said  no  one  was  there  ;  and  on  some  occasions,
when  he  counted  several  persons,  I  found  that,  as  near  as
the  time  could  be  ascertained,  he  was  correct  as  to  the  num-
ber of  visitors.  I  then  desired  him  to  look  at  a  house,
about  two  miles  out  of  town,  which  he  did  not  know,  and
which  I  did  not  farther  describe.  He  found  it,  and  said
that  it  was  of  a  peculiar  form,  describing  especially  the  roof,
which  is  unusual.  He  told  me  that  he  did  so,  because  he
saw  it,  as  it  were,  from  above.  He  said  it  stood  in  a  gar-
den, and  had  trees  about  it,  but  was  not,  at  that  time,  able
to  see  any  persons  about  it,  or  to  see  the  interior. — My
next  experiment  was  to  ask  him  to  visit  Aix-la-Chapelle,
which  is  quite  unknown  to  him,  but  which  I  know  well.
My  mind  turned  to  the  great  place,  in  which  is  the  Elisen-
brunnen ;  but,  to  my  surprise,  he  not  only  readily  went  to  Aix,
but  began  to  describe  what  he  saw  so  clearly,  that  I  at  once
recognised  the  boulevard,  or  promenade,  outside  the  walls.
This  showed  that  he  was  not  reading  my  present  thoughts.
When  I  asked,  how  he  knew  that  the  place  he  saw  was
that  I  named,  he  said,  that  an  internal  sense,  like  that
which  distinguishes  right  from  wrong,  told  him  that  the  first
place  he  saw  was  the  right  one ;  but  on  subsequent  occa-
sions, he  added,  that  sometimes  another  place  would  appear
first,  but  that  the  same  intuitive  sense  told  him  that  it  was
not  the  place  wanted.  I  now  requested  him  to  go  to  the
great  place,  which,  as  I  have  stated  in  Part  I.,  he  accu-
rately described,  quite  as  accurately  as  I  could  have  done.
He  also  saw  people  moving  in  the  place  or  streets,  but  every
time  he  saw  different  people.  He  noticed  soldiers  in  various
uniforms,  and  said  that  some  wore  cloth  caps,  others  hel-
mets, such  as  he  had  never  seen,  but  which  he  described
correctly  (the  Prussian  Helms  or  Pickelhauben.)  He  ob-
served that  many  men  wore  beards  and  moustaches,  which
amused  him  much,  and  he  described  several  fashions  of
beard  that  he  saw. I  asked  him  to  look  for  several  persons,


316  MENTAL  TRAVELLING.

known  to  ma,  naming  them,  and  he  found and  described
some of  them, but not  others. One  gentleman,  whom  I
thought  of  as  sitting in  his own  room,  he  saw  walking  on
the  boulevard  with  another,  an  additional  proof  that  he  was
not  reading  my  thoughts. This  gentleman,  he  said,  wears
neither  beard  nor  moustaches,  which  is  true. He  saw,  in  a
hotel,  dinner  going  on  at  2  p.  M.,  and  at  our  dinner-hour,
without  any  questions  being  put  in  either  case,  he  spoke  of
the  saloon  of  the  hotel  as  empty,  and  the  tables  uncovered.
After  trying  him  many  times  with  Aix,  I  asked  him  to  go  to
Cologne,  and  he  soon  vtold  me  that  he  saw  it  in  a  bird's-eye
view,  or  as  from  a  balloon,  in  which  way  I  certainly  never  saw
it,  nor  thought  of  it. He  noticed  the  river,  the  bridge  of
boats,  many spires, and one very  large building,  much
higher  than  the  rest. I  begged  him  to  go  nearer  to  it,  and
he  soon  spoke  of  being  in  a  street,  where  his  attention  was
arrested  by  a  fat,  jolly-looking  old  boy,  as  he  called  him,
standing  in  the  door- way  of  his shop,  without  a  hat,  and
with  an  apron  on. At  my  request,  he  described  the  exte-
rior of  the  large  building,  at  one  part,  where  he  spoke  of
very  tall  windows,  the  shape  of  which  he  drew,  and  of  but-
tresses and pinnacles between them. As  he  was  much
struck  with  the  great  size  of  the  building,  I  conclude  it  was
the  Dom,  and  that  he  first  saw  the  outside  of  the  choir,
and eastward  part. He  afterwards noticed  a  projecting
part  (transept), very  high,  with  high  windows,  and  going,
at  my  request,  to the  west  end,  entered, and saw  inside
many  pillars  and  arches,  and  people  kneeling  on  the  floor ;
but,  whether  within  or  without,  he  could  not  see  the  roof,
which  a  mist concealed  from him. In the  street  he  saw
people,  and  remarked  many  soldiers. I  next  asked  him  to
visit  Bonn,  when  he  found  it,  and  gave  me a  most  perfect
description  of  it,  as  seen  from  the  heights  to  the  west,  from  a
point  on  which  he  declared  he  was  looking  at  the  town. I
need  not  go  into  detail,  but  his  descriptions  of  the  situation
of  the  town,  of  the  heights  to  the  westward,  of  the  course
of  the  river,  and  of  the  heights  on  the  east  or  right  bank,
were  most  graphic  and  accurate. In  all  these  cases,  he  had
the  greatest  pleasure  in  contemplating  the  new  scenes,  and
particularly  admired  Bonn  and  the  environs  of  Aix. But
in every  instance  he  called  north south, and east  west ;
telling  me,  for  example,  that  the  Rhine  ran  southwards,  and


SINGULAR  VISIONS.  317

that  both  Cologne  and  Bonn  were  on  the  east  side,  or  what
is  actually  the  right  bank  of  the  river.  I  have  no  doubt
he  would  have  told  me  that  the  sun  at  noon  was  due  north,
had  I  tried  him.  He  certainly  persisted  uniformly  in  the
directions  he  gave  for  the  position  of  places,  and  when  I
caused  him  to  look,  in  his  sleep,  at  Prince's  Street,  from  a
distance,  declared  that  the  street  looked  to  the  north,  and
that  the  Castle  lay  to  the  north  of  Prince's  Street.
Making  the  necessary  corrections,  his  local  descriptions,  in
these  and  in  many  other  instances,  which  I  cannot  here
detail,  were  not  only  correct,  but  strikingly  graphic,  and  I
could  never  discover  the  slightest  reason  to  suppose  that  he
was  reading  my  thoughts ;  indeed,  he  very  often  spoke  of
one  place  or  thing,  when  I  was  thinking  of,  and  had  per-
haps asked  him  about  another ;  and  when  he  saw,  as  gene-
rally happened  after  a  short  interval,  the  particular  house
or  street  I  asked  for,  he  was  sure  to  observe  something  not
at  all  in  my  mind.  Thus,  in  Cologne,  he  frequently  re-
turned to  the  street  he  had  first  seen,  and  very  often  saw
the  "  jolly  old  boy,"  of  whom  I  had  no  idea  :  but  when  I
asked  for  him,  it  would  frequently  happen  that  he  was
not  visible.  Nor  did  that  person  always  appear  in  the  same
way,  for  he  sometimes  stood  in  the  doorway,  at  other  times
in  the  shop  ;  sometimes  with  an  apron  on,  at  others  without
it.  He  declared  that  he  should  know  this  man  anywhere,
and  spontaneously  added,  that,  in  spite  of  his  jolly  appear-
ance, he  disliked  him  ;  why,  he  could  not  tell.

I  shall  here  mention  some  very  singular  facts  that  pre-
sented themselves  in  this  case,  in  which  Mr.  D.  saw  and
described,  precisely  as  above,  places  quite  unknown  either
to  himself  or  to  me.  I  had  in  my  possession  a  so-called
magic  crystal,  apparently  of  glass,  certainly  of  some  anti-
quity, but  the  history  of  which  is  unknown.  I  wished  to
try  whether  Mr.  D.  would  feel  any  action  from  it  while  in
the  sleep,  he  being  at  that  time  singularly  sensitive.  I
therefore  placed  it  in  his  right  hand,  when  he  felt  a  strong
current  of  cold  up  his  arm;  and,  in  the  other  hand,  a  strong
current  of  heat.  When  I  asked  him  if  he  saw  it,  his  eyes
being  fast  shut,  he  said  it  shone  so  brightly  as  to  dazzle  his
eyes  and  begged  me  to  remove  it.  I  did  so,  but  found,  in
holding  the  glass  over  his  head,  that  he  saw  it  as  well  as
before. Next  day  he  was  either  in  a  different  state,  or  at

27*


318  CLAIRVOYANT  VISIONS

all  events  less  sensitive,  and  saw  it,  his  eyes  being  closed,
•whether  in  his  hand,  or  held  by  me  near  his  head,  out  of
reach  even  of  the  open  eyes.  But  this  time  it  did  not  daz-
zle him,  and  he  looked  at  it  with  extreme  pleasure.  He
described  it  as  traversed  in  every  direction  by  broad  bands
of  light,  each  of  the  bands  exhibiting  all  the  rainbow  colors
in  great  beauty.  When  held  in  his  left  hand,  it  caused  a
strong,  but  agreeable  warm  sensation,  and  appeared  to  pro-
duce a  deeper  sleep.  All  at  once  he  said,  spontaneously,
"I  see  a  man  in  a  very  strange  dress."  As  it  occurred  to
me  that  Mr.  D.  might  be  seeing  some  one  in  whose  posses-
sion the  crystal  had  been,  or  who  was  somehow  connected
with  it,  I  encouraged  Mr.  D.  to  tell  me  all  he  saw;  and  as
I  found  that  on  subsequent  occasions  he  saw  the  same  per-
son, I  very  often  got  him  to  tell  what  the  man  was  doing,
and  in  fact  for  a  time  to  trace  his  motions,  day  after  day.
I  shall  give  the  results  as  briefly  as  possible.

Mr.  D.  first  found  himself  after  apparently  traversing  a
large  space,  and  seeing  confusedly  and  dimly  various  objects
(during  the  very  short  time  that  elapsed  after  the  crystal  was
placed  in  his  hand,  before  he  began  to  speak,)  in  a  road  on  one
side  of  which  ran  a  rapid  and  rough  river,  under  high,  perpen-
dicular rocks,  while  on  the  other  side  of  the  road  were  also
rocks,  not  so  high.  On  the  road  walked  a  man  above  the
middle  height,  between  40  and  50  years  of  age,  very  healthy
and  vigorous,  with  dark  complexion,  long  face,  prominent
features,  like  a  Spaniard,  Italian,  or  Jew,  black  hair,  long
black  beard,  dressed  in  a  black  jacket,  fur  vest,  and  black  knee-
breeches,  striped  stockings,  and  short  boots  folded  over  and
furred  at  the  top,  below  the  calf  of  the  leg.  He  had  a  belt
or  girdle  round  his  middle,  to  which  hung  something,  not  a
sword  or  dagger.  Over  all  he  wore  a  large  cloak,  which
was  open  so  as  to  allow  his  dress  to  be  seen.  His  hat  was
a  tall  and  conical  cap  of  cloth,  with  fur  round  the  lower
part  of  it,  and  a  broad  brim,  and  there  was  a  feather  in  it.
In  his  hand  he  carried  a  kmg  staff,  taller  than  himself,  with
a  crook  at  the  upper  end,  and  before  him  ran  three  or  four
sheep  on  the  road.  Mr.  D.  thought  the  shepherd's  crook
and  the  sheep  so  incongruous  with  the  rest  of  the  costume,
which  was  handsome,  and  of  fine  materials,  that  he  often
expressed  his  surprise  at  these  things.  He  followed  the
man  along  the  road  to  an  inn,  into  which  he  entered,  and


OF  A  SINGULAR  KIND.  319

had  refreshment  in  a  public  room,  where  some  men,  appa-
rently peasants,  were  sitting.  By  them  and  by  the  landlord
he  was  respectfully  received.  The  inn  did  not  look  like  one
of  this  country,  nor  were  the  peasants  English.  Their  dress
was  in  form  like  that  of  the  man,  but  of  very  coarse  blue
cloth,  and  they  had  cloaks  of  sheepskin.  When  Mr.  D.  next
day  saw  the  man,  he  was  again  walking  on  a  road,  but  with-
out the  sheep  or  crook,  and  wrapped  in  his  cloak.  The
road  was  now  in  a  wild,  bare  country,  in  which,  by  and  bye,
stunted  trees  appeared,  along  the  course  of  the  river.  The
valley  gradually  widened,  the  mountains  receding  on  each
side,  and  trees  and  cultivated  fields  appeared.  The  road
led  to  a  town,  lying  near  the  foot  of  the  hills  on  one  side,
and  before  entering  the  town,  crosses  the  river  by  a  bridge
of  many  arches,  elevated  in  the  middle.  The  man  first  seen
was  apparently  a  mile  or  two  from  the  town  on  the  third  or
fourth  occasion  on  which  he  was  seen,  and  walking  towards
it.  On  the  road  were  many  peasants,  some  carrying  bas-
kets with  eggs,  &c,  to  the  town,  some  with  carts.  The
town,  which  appeared  larger  than  Perth,  lies  on  a  slope
rising  up  from  the  river  to  the  hills  behind  ;  it  is  triangular
in  shape,  the  base  of  the  triangle  resting  on  the  hills,  the
apex  on  the  bridge.  There  are  towers  and  spires  in  it,  but
Mr.  D.  could  see  no  wall  around  it.  The  carts  and  wagons
on  the  road  are  not  like  ours.  As  Mr.  D.  could  not  give
a  name  to  the  man,  and  yet  wished  to  have  a  name  for  him,
and  as  he  seemed  to  be  a  foreigner,  and  either  a  Jew,  Ita-
lian, or  Spaniard,  in  appearance,  I  suggested  that  he  might  be
called  Rafael,  which  name  Mr.  I),  at  once  adopted.  We  shall
call  him  R.  Next  day,  Mr.  D.  found  R.  in  a  house  in  the
main  street  of  the  town,  which  rises  straight  from  the  bridge,
up  a  pretty  steep  slope.  In  passing  the  bridge,  Mr.  D.  ob-
served, first,  that  the  water  was  very  muddy ;  secondly,  that
towards  the  end  of  the  bridge,  next  the  town,  where  he  con-
jectures there  is  a  gate  or  archway,  there  appeared  to  him
a  dark  space,  in  which  he  could  see  nothing,  and  he  could
only  see  clear  again  when  he  had  reached  to  a  point  in  the
street,  three  or  four  houses  from  the  bridge.  This  I  can-
not explain,  but  the  same  blank  place  has  invariably  pre-
sented itself.  The  house  in  which  R.  was  now  seen  was  a
shop,  his  own  apparently.  A  woman,  much  resembling
him,  was  there  with  him  ;  Mr.  D.  thought  she  was  a  sister.


320  SINGULAR  VISIONS

She  seemed  to  listen  attentively  to  what  he  told  of  his  travels,
as  far  as  Mr.  D.  could  judge.  The  shop  appeared  to  be
one  in  which  are  sold  curiosities  and  second-hand  jewellery;
there  were  chains,  crosses,  &c,  of  gold  and  silver;  but  they
did  not  look  new.  When  describing  these  things  for  the
first  time,  Mr.  D.  expressed  much  surprise,  and  some  un-
easiness, at  his  being,  as  he  seemed  to  be,  outside  of  the
town,  looking  at  the  bridge,  &c,  and  at  the  same  time  being
able  to  see  the  inside  of  R.'s  shop,  without  going  there.
Afterwards,  he  got  accustomed  to  this,  and  made  no  obser-
vations about  it.  He  saw  R.  and  the  woman  at  a  meal  in
a  small  room  behind  the  shop.  The  furniture  was  coarse
and  plain,  the  fare  also  plain.  They  did  not  say  grace  be-
fore meat.  Their  drink  seemed  to  be  wine.  The  woman
in  the  shop  took  down  from  a  shelf  what  seemed  to  be  a
small  brass  globe,  to  show  to  R.  In  the  fire-place  was  a  wood
fire,  burning  on  dogs,  and  some  billets  lay  on  the  floor.
Another  day,  he  saw  R.  in  his  shop,  and  a  ragged  man  of-
fering something  for  sale  in  a  small  box,  which  R.  would
not  buy.  The  main  street,  leading  up  hill  from  the  bridge,
has  side  pavements.  It  is  crossed,  half-way  up,  by  another
street.  At  one  of  the  corners  of  this  crossing,  he  saw  a
dragoon  standing,  with  a  green,  long-tailed  coat,  red  facings,
blue  trousers  with  red  stripe,  cloth  cap,  with  a  shade  in
front,  green,  with  a  band  of  red,  and  a  red  tuft  in  the  top ;
long  sword,  with  long  belt,  boots  and  spurs.  Saw  many
names  on  the  shops  or  sign-boards  in  the  street;  but  could
not  read  them,  the  letters  being  unknown  to  him,  except  on
one  large  house,  like  a  hotel,  at  the  corner  of  the  cross
street  already  mentioned,  on  which  he  spelt  out  the  name
Schultz,  the  only  one  that  he  could  read  of  all  that  he  saw.
Another  time  R.  was  not  in  his  shop,  but  after  seeking  for
him,  he  found  him  in  a  hut,  in  a  mountainous  district,  along
with  a  number  of  men.  As  some  of  these  men  were  dressed
as  he  had  described  the  peasants  whom  he  had  seen,  in
coarse  jackets  and  wide  trousers,  with  sheepskin  cloaks,
while  others  wore  a  dress  which  seemed  to  him  more  Turk-
ish than  European,  having  cloths  rolled  round  their  heads,
and  very  wide  trousers,  and  wearing  long  beards,  he  spon-
taneously said  that  he  believed  the  hut  to  be  on  the  frontier
between  two  countries.

I  cannot  help  regarding  these  visions  as  very  interesting.


IN  THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  321

Supposing  them  to  have  been  mere  dreams,  they  are  dreams
of  a  very  singular  kind. Mr.  D.,  from  the  time  he  first  saw
R.,  was  requested  to  do  so  on  not  less  than  twenty  different
occasions. I  have  only  given  a  selection  of  a  few  of  the
more  characteristic  observations ;  had  I  given  the  whole,
they  would  have  filled  many  pages. Now,  from  the  first
observation  to  the  last,  he  not  only  never  saw  the  same
vision  twice,  but  as  he  was  at  that  time  magnetised  daily,
and  "sometimes  twice  a  day,  there  was  an unmistakeable
connection  between  the  separate  visions. Thus,  one  day
he  saw  R.  in  a  wild  country,  travelling  down  the  course  of
the  river,  by  which  the  road  ran. Next  day,  he  was  seen
in  a  lower  part  of  the  valley,  where  the country  became
more  cultivated ; on  the third  day,  he  was  observed ap-
proaching a  considerable  town,  and  on  the  fourth  was  found
in  his  own  home  in  that  town. For  about  three  weeks  or
a  month,  he  was  seen  every  day,  often  travelling  on  foot,  at
other  times  at  home. The  various  localities  were  described
with  singular  minuteness. Indeed,  the town  was  so  de-
scribed, and  that  on  many  different  occasions,  that  I  am  sure
I  should  know  it,  were  I  ever  to  see  it. It  is  obviously  not
in  England,  and  from  the  costumes,  and  the  often  reiterated
statement,  that  all  the  names  on  shops  and  signs,  with  one
exception,  a  German  name,  were  in  strange  letters,  I  con-
clude that  it  is  not  in  Germany,  but  in  the  east  of  Europe,
possibly  near  the  frontiers  of  Russia  and  Turkey,  or  Tran-
sylvania and  Turkey. It  is  possible  that  some  reader  may
be  able  to  specify  the  town. It  is  very  difficult  to  see  why
Mr.  D.  should  have  seen  these  visions so clearly  and so
persistently;  but  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  the  crystal,
which  at  first  seemed  to  call  them  up,  had  really  some  con-
nection with  them. Mr.  D.  himself,  in  the  sleep,  thought
that  the  crystal  had  at  one time  belonged  to  R.,  and  we
may  suppose  it  to  have  acted  on  Mr.  D.  as  R.'s  handwriting
might  have  done  on  some subjects. Supposing  this  to  be
the  case,  were  the  visions  concerned  with  present  or  with
past  events? Mr.  D.  always  said,  that  it  appeared  to  him
as  if  what  he  saw  were  then  actually  passing. But  if  the
visions,  as  is  possible,  referred  to  past  events,  it  is  truly  re-
markable that  the  whole  succession  of  these  events  should
have  been  traced  for  about  a  month.

But  this  was  not  the  only  instance  in  which Mr.  D.  sur-


322  OTHER  VISIONS  OF

prised  me  by  very  distinct  visions  of  distant  and  unknown
places. One  day,  while  observing  the  town  above  mention-
ed, and  describing  it  spontaneously,  as  I  always  encouraged
him to  do,  he  became  suddenly  silent, and  after  a  short
time  told  me,  that  he  was  travelling  through  air  or  space,
to  a  great  distance. I  soon  discovered  that  he  had  spon-
taneously passed  into  a  higher  stage ; perhaps  in  conse-
quence of  the  crystal,  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  acting  more
powerfully  than  usual,  he  being  then  in  a  very  susceptible,
state. As  soon  as  he  had  come  to  the  end  of  his  journey,
he  began  to  describe  a  beautiful  garden,  with  avenues  of
fine  trees,  of  which  he  drew  a  plan. It  was  near  a  town,  in
which  he  could  see  no  spires. At  the  end  of  one  principal
avenue  was  a  round  pond,  or  fountain,  enclosed  in  stone  and
gravel,  with  two  jets  of  water,  and  close  to  this  fountain  or
pond  stood  an  elderly  man,  in  what,  from  the  description,
seemed  to  be  the  ancient  Greek  dress,  the  head  bare,  long
beard,  flowing  white  robes,  and  bare  feet  in  sandals. He
was  surrounded  by  about  a  dozen  younger  men,  most  of
whom  had  black  beards,  and  wore  the  same'  dress  as  their
master. He  seemed  to  be  occupied  in  teaching  them,  and
after  a  time,  the  lecture  or  conversation  being  finished,  they
all  left  the  fountain,  by  twos  and  threes,  and  slowly  walked
along  the  avenues. Looking  down  these  avenues,  Mr.  D.
saw glimpses  of  the neighboring  hills,  and  of  the  town,
which  lay  nearer  to  the  garden  than  the  hills,  although
still  at  some  distance. This  singular  vision  also  recurred
spontaneously  two  or  three  times  ;  that  is,  Mr.  D.  saw  the
gardens  and  the  localities,  but  not  again  the  group  at  the
fountain,  although  other  persons  were  seen  enjoying  the
walks,  and  on  one  occasion  two  ladies  were  noticed,  whose
dress  seemed  also  to  be  ancient  Greek. But  what  parti-
cularly struck  me  was,  that  this  vision  only  occurred  in  a
peculiar  state,  of  which  the  consciousness  was  quite  distinct,
not  only  from  his  ordinary  consciousness,  but  also  from  that
in  which  he  saw  the  former  vision  of  the  town,  and  of  E.
This  peculiar,  third  consciousness  was  interpolated,  and  he
always  slept  out  his  full  time,  as  previously  fixed,  in  the
more  common  magnetic  state,  while  the  time  spent  in  this
new  state  was  added. On  returning,  which  he  always  did
of  himself,  to  his  first  magnetic  state,  he  had  not  the  slight-
est recollection  of  the  new  vision,  nor  did  he  ever  remem-


THE  SAME  SUBJECT.  323

ber  it,  except  when  he  came  into  the  new  state.  It  cer-
tainly seems  probable  that,  in  that  new  state,  he  was  trans-
ported to  distant  times  and  past  events.

Another  time  he  spontaneously  passed  into  a  similar  state,
but  which  I  think had  a  fourth  consciousness  of  its  own,
divided  from  all  the  others. He  told  me  one  day  that  he
was  travelling  through  the  air  or  through  space,  as  before,
but  all  at  once  began  to  appear  uneasy  and  alarmed,  and  told
me  he  had  fallen  into  the  water,  and  would  be  drowned,  if
I  did  not  help  him. I  commanded  him  to  get out  of  the
water,  and  after  much  actual  exertion  and  alarm,  he  said  he
had  got  to  the  bank. He  then said  he  had fallen  into  a
river  in Caffraria,  at  the  place  where  a  friend  of  his  was
born. But  what  was  very  remarkable  was,  that  he  spoke
of  the  river,  the fields,  farm-houses, people,  animals,  and
woods,  as  if  perfectly  familiar  to  him,  and  told  me  he  had
spent  many  years  as  a  boy  in  that  country,  whereas  he  has
never  been  out  of  Scotland. Moreover,  he  insisted  he  was
not  asleep,  but  wide  awake, and although  his eyes  were
closed,  said  they  were  open, and complained that  I  was
making  a  fool  of  him,  when  I  said  he  was  asleep. He  was
somewhat  puzzled  to  explain  how  I,  whom  he  knew  to  be  in
Edinburgh,  could  be  conversing  with  him  in  Caffraria,  as  he
declared  he  was;  and  he  was  still  more  puzzled  when  I  asked
him,  how  he  had  gone  to  that  country,  for  he  admitted  he
had  never  been  on  board  a  ship. But  still  he  maintained
that  he  was  in  Caffraria,  and  had  long  lived  there,  and  that
he  knew  every  man and  every  animal at the  farm  he  de-
scribed. It  was  evident  that  he  had  heard  of  Caffraria  from
his  friend ;  but  as  he  described  all  that  he  saw,  precisely  as
a  man  would  do  who  was  looking  at  the  place  and  the  peo-
ple, and  as  he  maintained  that  all  were  familiar  to  him,  I
could  hardly  avoid  supposing,  that,  his  mind  having  been
interested  in  what  he had  heard,  he had,  in some  of  his
previous sleeps  visited  Caffraria  by  clairvoyance,  without
telling  me  of  it  at  the  time ;  for  it  often  happened,  that  he
would  sleep  for  an  hour  or  half  an  hour  without  speaking  ;
that  when  he  had  spontaneously  passed  into that  state  on
this  occasion,  he  not  only  saw,  but  recognised  as  well  known,
and  as  seen  in  previous  portions  of  that  peculiar  conscious-
ness, the  localities,  persons,  &c.  wThom  he  described. Cer-
tainly  his  descriptions  were such as  to  convey  to  me  the


324  VISIONS  OF  DISTANT  PLACES

impression  that  he  actually  saw  these  things  as  they  exist.
On  two  other  occasions,  he  spontaneously  got  into  the  same
state,  and  always  then  spoke  as  he  had  done  the  first  time ;
but  he  retained  not  a  trace  of  recollection  of  this  South
African  vision  in  any  other  state  but  that  one.  Nay,  when
I  asked  him  about  Caffraria  in  his  ordinary  magnetic  sleep,
he  seemed  not  to  understand  me,  and  thought  I  was  making
fun  of  him  when  I  asked  whether  he  had  ever  been  in
Africa.

In  these  three  distinct  kinds  of  vision,  that  of  R.,  that  of
the  Greek  garden  and  philosopher,  and  that  of  Caffraria,  it
is  hardly  possible  to  verify  the  visions  ;  but  when  I  reflect,
that  Mr.  I),  was  able,  in  a  certain  state,  to  see  and  describe
accurately  towns,  such  as  Aix  and  Cologne,  countries,  and
persons,  at  a  great  distance,  and  quite  unknown  to  him,  I  am
disposed  to  think  that  in  these  visions  also  he  saw  the  real
places  actually  before  him.  It  would  have  been  most  inter-
esting to  have  studied  more  minutely  the  powers  exhibited,
or  which  might  have  been  developed,  in  this  very  interest-
ing case;  but,  as  I  have  mentioned,  Mr.  D.,  whose  extreme
susceptibility  at  that  time  may  have  depended  on  the  very
unsatisfactory  state  of  his  health,  was  taken  ill,  and  con-
fined to  bed  with  an  affection  of  the  chest,  for  five  or  six
weeks  ;  and  when  he  had  recovered,  I  found  that  his  general
health  was  far  better  than  when  he  was  first  magnetised,  but
his  extreme  susceptibility  was  gone.  I  can  still  magnetise
him,  although  with  far  more  difficulty;  and  since  his  recovery,
I  have  only  once  been  able  to  get  him  to  see  the  town  for-
merly described,  and  R.  I  intend,  however,  to  pursue  the
investigation,  and,  perhaps,  with  patience,  I  may  be  able  to
bring  him  again  into  a  state  of  decided  and  direct  clairvoy-
ance. Indeed,  he  several  times  told  me,  in  the  sleep,  that
he  would  acquire,  after  many  operations,  a  high  degree  of
lucidity,  and  as  long  as  I  was  able  to  magnetise  him  before
his  illness,  he  did  continue  to  improve  in  lucidity.

Case  37. — Mr.  T.,  formerly  mentioned,  occasionlly  shewed,
quite  spontaneously,  some  degree  of  clairvoyance.  Thus,
one  day  he  told  me  that  he  saw  my  carriage  arriving  in  the
court-yard  of  the  University,  which  I  did  not  believe,  as  it
had  been  ordered  an  hour  later.  But  he  said  he  not  only
saw  it,  but  saw  also  the  servant  coming  up  stairs  to  announce
it ;  and  two  minutes  afterwards,  the  servant  appeared,  the


IN  THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  325

carriage  having  by  mistake  been  brought  an  hour  too  soon.
Another  day,  he  spoke  to  me  of  seeing  his  uncle  in  Berwick-
shire, and  said  that  his  uncle  was  then  sending  off  a  letter
to  him.  He  had  no  reason  to  expect  a  letter,  as  he  told  me ;
on  the  contrary,  he  was  at  that  time  intending  to  write  to
his  uncle.  But  with  the  first  post  from  Berwickshire,  the
letter  came.  He  several  tims  saw  and  described  what  was
going  on  in  my  house,  from  the  College,  and  although  I
could  not  in  all  instances  verify  his  statements,  yet  on  several
occasions  I  was  able  to  do  so,  and  found  him  correct  as  to
the  number,  dress,  &c,  of  the  persons  he  saw  in  my  draw-
ing-room, at  certain  times,  the  distance  being  certainly  up-
wards of  a  fourth  of  a  mile  in  a  straight  line.  One  clay  he
spontaneously  visited  Inchkeith  and  the  lighthouse  there,
which  he  had  never  seen ;  but  I  found  on  enquiry,  that  his
description,  which  was  very  minute,  was  accurate,  and  it  was
certainly  given  as  by  one  seeing  what  he  describes.  He  got
at  last  alarmed,  not  seeing  how  he  was  to  get  home  again,
for  he  said  he  saw  no  boat  that  could  bring  him  away.  An-
other time,  he  of  his  own  accord  described  very  minutely  a
long  avenue  of  fine  trees,  at  the  end  of  which  was  a  large
public  building,  and  this  appeared  to  be  used  as  a  barrack,
for  he  saw  lounging  in  front  of  it  a  number  of  cavalry  of-
ficers in  an  undress  uniform,  which,  from  his  very  detailed
account  of  it,  was  not  an  English  one,  but  seemed  to  corre-
spond with  that  of  a  regiment  of  Prussian  hussars,  which  I
have  since  heard  of,  but  had  never  seen.  Why  he  should
have  seen  this  vision,  I  cannot  conjecture,  for  I  do  not  know
of  any  such  barrack  as  he  described,  and  he  could  not  there-
fore have  read  it  in  my  thoughts.  In  this  case,  I  could  not
always,  when  putting  him  to  sleep,  get  him  into  the  clairvoy-
ant state.  His  clairvoyance  was  generally  spontaneous  ;
but  sometimes  I  was  able  to  get  him  to  look  where  I  wished,
and  he  several  times  correctly  told,  at  my  request,  what  was
doing  in  the  room  of  a  friend  who  lived  at  a  distance  of
several  hundred  yards.  He  often  told  me  that  he  saw  places
and  persons  very  dimly,  as  if  through  a  mist,  like  Mr.  D.,
but  I  believe  that,  if  I  should  be  able  to  continue  experi-
ments with  him  for  some  time,  he  would  gradually  come  to
see  more  perfectly.

Case  38. — This  case  I  have  on  the  authority  of  a  lady,
who  had  it  from  the'  parties. Mr.  B.,  of  the  E.  I.  C.  Civil
28


326  CASES  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE

service,  being  at  Calcutta,  and  wishing  to  hear  about  Mrs.
B.,  then  on  her  voyage  to  England,  applied  to  a  clairvoyant  at
Calcutta,  who  being  put  into  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  asked
where  the  ship  "  Queen"  was,  at  that  moment,  answered,
that  she  was  off  the  Western  Isles,  and  was  then  passing
one  of  them,  described  as  having  a  high  peaked  outline,  re-
sembling Madeira.  The  day,  he  said,  was  hazy  and  gloomy.
Mr.  B.  asked  him  to  enter  Mrs.  B.'s  cabin,  which  he  at
first  declined  to  do,  for  fear  of  intrusion,  but  finally  agreed
to  do  so,  and  said  the  cabin  was  in  great  confusion.  Two
ladies  were  sitting  in  it,  conversing  together,  and  his  descrip-
tion of  Mrs.  B.  was  so  exact  and  graphic,  that  Mr.  B.  was
much  affected  by  it.  Captain  Macleod,  of  the  Queen,  after-
wards compared  the  statement  of  the  clairvoyant  as  to  the
position  of  the  ship  with  his  logbook,  and  found  it  perfectly
correct.  The  Queen  had  left  Calcutta  on  the  3d  of  Feb.
1850,  and  having  had  an  unusually  long  passage,  did  not
reach  England  till  the  6th  of  July.  According  to  the
average  passage,  she  ought  to  have  been  in  England  when
she  was  off  the  Western  Isles.  The  clairvoyant  had  never
seen  Mrs.  B.,  and  it  should  be  added,  that  a  fellow  passen-
ger of  that  lady  spoke  from  observation  of  the  confused
state  in  which  her  cabin  usually  was.

Case  39. — We  have  already  seen  that  Major  Buckley
often  produces  waking  or  conscious  clairvoyance,  but  he  is
also  very  successful  in  producing  clairvoyance  in  the  magnetic
sleep.  The  following  case  is  extracted  from  a  letter  to  me
from  Major  B.  A  lady,  who,  after  having  been  rendered
clairvoyant  in  the  sleep,  could  be  rendered  consciously  clair-
voyante,  was  found,  in  the  sleep  to  be  able  to  read  mottoes,
&c,  not  in  Major  B.'s  possession,  and  at  a  considerable  dis-
tance. Another  lady,  having  placed  within  a  box,  in  her
own  drawing-room,  a  motto,  requested  Major  B.  to  ask  the
clairvoyante  to  read  it.  This,  while  asleep,  she  did,  she
being  in  her  own  house,  the  motto  in  that  of  the  lady,  and
the  lady  herself  not  being  present.  The  motto  was  quite
unknown  to  Major  B.  He  then  asked  the  clairvoyante
to  look  into  a  shop  of  which  he  had  heard,  where  mottoes
were  sold  in  nuts,  but  which  neither  he  nor  his  subject  had
ever  entered,  and  to  tell  him  if  she  could  perceive  any  new
mottoes  among  those  in  the  shop.  She  said  she  saw  some
new  ones. "Many? No,  only  about  three  in  an  ounce  of


IN  THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  327

nuts.  Are  you  quite  sure  they  are  new  ?  Quite.  I  see
the  one  I  have  just  read  in  the  lady's  house.  Were  I,  said
Major  B.,  to  buy  an  ounce  there,  should  I  have  any  new
ones  ?  Yes,  the  one  just  mentioned  would  be  among  them.
Will  this  happen,  if  I  purchase  one  ounce  only  ?  Yes.
Mark  them  all  before  you  bring  them  to  me."  Major  B.
left  her  asleep,  went  to  the  shop,  purchased  one  ounce,
eighteen  nuts,  marked  them  all  with  a  file,  and  brought
them  to  her.  She  instantly  pointed  to  one,  and  directed
him  to  open  it.  It  contained  the  same  words  he  had  just
before  written  down,  and  only  two  of  the  others  contained
new  mottoes.  Next  day,  Major  B.  called  on  that  other
lady,  and  saw  the  same  motto  taken  from  the  box  in  which
it  had  been  put.

Case  40. — A  lady  who  could  read  in  boxes  while  awake,
being  one  day  on  her  way  with  Major  B.,  to  leave  a  letter
at  the  house  of  a  professional  singer,  all  at  once  exclaimed,
"  He  has  left  his  house,  and  the  name-plate  has  been  taken
off  the  door."  On  arriving  at  the  house,  this  was  found
correct.  As  the  people  of  the  house  could  not  give  the  new
address,  Major  B.  put  the  lady  to  sleep,  when  she  said,
truly,  that  the  singer  now  lived  out  of  town,  and  intended
to  come  in  to  his  duty  by  omnibus.

Case  41. — Miss  Gr.,  a  very  intelligent  young  lady,  was
magnetised  by  Mr.  Lewis,  and  became  clairvoyante  at  the
second  trial.  In  this  state,  she  went  to  see  some  near  rela-
tions in  India,  whom  she  found  in  a  camp,  and  mentioned
various  details,  which  cannot  yet  be  verified.  Mr.  Lewis,
while  she  was  asleep,  told  her  that  he  would  magnetise  her
next  day  from  a  distance,  at  one  P.  M.,  and  that  she  must
then  go  to  sleep,  and  see  him  wherever  he  might  be,  so  as
to  tell  what  he  was  doing.  When  awoke,  she  had  not  the
slightest  recollection  of  anything  that  had  passed  in  her
sleep,  and  she  was  not  told  of  what  Mr.  Lewis  had  said.
Next  day,  at  one  o'clock,  while  occupied  in  writing,  she  fell
asleep,  and  after  a  time  answered  the  questions  of  a  gentle-
man who  watched  the  experiment,  and  from  whom  I  have
the  details.  She  soon  saw  Mr.  Lewis,  in  a  room,  the  furni-
ture of  which  she  described,  and  she  also  said  he  was  writ-
ing at  one  time,  but  afterwards  walked  about  the  room,  ges-
ticulating strangely,  and  making  ludicrous  grimaces.  Every
thing  that  she  said  was  correct,  except  that  she  took  a  tra-


328  CASES  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE

velling-desk  for  a  large  book,  but  could  not  say  what  book  it
was.  Mr.  Lewis  was  then  in  Dundee,  the  lady  in  Stirling.
He  was  in  the  room  she  described,  and  had  made  gesticula-
tions and  grimaces  after  he  thought  she  must  be  asleep,
with  the  wish  that  she  should  repeat  these  gestures,  which
however  she  did  not  do.  But  at  that  distance  she  saw  his
gestures,  and  had  been  already  put  to  sleep,  whether  by  his
direct  influence  at  the  time,  or  in  consequence  of  the  com-
mand •  given  in  the  sleep  the  day  before,  of  which,  in  her
waking  state,  she  knew  nothing.  And  this  was  only  the
third  time  she  had  been  magnetised.

Case  42. — Mr.  J.  D.,  a  plate  layer  from  Annan,  was,  as
I  have  mentioned  in  Part  I.,  put  to  sleep  by  Mr.  Lewis  in
my  presence,  and  in  that  of  several  gentlemen.  He  ex-
hibited beautifully  the  phenomena  of  suggestion  in  the  sleep,
as  also  detailed,  Case  24 ;  but  after  a  time  he  spontaneous-
ly passed  into  the  clairvoyant  state,  in  which  I  examined
him,  he  being  transferred  to  me  by  Mr.  Lewis,  when  he  heard
my  voice,  but  not  that  of  Mr.  L.,  till  I  retransferred  him.
I  have  mentioned  in  Part  I.  that  I  asked  him  to  find  and
describe  my  house,  which  he  did  most  accurately,  although
he  had  only  that  day  come  to  Edinburgh,  and  did  not  know
me.  In  particular,  after  describing  the  street-door  and
steps,  the  lobby,  the  staircase,  and  the  drawing  rooms,  he
said  he  saw  a  lady  sitting  in  a  particular  chair,  reading  a
new  book.  On  returning  home  I  found  that  Mrs  Gr.  had  at
that  time  been  sitting  in  the  chair  alluded  to,  which  she  hard-
ly ever  does,  reading  a  new  book,  which  had  been  sent  to  her
just  before,  but  of  which  I  knew  nothing.  Besides,  I  found
that  J.  D.  did  not,  in  describing  the  house,  read  my  thoughts
at  all,  but  dwelt  on  many  things,  strange  to  him,  which  I
never  thought  of,  and  omitted  others  which  I  did  think  of,
and  wished  him  to  notice.  I  have  now  to  add,  that  when
he  first  said  he  would  look  for  my  house,  and  I  did  not  even
tell  him  the  street  in  which  it  is,  he  very  soon  spoke  of  being
in  the  Royal  Infirmary.  I  found  it  impossible  to  divert  him
from  this,  till  he  had  described  what  he  saw.  I  cannot  dis-
cover why  his  mind  should  have  been  led  to  the  Infirmary,
unless  it  be  that  it  had  been  pointed  out  to  him  in  the  course
of  the  day.  But  he  had  never  entered  it ;  yet  he  saw  the
interior,  described  two  men  putting  a  third  into  a  bath  on
the  ground  floor,  and  afterwards,  going  up  stairs,  entered  a


IN  THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  329

ward,  on  the  door  of  which  he  saw  No.  IV.,  counted  the  beds
on  one  side  of  it,  noticed  the  closets  at  the  ends  of  the  ward,
and  said  that  most  of  the  patients  were  in  bed,  but  that  one
man  was  smoking  "  up  the  lum."  After  leaving  the  Infirm-
ary, he  proceeded  to  look  for  my  house,  and  very  soon
found  it  to  be  in  Prince's  Street.

On  this  occasion  J.  D.  became  only  accidentally  clair-
voyant, and  was  not  very  highly  lucid  ;  but  on  other  occa-
sions Mr.  Lewis  found  him  to  possess  a  rare  degree  of  lucid-
ity. At  Mr.  L.'s  request,  he  once  mentally  visited  St.  John's,
New  Brunswick ;  told  Mr.  L.  that  his  mother,  of  whom  he,
Mr.  L.,  had  hot  heard  for  years,  was  alive  and  in  that  place.
Also  than  on  a  certain  day  Mr.  Lewis  would  receive  a  letter
from  that  quarter,  on  business  of  importance,  which  was
now  on  the  way  ;  that  it  was  written  by  an  agent  or  execu-
tor, who  was  then  ill ;  that  the  mother  of  Mr.  L.  would  also
soon  receive  a  letter  which  Mr.  L.  had  written  ;  and  he
added  private  information  of  much  importance  to  Mr.  Lewis.
The  whole  proved  quite  correct.  Mr.  L.  received  the  letter
announced,  from  an  agent,  whose  illness  and  death  was  men-
tioned in  a  later  communication.  Mr.  L.'s  mother  proved
to  be  living  there,  and  she  also  received  the  last  letter  he
had  written,  without  a  knowledge  of  her  being  alive,  or  of
her  address.  I  have  since  heard  of  various  other  instances.
of  J.  D.'s  great  lucidity.

Case  43. — L.  W.,  a  young  woman,  aged  25,  of  fair  com-
plexion and  nervous  temperament,  servant  in  the  family  of
Dr.  M'Culloch,  Dumfries,  of  excellent  character  in  every
respect,  was  magnetised  by  Mr.  Lewis,  and  became  clair-
voyante.  On  the  6th  of  October  1850,  she  was  put  to  sleep
in  the  evening,  and  asked  to  visit  a  school  for  young  ladies
at  Boulogne,  where  Dr.  M.'s  daughter  had  been  for  several
months,  and  then  was.  She  said  she  saw  her  going  to  bed
at  a  quarter  to  nine,  and  hanging  up  a  brown  dress  which
she  had  worn  that  day,  because  the  day  was  wintry.  It
was  supposed  that  this  was  a  mistake,  as  that  dress  was  not
to  be  worn  till  winter.  She  said  that  the  young  lady  was
to  return  home  in  June  or  July,  and  afterwards  to  go  back
to  Boulogne.  This  also  was  supposed  to  be  quite  wrong.
She  described  minutely  the  person  of  the  English  teacher,
and  said  there  were  25  scholars,  a  point  not  known  to  any
one  in  Dumfries. She  said  they  dined  at  half-past  one,  and

9K*


330  CASES  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE

drank  no  wine,  but  some  light  stuff  out  of  a  very  large  flask
of  a  peculiar  shape.  She  also  described  the  bed  and  other
furniture  of  the  young  ladies'  bed-room,  particularly  a  small
carpet,  of  a  stair-carpet  pattern,  a  deep  red  color,  much
faded.  Miss  M.  heard  from  her  mother  last  week,  on  the
4th,  she  thought,  and  intends  to  write  home  on  Wednesday
the  9th.  She  also  described  a  lady  whom  she  took  for  the
school-mistress,  as  a  stout  woman,  dressed  in  black  satin,
wearing  a  cap,  and  with  black  hair.  Miss  M.  generally
sleeps  alone,  but  sometimes  one  of  the  young  ladies  sleeps
with  her.  One  of  the  French  teachers  sometimes  instructs
in  music.  Miss  M.  was  at  the  English  church  in  the  fore-
noon, but  not  in  the  afternoon,  because  it  was  rather  wet.
The  text  of  the  sermon  was  from  Luke  xvii.

On  enquiry,  almost  the  whole  of  these  statements  were
found  correct.  A  few  were  wrong.  Thus,  Miss  M.  did  go
to  church  in  the  afternoon  also,  and  the  text  in  the  forenoon
was  not  from  Luke.  The  lady  L.  W.  took  for  the  school-
mistress was  a  friend  on  a  visit  to  her.  But  in  almost  every
thing  else,  L.  W.  was  right.  Thus,  Miss  M.  had  worn  the
brown  dress  that  day,  for  the  first  time,  sooner  than  she  had
intended,  because  the  day  was  very  cold.  She  had  gone  to
bed  that  evening  at  a  quarter  to  nine,  and  had  hung  the
dress  in  her  cupboard.  Only  the  day  before  she  and  the
other  young  ladies  had  been  unexpectedly  told  that  they
would  have  to  return  home  about  the  end  of  June  or  begin-
ning of  July,  because  the  mistress  was  obliged  to  go  at  that
time  to  Germany,  which  was  entirely  unknown  to  and  unex-
pected by  Miss  M.'s  family.  The  person  of  the  English
teacher  was  correctly  described.  The  description  of  the
dinner  was  generally  correct,  and  the  water  flask  was
exactly  as  L.  W.  said.  The  furniture  of  the  bed-room  was
also  correctly  described,  as  was  the  pattern  and  color  of
the  carpet  before  the  bed.  Miss  M.  did  intend  to  write,
and  did  write  on  the  9th.  One  of  the  young  ladies  some-
times slept  with  her  ;  and  one  of  the  French  teachers  occa-
sionally gave  instructions  in  music.  The  number  of  scho-
lars, which  had  varied  much,  was  then  25.

Now  it  is  impossible  that  these  things  could  have  been
suggested  to  L.  W.,  because  no  one  in  Dumfries  knew  them,
and  several  of  them,  such  as  the  unexpected  return  of  Miss
M.,  were  quite  opposed  to  what  her  parents  understood,  and


IN  THE  MAGNETIC  SLEEP.  331

had  only  then  become  known  to  herself.  The  girl,  moreover,
spoke  and  acted  as  if  looking  at  what  she  described,  and  it
cannot  I  think,  be  doubted  that,  by  some  means  she  did  see
it.  The  case  is  remarkable  also  because  the  girl  mentioned
correctly  various  points,  which  cannot  .here  be  given,  as  to
what  passed  in  the  mind  of  Miss  M.,  and  because  there  was
some  tendency  to  prevision  of  future  events,  as  in  regard  to
her  writing  on  the  9th,  and  her  return  at  a  later  period.

Case  44. — E.,  the  clairvoyante  of  Dr.  Haddock,  for-
merly mentioned,  is  often  clairvoyante  without  any  means
of  communication,  such  as  writing,  &c,  and  sometimes  spon-
taneously passes  into  a  lucid  state,  without  any  artificial
process.  One  day  lately,  Dr.  H.  received  a  letter,  the
writing  of  the  address  of  which  he  did  not  recognise.  E.
requested  him  not  to  open  it,  till  she  had  told  him  of  a
dream  (that  is,  an  act  of  spontaneous  clairvoyance,)  she  had
had  about  it.  She  had  seen,  as  it  were,  the  form  of  its
contents,  but  it  had  not  appeared  to  her  open.  She  said
there  were  two  sheets  in  it,  one  of  which  had  a  piece  cut
off,  and  a  plain  piece  of  paper,  apparently  that  cut  off,  was
also  in  the  envelope.  In  connection  with  the  letter  she  saw
a  man,  and  a  funeral.  On  opening  the  letter,  Dr.  H.  found
every  thing  just  as  E.  had  described,  and  the  first  sentence
referred  to  the  death  of  a  gentleman. — ^This  case  I  consider
very  interesting,  as  showing,  how  true  dreams,  as  this  was,
are,  in  all  probability,  very  often  acts  of  clairvoyance.  It
is  remarkable  also,  because  E.,  before  the  letter  was  opened,
not  only  described  its  form,  &c,  but  had  ideas  of  death  and
a  funeral  connected  with  it,  which  ideas  were  in  the  mind
of  the  writer  when  she  began  her  letter.  But  the  writer
and  E.  were  200  miles  apart.  Whatever  may  have  been
the  ultimate  result,  it  appears  that  E.  had  found  the  trace
of  all  the  ideas  concerning  the  letter  in  the  writer's  mind,
at  that  great  distance,  and  had  then  followed  them  up  for
herself.

It  would  be  tedious  here  to  go  into  detail ;  but  I  may
briefly  mention,  that  E.,  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  as  I  saw
more  than  once,  could  see  perfectly  what  passed  behind  her,
her  eyes  being  closed ;  or  any  thing  placed  in  such  a  posi-
tion, that,  had  her  eyes  been  open,  she  could  not  have  seen
it ;  she  could  also  see  very  often  all  that  passed  outside  of
the  door,  and  when  I  was  there,  told  us  how  many  of  the


332  REV.  A.  gilmour's  case.

servants  of  the  hotel  were  listening  at  the  door,  in  hopes  of
hearing  wonders ;  she  would  also  often  tell  what  was  doing
in  the  room  above  or  below  her.  In  short,  she  frequently
exhibited  direct  clairvoyance  in  every  form,  not  only  in
those  just  mentioned,  but  also  in  that  of  seeing  prints  or
pictures  shut  up  in  boxes.  Besides  seeing  various  instances
of  direct  clairvoyance,  I  was  able  to  satisfy  myself  that  Dr.
Haddock's  experiments  were  made  with  the  greatest  care
and  judgment ;  that  he  was  particularly  well  acquainted
with  the  various  causes  of  error  and  confusion,  very  careful
to  avoid  these,  and  that  in  short  his  accounts  of  such  ex-
experiments  as  I  had  not  seen  were  entirely  trustworthy.  I
shall  have  occasion  again  to  return  to  this  case.

Case  45. — The  next  case  is  one  which  I  regard  as  par-
ticularly valuable,  because  the  observer,  in  whose  words  I
shall  give  it,  had  never  seen  any  magnetic  experiments  what-
ever, and  had  only  read  a  few  works  on  the  subject,  when  he
resolved  to  try  for  himself,  and  succeeded,  in  the  first  case,
in  producing,  not  only  the  magnetic  sleep,  but  also  clairvoy-
ance. He  is  the  Rev.  A.  Gilmour,  a  highly  respected
clergyman,  residing  in  Greenock,  and  well  known  to  be  a
very  able  and  highly  accomplished  gentleman.  At  my  re-
quest, he  wrote  the  following  letter,  which  I  give  without
abridgement,  because  it  is  an  excellent  example  of  what  may
be  done  by  any  of  us,  if  we  only  take  the  trouble  to  experi-
ment for  ourselves.  It  will  be  seen  also  that  this  case  illus-
trates many  other  phenomena,  besides  direct  clairvoyance,
such  as  sympathy  and  community  of  sensations.  And  I  may
here  add,  that  if  my  space  permitted,  I  could  have  published
several  similar  accounts,  of  the  results  obtained  by  various
ladies  and  gentlemen  of  my  acquaintance.  As  that  cannot
be  done  in  this  work,  I  must  content  myself  with  giving  Mr.
Gilinour's  letter  as  a  type  of  a  numerous  class  of  communi-
cations, and  reminding  you  that  many  have  been  equally  or
even  more  successful,  whose  observations  have  never  been
published,  and  that  the  results  of  these  numerous  private
experiments  entirely  confirm,  as  far  as  they  go,  the  state-
ments of  professed  magnetisers,  and  the  multitudes  of  pub-
lished cases  to  be  found  in  the  Zoist,  and  in  numerous  French
and. German  periodicals  devoted  to  magnetism.


REV.  A.  GILMOUR  S  LETTER.  666

"My  Dear  Dr.  Gregory,

"I  had  read  a  good  deal  about  Animal  Magnet-
ism in  the  spring  of  1843,  but  I  had  never  seen  any  person
put  under  its  influence.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Townsend's  works
were  my  text-book  upon  the  subject.  The  whole  seemed  to  me
to  be  a  mystery,  yet  I  felt  that  I  was  not  warranted  in  re-
jecting the  testimony  of  upright  and  honorable  men,  merely
because  I  could  not  understand  the  subject  in  question.

"I  resolved  to  make  experiments  for  myself,  following  the
directions  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Townsend.  I  asked  one  of  my
servants,  V.  R.,  May  27,  1843,  if  she  was  willing  to  be
mesmerised  ;  she  consented.  Her  temperament  is  nervous,
bilious,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  pulse  80  and  small,*  age  18,
person  thin  and  spare.  I  gazed  steadily  for  about  seven
minutes  upon  the  pupil  of  her  right  eye,  directing  her  to
look  fixedly  into  mine.  This  I  continued  to  do  for  about
fourteen  minutes,  and  was  about  to  give  it  up,  when  she  told
me  that  she  felt  very  strangely.  I  should  have  mentioned
that  she  had  never  heard  of  mesmerism  before  this.  On  get-
ting the  hint  that  she  felt  very  strangely,  I  persevered  for
ten  minutes  longer,  when  her  eyes  gently  closed,  and  she
was  fast  asleep.

"  She  appeared  to  be  agitated;  her  hands  and  arms  moved
as  if  under  the  influence  of  irregular  nervous  twitches.  Her
head  kept  up  a  kind  of  rocking  motion,  and  on  being  asked
how  she  felt,  answered  'very  funny.'  I  made  a  few  reverse
passes,  when  she  said  that  she  felt  very  happy.  I  kept  her
in  this  state  for  about  forty-five  minutes  I  tried  to  affect
her  phrenological  developments,  but  could  not.  I  tickled  her
nose  and  upper  lip  with  a  feather,  but  she  was  quite  insensi-
ble to  it.  I  also  tried  to  render  the  arm  cataleptic,  but  could
not.  I  then  demesmerised  her,  when  she  knew  nothing  of
all  that  had  taken  place.  I  tried  her  with  the  feather,  but
she  shrunk  from  the  slightest  touch.  This  was  my  first  suc-
cessful trial.

"  After  this  I  mesmerised  her  every  night.  She  became
more  and  more  susceptible,  and  my  power  seemed  to  increase
in  proportion  as  it  was  exercised.  At  last  I  could  throw  her
into  the  mesmeric  sleep  in  40  seconds. She  is  able  to  tell

*  The  pulse  invariably  lessened  and  softened  under  the  mesmeric
influence.


334  REV.  a.  gilmour's  account

■what  I  taste,  such  as  soda,  salt,  sugar,  milk,  water,  &c,
though  not  in  the  same  room  with  me.  When  my  foot  is
pricked,  or  mj  hair  pulled,  or  any  part  of  my  person  pinched,
she  feels  it,  and  describes  it,  unerringly.

"  August  7th. — I  found  her  in  a  state  of  Clairvoyance.
She  went  to  my  mother's,  on  being  requested ;  described  her
cottage,  her  personal  appearance,  and  her  dress,  with  perfect
accuracy.

"  When  in  this  state,  I  went  into  different  rooms,  leaving
her  in  my  study ;  and  forming  a  strong  wish  that  she  should
rise  and  come  to  me,  she  invariably  did  so.  I  also  went  into
the  garden,  and  on  wishing  her  to  come  to  me,  she  instantly
did  so,  always  proceeding  in  a  direct  line,  slowly,  but  accu-
rately. I  observed  that,  as  she  came  to  me  on  such  occa-
sions, her  two  hands  were  slightly  extended,  and  when  they
touched  mine,  it  was  with  a  sudden  slightly  jerking  motion,
the  same  as  when  a  needle  touches  the  magnet.

"  Without  giving  you  an  historical  detail  of  my  proceed-
ings, I  may  here  mention  that,  on  the  8th  of  March  1844,
one  of  our  most  intelligent  physicians,  his  sister,  two  ladies,
and  one  of  our  magistrates,  dined  with  me,  when  we  had  a
mesmeric  seance.  We  requested  her  to  visit  the  house  of
Mrs.  P.,  one  of  the  ladies  present.  This  house  was  in
Greenock,  distant  from  my  cottage  about  a  mile  and  a  quar-
ter. She  saw  her  servant  in  the  kitchen,  but  said  that
another  woman  was  with  her. On  being  pressed  to  look

earnestly  at  the  woman,  she  said  it  was  C M .

This,  Mrs.  P.  declared  to  be  true.  We  then  asked  her  to
see  if  any  person  was  in  Mrs.  P.'s  parlor,  when  she  said  that
Miss  Laing  was  there,  a  young  lady  from  Edinburgh,  who
was  boarding  with  Mrs.  P.  at  the  time ;  that  she  was  sitting
on  the  sofa ;  that  she  was  crying,  and  that  a  letter  was  in
her  hand.  On  the  party  breaking  up,  I  walked  into  Gree-
nock with  the  ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  order  to  see  if  she
was  right  about  Miss  L.  It  was  true.  Miss  L.  had  received
a  letter  by  that  evening's  post  from  her  father  in  Edinburgh,
stating  that  her  mother  was  not  expected  to  live,  and  re-
questing her  to  come  home  by  the  first  train  in  the  morning.

"  September  2d. — I  had  made  her  follow  the  ship  i  Ellen'
of  Glasgow,  Captain  P.,  on  a  voyage  from  Glasgow  to  Ich-
aboe,  which  was  towed  down  the  Clyde  with  the  ship  'Chusan'
on  the  28th  of  August. She  saw  the  Chusan  lying  becalmed


OF  A  CASE  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE.  660

the  same  evening,  about  seven  miles  down  the  river,  but
could  nowhere  see  the  Ellen.  On  being  pressed  to  look  out
for  her,  she  discovered  her  much  farther  down,  a  small  boat
at  her  stern,  and  the  Captain  and  a  little  man  in  the  cabin
taking  their  grog.  A  few  days  after,  the  pilot  called,  when
she  said,  (on  being  mesmerised,)  that  was  the  man  who  was
in  the  cabin  with  Captain  P.  The  pilot  stated  that  the
steamboat  threw  off  the  Chusan  opposite  the  Clock  Light-
house ;  but  that  Captain  P.  had  made  them  tow  the  Ellen
eight  or  ten  miles  farther  down  the  frith.  This  harmonises
with  what  she  saw.  On  the  2nd  September  she  saw  the
Ellen  in  full  sail,  the  sea  a  little  rough,  Captain  P.  in  bed,
and  the  mate  on  the  quarter-deck.  She  is  sure  the  ship  is
past  Ireland,  for  there  is  no  land  to  be  seen  ahead  of  her  ;
but  she  cannot  discover  any  more  than  one  dog  on  board,
there  being  two  when  the  Ellen  sailed.  On  Captain  P.'s
return  from  Ichaboe,  I  obtained  the  log  of  his  voyage,  which
is  still  in  my  possession.  The  little  dog  had  become  so  ill
that  it  was  thrown  overboard  in  the  Channel,  and  at  the
above  date  the  Ellen  was  by  observation  53.25  north  lati-
tude, 17.41  west  longitude,  which  you  will  see  carries  her
far  beyond  Ireland.

" December  25. — J.  S.,  Esq.,  spending  the  evening  with
me,  was  anxious  to  test  her  clairvoyance  accurately.  She
visited,  at  his  request,  his  breakfast  parlor  at  home,  said
that  his  father  was  reading  Blackwood's  Magazine,  in  his
easy  chair  by  the  fire;  described  the  room  with  perfect
accuracy,  though,  I  need  scarcely  say,  she  had  never  been
in  it  in  her  life ;  described  the  gaselier,  and  the  number  of
burners  lighted,  and  mentioned  what  Mrs.  Scott  was  doing.
Some  of  these  statements,  he  felt  perfectly  sure,  were  incor-
rect; but,  on  going  home,  he  found  that  she  had  been
minutely  accurate.  On  the  same  evening,  he  begged  me,
in  writing,  so  that  she  might  not  hear  the  request,  that  I
would  send  her  along  to  our  Provost's.  On  going  into  one
room,  she  saw  a  great  number  of  young  ladies ;  but  though
she  had  seen  some  of  them  before,  she  could  not  name  them.
On  entering  another  room,  she  said  that  she  saw  a  great
many  little  misses.  On  being  pressed  to  look  earnestly  at
them,  and  see  if  she  knew  any  of  them,  she  discovered  Mr.
S.'s  sisters,  their  governess,  whom  she  named,  and  the
Misses  L. Mr.  S.  then  told  me  that  the  Provost  had  a


336  REV.  A.  gilmour's  account

large  party  that  evening,  upwards  of  sixty  young  ladies;
that  his  sisters,  their  governess,  and  the  Misses  L.,  were  to
his  certain  knowledge  there.  I  may  also  mention,  that
while  this  was  going  on,  I  heard  a  knock  at  my  door.  On
the  person  being  admitted  by  the  housemaid,  I  asked  her
to  tell  me  if  any  one  was  there.  She  said,  Yes,  a  lady  had
been  taken  into  the  parlor.  On  being  pressed  to  look  well
at  her,  and  tell  me  who  she  was,  she  named  her.  I  went
out  and  found  that  all  this  was  true.

"I  may  also  state,  that  during  the  summer,  Dr.  T

of  K ,  Mrs.  T  ,  and  her  two  daughters,  visited

me.  On  the  day  that  they  left,  I  requested  him  to  take
notice  of  all  that  was  doing  in  his  house  at  11  o'clock  of
that  same  night,  and  I  would  visit  him,  through  my  clair-
voyante.  I  did  so,  and  dispatched  to  the  Doctor,  by  the
next  morning's  post,  my  questions  and  her  answers,  stating
that  the  Dr.  and  Mrs.  T.  were  in  a  small  parlor ;  that  it
was  lighted  by  a  gas  jet  from  the  mantelpiece ;  that  Mrs.
T.  was  sitting  at  the  table  with  a  book  before  her ;  that  she
had  a  turban  on  her  head ;  that  she  had  a  dress  of  an  un-
common kind,  which  she  described;  that  the  Dr.  was  stand-
ing in  the  room,  describing  his  dress ;  that  one  little  Miss
was  in  a  small  bedroom  off  the  parlor,  and  that  another
little  Miss  was  in  bed  with  the  servant  in  a  room  at  the
head  of  the  stair.  I  may  state  that  she  had  never  been  in
K.  in  her  life.  By  return  of  post,  the  Dr.  acknowledged
the  receipt  of  my  letter ;  stated  that  Mrs.  T.  was  dressed
in  the  peculiar  manner  described,  and  that  every  thing
which  I  had  stated  was  true;  but  he  informed  me  that  he
was  playing  upon  the  flute,  and  expressed  his  unwillingness
to  believe  in  the  possibility  of  any  person  telling  what  was
doing  at  such  a  distance.

"These,  my  dear  Dr.  Gregory,  are  only  a  few  of  the
many  strange  and  startling  statements  which  I  could  make
upon  this  subject.  I  cannot  comprehend  the  modus  operandi
of  clairvoyance ;  but  neither  can  I  deny  the  evidence  of  my
own  senses ;  nor  can  I  question  the  veracity  of  hundreds  of
upright  and  honorable  men,  who  are  far  too  clear-sighted
to  be  imposed  upon  themselves,  and  much  too  honest  to  try
to  deceive  others.  Moreover,  every  thing  around  me  is  a
mystery,  not  opposed  to  reason,  but  far  above  all  human
comprehension. I  cannot  explain  how  I  speak,  or  hear,  or


OF  HIS  CASE  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE.  337

see;  and  yet  I  am  compelled  to  admit  the  fact.  Neither
can  I  understand  how  a  clairvoyante  can  tell  me  what  is
going  on  in  any  part  of  my  house,  or  in  any  other  house ;
and  yet  I  know  that  this  has  been  done  hundreds  of  times,
and  with  the  most  startling  accuracy.  I  cannot  tell  how  it
is  that  the  clairvoyante  obeys  all  my  volitions ;  but  still  I
am  compelled  to  admit  that  this  is  true.  Many  honest  and
upright  men  object  to  mesmerism  upon  the  principle  that
young  women,  when  mesmerised,  may  be  easily  corrupted
by  unprincipled  men.  I  am  destitute  of  experience  on  this
point,  but  express  my  firm  conviction  that  it  is  an  error.
The  young  person  that  may  be  corrupted  in  this  state,  may
be  corrupted  in  any  state ;  but  the  virtuous  and  the  pure
will  neither  indulge  in  an  irregular  thought,  nor  submit  to
an  improper  proposal  when  mesmerised.  Impure  minds
will  indulge  in  impure  actions  in  any  state. — I  am,  my  dear
Dr.  Gregory,  with  every  sentiment  of  respect  and  affection,
"  Yours  faithfully,

"And.  Gilmour."

Marthabrae  Cottage,
Greenock,  21st  January,  1851.

Professor  Gregory,  Edinburgh.

JST.B. — In  reference  to  this  point,  I  would  recal  what  1
have  said  in  one  of  the  earlier  letters,  namely,  that,  as  a
general  rule,  the  moral  sense  is  exalted  in  the  magnetic
state,  and  the  so-called  sleeper  is  fully  awake  to  moral  feel-
ing. Magnetism  does  not  essentially  change  the  character ;
but  it  does  seem  to  give  greater  preponderance  to  certain
feelings,  than  is  observed  in  the  natural  state  of  the  subject.
But  so  far  as  I  have  seen,  when  a  change  has  been  observed,
the  feelings  exalted  have  been  those  of  the  love  of  truth  and
morality,  and  a  very  marked  hatred  of  vice  and  falsehood.
I  have  never  observed  any  appearance  of  exaltation  or  ex-
citement of  the  lower  propensities,  which,  on  the  contrary,
have  seemed  to  be  laid  to  sleep,  while  the  higher  sentiments
were  in  full  vigor.  W.  G.

Case  46. — The  following  letter,  received  when  this  sheet

was  in  type,  is  particularly  interesting  as  an  example  of  the

manner  in  which  a  man  of  sense  and  ability,  like  the  reverend

writer,  although  sceptical,  investigates  any  case  which  may

29


338  REV.  MR.  H.'S  ACCOUNT  OF

present  itself. The  case  itself  appears  to  be  one  of  great
interest,  and  well  worthy  of  further  investigation : —

"  "W ,  31st  March  1851.

"  Dear  Sir,

"I  very  willingly  furnish  you  with  the  informa-
tion which  you  request  from  me.  Till  the  month  of  August
last,  I  regarded  the  whole  subject  of  Animal  Magnetism  with
incredulity  and  dislike ;  and  with  respect  to  clairvoyance,  in
particular,  I  was  a  determined  sceptic.  I  had  not,  indeed,
at  all  investigated  the  matter;  but  I  have  now  a  somewhat
uncomfortable  consciousness  that  my  scepticism  was  not  a
whit  the  less  dogged  and  decided  on  that  account.

"  At  the  time  referred  to,  I  visited,  in  the  company  of
another  minister,  some  old  friends  in  Shetland ;  and  it  was
not  long  till  we  heard  of  certain  wonderful  performances  in
the  way  of  mesmerism.  We  were  told,  that  a  man,  whom  I
knew  very  well  ten  or  twelve  years  ago,  had  been  found  to
be  an  excellent  mesmeric  subject,  and  had  enacted  marvels
as  a  clairvoyant.  I  listened  to  the  narrative  with  cool  and
settled  incredulity;  not  questioning,  indeed,  the  veracity  of
the  reporters,  for  that  I  could  not  question,  but  altogether
disbelieving  the  correctness  of  the  so-called  clairvoyant's
statements,  and  having  no  doubt  that  there  must  be  rampant
delusion  or  imposture  somewhere.  I  made  a  pretty  emphatic
declaration  to  this  effect,  and  expressed  a  wish  to  have  the
matter  thoroughly  tested,  and  to  have  the  testing  process
put  entirely  into  my  own'  hands.  This  was  at  once  agreed
to  ;  and  when  I  then  intimated  that  I  should  not  be  satisfied
with  any  mere  general  description  of  places  or  persons,  nor
any  account  whatever  of  Sir  John  Franklin,  or  such  like,  the
accuracy  of  which  I  could  not  pronounce  upon;  but  that  my
tests  should  be  such  as  would  establish  at  the  moment,  and
upon  the  spot,  either  the  truth  or  the  falsehood  of  the  alleged
revelations,  I  was  told,  in  reply,  to  put  what  tests  I  pleased,
as  all  would  be  left  to  myself.  This  was  satisfactory ;  and
I  had  no  doubt  that  I  should  speedily  demolish  the  delusion.
The  individual  was  sent  for,  and  mesmerised  in  my  presence  ;
and  when  he  was  pronounced  to  be  asleep,  I  furnished  the
mesmeriser  with  half-a-dozen  questions  to  ask,  not  regarding
Sir  J.  Franklin,  but  regarding  myself ;  and  having  requested
that  the  answers  to  these  queries  should  be  accurately  re-


THE  SHETLAND  CLAIRVOYANT.  339

ported  to  me  on  my  return,  I  left  the  room.  The  questions
referred  to  my  whereabouts  after  quitting  the  apartment ;
my  dress,  in  which  I  took  care  to  make  some  rather  material
alterations;  my  exact  position  and  occupation,  and  such  like
particulars,  which  the  clairvoyant  could  not  possibly  know
by  any  ordinary  means  of  intelligence,  and  which  there  were
ten  thousand  to  one  against  his  hitting  by  so  many  consecu-
tive guesses.  On  my  return,  I  demanded  a  report;  and
found,  to  my  no  small  surprise,  that  all  the  questions  had
been  correctly  answered,  and  that  the  experiment  by  which
I  had  intended  to  expose  a  hoax,  was  likely  to  lead  to  a  very
different  result.  In  a  word,  I  had  taken  such  precautions,
and  had  applied  what  seemed  to  me  so  fair  a  test,  though  a
simple  one,  that  my  scepticism  received  a  considerable  shock.
Resolved,  however,  to  sift  the  matter  still  more  thoroughly,
WTe  made  a  great  number  of  very  varied  experiments ;  and,
as  the  result  of  the  whole,  I  was  compelled  to  admit  the  un-
questionable reality  of  the  facts,  although  utterly  unable,  as
I  still  am,  to  account  for  them.  The  full  detail  would  fill  a
volume,  as  we  had  the  clairvoyant  under  our  hands  for  a
period  of  about  two  hours  during  each  of  three  successive
days.  I  may,  however,  state  one  or  two  facts  which  I  wit-
nessed, and  for  which  I  can  vouch.  Perhaps  I  should  men-
tion here,  that  the  clairvoyant  is  a  poor  man — indeed  steeped
in  poverty — not  very  robust  in  health;  but  sufficiently  active
and  intelligent,  and,  for  his  station  in  life,  pretty  well  edu-
cated. He  has  never  been  out  of  Shetland,  and  has  had
little  opportunity  of  acquainting  himself  in  any  way  with  the
circumstances  of  '  the  adjacent  islands  of  Great  Britain  and
Ireland.'  One  evening,  after  he  had  been  thrown  into  a
mesmeric  sleep,  my  friend  and  fellow-traveller,  whose  name
I  shall  send  you,  asked  him  to  accompany  him  to  a  certain
place  which  he  was  thinking  of,  but  the  name  or  locality  of
which  he  did  not  mention,  nor  in  the  least  hint  at.  The
clairvoyant  described  the  house,  first  the  outside,  with  l  big
trees'  round  it,  then  several  rooms  in  the  interior  ;  and  being
directed  to  enter  a  particular  apartment  which  was  indicated
to  him  by  its  position,  he  described  the  appearance  and  occu-
pation of  a  gentleman  and  two  ladies  who  were  in  it;  de-
clared that  he  saw  a  picture  over  the  mantelpiece  ;  and  being
farther  questioned,  deponed  that  it  was  the  picture  of  a  man,
and  that  there  was  a  name  below  it ;  and  being  urged  to  read


340  REV.  MR.  H.'S  ACCOUNT  OF

the  name,  after  experiencing  some  difficulty  with  the  pen-
manship, he  affirmed  that  the  last  word  of  the  name  was
1  Wood,''  which  he  slowly  but  correctly  spelt.  The  house
was  near  Edinburgh,  and  when  we  came  to  compare  notes,
on  our  return  from  Shetland,  we  found  that  the  description
of  the  individuals  in  the  room  at  the  time  had  been  quite  cor-
rect ;  and  we  saw  over  the  mantelpiece  a  print  of  the  Rev.
J.  J.  Wood  of  Dumfries,  with  his  name  written  below.

"  I  had  the  clairvoyant  taken  to  other  places,  which  were
not  named  in  his  hearing,  but  which  he  described  with
great  accuracy  and  minuteness;  and  some  of  these  experi-
ments were,  if  possible,  still  more  satisfactory  to  my  own
mind  than  that  just  mentioned,  though  I  may  not  be  able
to  present  the  evidence  so  palpably  to  others.  For  example,
he  accompanied  me  to  my  own  house,  without  my  naming
it,  though  this  indeed  could  have  made  no  difference  to  him,
and  he  gave  a  fuller  and  more  detailed  and  accurate  descrip-
tion of  it  than  many  who  have  spent  hours  in  it  could  have
done.  He  followed  me,  in  thought,  from  place  to  place,
and,  with  a  momentary  hesitation  and  confusion  in  one  or
two  cases,  he  correctly  described  them  all.

"  He  went  in  search  of  Sir  John  Franklin,  and  found  the
ships  Erebus  and  Terror,  spelling  the  name  of  each  on  the
stern  of  the  vessel.  I  am  sorry  now  that  I  did  not  make
such  full  and  explicit  enquiries  upon  this  subject,  as  its  im-
portance and  the  interest  attaching  to  it  deserve,  or  as  it
would  have  been  proper  to  institute,  in  order  to  compare
the  statements  of  this  clairvoyant  with  those  of  others.
During  the  time  when  I  had  him  in  hand,  my  experiments
were  almost  entirely  of  a  kind  which  were  fitted  to  be  con-
clusive upon  the  spot.  However,  I  heard  him  declare  that
the  Erebus  was  fast  locked  up ;  that  those  on  board  were
alive,  but  in  low  spirits,  and  that,  in  answer  to  his  enquiries,
they  said  that  they  had  little  hope  of  making  their  escape.
He  affirmed  that  there  was  water  for  a  certain  distance
round  the  Terror,  but  that  she  was  not  clear  of  the  ice.  Of
course,  I  give  no  opinion  as  to  the  correctness  of  these  reve-
lations. The  date  when  they  were  made  was  about  the  22d
of  August  1850.  When  sent  to  these  northern  regions,  and
as  long  as  he  was  kept  there,  he  appeared  to  be  shivering
with  cold,  and  declared  the  cold  to  be  intense.

"  I  might  mention  other  phenomena,  which  struck  me  as


THE  SHETLAND  CLAIRVOYANT.  341

curious,  but  which  are,  I  suppose,  common  enough  in  such
cases,  as,  for  instance,  his  insensibility  to  pinching  and
pricking,  when  applied  to  his  own  proper  person,  and  then
wincing  and  complaining  when  these  applications  were
made  to  one  of  my  hands,  while  I  had  hold  of  his  with  the
other.  And  so,  when  a  chain  of  five  or  six  individuals  was
formed,  and  the  pinching  applied  to  the  one  farthest  off,
poor  James  got  the  full  benefit  of  it.  It  was  also  amusing
to  notice  his  readiness  in  catching  the  air  of  a  song,  and
chiming  in  with  the  singers — his  aptitude  in  pronouncing
Gaelic  words,  which  it  cost  some  of  us  not  a  little  effort  to
master,  and  you  know  Shetland  is  too  far  north  for  Gaelic —
his  fluency  in  repeating  German  sentences,  and  in  rolling
forth  after  you  Homer's  hexameters  in  an  ore  rotundo
style,  which  would  have  done  credit  to  an  advanced  student
at  the  University.

"  I  may  state  farther,  that,  when  awakened,  he  had  no
recollection  of  what  had  passed  while  he  was  in /the  mes-
merised state.  On  one  of  the  three  occasions  on  which  I
witnessed  the  proceedings,  he  was  slightly  sick  when  restored
to  consciousness,  but  immediately  recovered  on  receiving  a
little  cold  water.  Upon  that  occasion  the  room  was  warm,
and  the  sun  had  been  shining  upon  him  while  asleep.  He
declared  that  he  had  never  experienced  any  bad  effects,  only
his  wife  had  once  or  twice  said,  that  after  he  had  been  mes-
merised, she  thought  him  less  talkative  than  usual.

"It  is  right  to  state,  that  I  found  him  committing  one  or
two  mistakes;  but  it  should  also  be  stated,  that  they  were
of  a  kind  which  served  rather  to  confirm  than  contradict
the  other  evidence — exact  instances,  indeed,  of  the  canon,
"  Exceptio  probat  regulam" — as,  for  example,  when  he  de-
scribed a  certain  person,  whom  he  named,  as  being  in  a
certain  place,  and  superintending  laborers  eDgaged  in  a
particular  employment,  when  it  turned  that  another  indi-
vidual had  been  so  engaged  at  the  time,  but  who  might
easily  be  mistaken  for  the  person  in  question  even  by  those
who  knew  them  both.  It  is  right  to  mention  another  mis-
take, of  which  I  have  no  explanation  to  offer.  It  seems
that,  on  the  21st  of  Dec.  last,  James  did  me  the  honor,  of
paying  me  a  visit,  and  inspecting  my  premises,  and  informed
my  friends  in  the  North  who  were  in  my  house,  and  how
we  were  engaged. Now,  it  so  happened  that  the  individuals

29*


342  CASES  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE.

whom,  he  named  were  here,  and  were  engaged  exactly  as  he
described,  but  then  this  was  certainly  not  on  the  day  on
which  the  clairvoyant  professed  to  see  us,  in  truth,  not  till
nearly  three  weeks  afterwards.  How  he  should  have  been
so  correct  with  regard  to  persons  and  circumstances,  and
so  much  in  error  with  respect  to  time,  I  do  not  pretend  to
explain.*

"  I  think  I  have  not  mentioned  before  that  the  name  and
address  of  this  individual  is  James  Smith,  Whalsay,  Shet-
land. He  lives  on  the  property  of  my  friend  Mr.  Bruce,
of  Symbister,  in  whose  house  the  proceedings  above  related
took  place.  If  any  one  should  wish  to  know  more  of  the
person  who  furnishes  you  with  this  statement  than  his  in-
itials will  tell  them,  you  may  give  them  whatever  amount
of  information  they  may  desire. I  remain,

"  Dear  sir,

"  Yours  truly,

"P.  H."

Case  47. — Mr.  C,  with  two  daughters,  travelling  from
Richmond,  Yorkshire,  to  Cheltenham,  stopped  a  night  in
Y7ork,  where  a  son  was  to  join  them  from  Richmond.  One
of  the  young  ladies,  being  put  into  the  magnetic  sleep  by  a
friend,  was  asked  if  she  expected  any  one,  when  she  said
she  saw  her  brother  coming ;  but  instead  of  describing  the
expected  brother  from  the  north,  she  spoke  of  another  as
coming  from  the  south,  whom  she  saw  in  a  railway  carriage,
which  she  described,  with  a  certain  number  of  fellow-travel-
lers, and  reading  a  certain  book.  She  also  described  his
dress.  This  puzzled  the  party  much,  but  their  astonish-
ment was  much  more  increased  when  this  brother,  who
lived  in  Manchester,  came  into  the  room,  in  the  dress  de-
scribed, and  confirmed  every  statement  of  the  clairvoyante.
His  wife  was  ill,  and  having  heard  that  his  sisters  were  to
be  at  York  that  evening,  he  had  suddenly  started,  in  order
to  see  them,  and  take  back  one  of  them  to  nurse  his  wife.
No  communication  had  been  possible,  as  he  had  only  resolved

*  Here  the  clairvoyant  would  seem  to  have  exerted  prevision,  as
well  as  lucid  vision.  It  is  not  retrovision,  for  the  persons  never  had
been  there  before.  The  fact  illustrates  what  I  have  said  as  to  sources
of  error. — W.  G.


CASES  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE.  343

to  start  an  hour  before  doing  so.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that,  in  this  case,  Miss  C.  saw  her  brother  on  his  way  to
York.  This  interesting  case  was  communicated  to  me  by
Alan  Stevenson,  Esq.,  0.  E.

The  same  gentleman  also  communicated  to  me  a  brief
notice  of  a  remarkable  instance  of  sympathetic  warning,
the  details  of  which  might  be  obtained  from  the  parties  if
required.  Two  ladies,  very  intimate  friends,  had  both  been
magnetised,  which  proves  that  both  were  susceptible.  On
one  occasion,  one  of  them  suddenly  burst  into  tears,  and
declared  that  at  that  moment  some  great  evil  had  befallen
the  other.  This  proved  to  be  exact,  although  the  friends
were  then  one  hundred  miles  asunder.

In  the  Case  of  Miss  C.  above  given,  it  would  appear,  that
sympathy  led  her  to  find  the  trace  of  her  brother,  and  that,
having  found  it,  she  saw  him  and  his  companions  in  the
railway- carriage  by  direct  clairvoyance.

Case  48. — The  following  case  is  one,  in  which  the  names
of  the  parties  are  unknown  to  me,  but  I  have  no  reason  to
doubt  its  accuracy,  at  all  events  in  all  the  chief  points,  and,
if  necessary,  I  have  no  doubt  it  could  be  well  substantiated.
A  young  lady,  on  a  visit  away  from  her  home,  being  mag-
netised, was  desired  to  visit  her  father's  house.  She  did  so,
and  said  she  saw  the  postman  delivering  a  letter ;  that  this
letter  was  addressed  to  her ;  that  it  was  from  a  brother  or
cousin,  an  officer,  and  dated  from  Cork ;  that  her  sister  had
opened  it,  &c.  When  she  woke,  she  had  no  recollection  of
the  vision.  On  being  asked,  incidentally,  where  the  brother
or  cousin  was  whom  she  had  spoken  of  as  the  writer  of  the
letter,  she  said  he  had  sailed  a  week  or  ten  days  before
from  Cork  for  the  Colonies  with  his  regiment.  It  was
therefore  supposed  that  she  had  been  dreaming  of  some
past  letter.  But  on  her  return  home,  she  found  that  at  the
time  she  saw  it,  a  letter  had  arrived,  addressed  to  her,  the
writer  having  been  forced  by  stress  of  weather  to  return  to
Cork,  from  which  place  he  had  written.

Such  cases  are  very  frequent,  but  a  few  are  sufficient  to
illustrate  the  essential  fact,  that  many  persons,  in  the  mag-
netic sleep,  possess  some  means,  the  nature  of  which  we  can
only  guess  at,  of  perceiving  absent^  persons  and  things,  and
correctly  describing  the  occupation  of  the  persons  seen.

Case  49. — A  young  lady  of  17,  being  magnetised  for  the


344  TRAVELLING  CLAIRVOYANCE.

first  time  by  Mr.  Lewis,  became  clairvoyant,  and  when
asked  by  him  to  do  so,  visited  America.  In  New  York,  she
accurately  described  the  appearance  and  situation  of  the
Astor  House  Hotel,  then  proceeded  to  Niagara,  where  she
was  at  first  much  alarmed,  but  afterwards  much  delighted
with  the  scenery,  which  she  most  correctly  described,  on
both  sides  of  the  falls.  She  next  took  a  view  of  the  country,
from  the  suspension  bridge  above  the  falls,  describing  the
landscape  on  both  sides.  After  this,  she  was  taken  to  Buf-
falo, and  immediately  on  entering  a  certain  part  of  it,  ex-
claimed at  its  extreme  filthiness,  which  is  true  of  that  part.
She  was  then  made  by  silent  volition  to  visit  Louisville,
and  the  slave  market  there,  which  horrified  her  much.  She
saw  an  open  space,  with  something  about  slaves  printed  on
a  wall  or  building.  She  then  visited  the  residence  of  a
gentleman  at  Rochester,  known  to  the  family,  and  saw  him
seated  in  his  parlor,  looking  over  a  newspaper,  of  which
he  is  editor.  This  case  might  be  regarded  as  one  of  thought-
reading,  although,  on  that  view,  it  would  not  be  the  less
interesting  or  difficult  to  explain.  But  I  have  chiefly  no-
ticed it,  because  it  is  an  instance  of  clairvoyance,  by
thought-reading  or  otherwise,  occurring  in  the  very  first
trial,  and  because  of  the  vividness  of  the  images.  Another
young  lady,  magnetised  at  the  same  time,  was  made  to  see
the  same  things,  and  confirmed  the  statements  of  the  first.
This  case  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  the  father  of  the  first-
mentioned  young  lady.

Case  50. — Mr.  Atkinson  had  magnetised  a  young  lady,
the  daughter  of  a  medical  man,  who  resided  many  miles
from  London,  where  the  young  lady  was.  She  became
clairvoyant,  but  her  father,  who  came  to  see  her,  would  not
believe  in  her  clairvoyance.  Mr.  A.  then  requested  him,
when  he  got  home,  to  do  anything  he  chose,  not  telling  any
one,  at  a  certain  hour  and  in  a  certain  room.  At  the  time
appointed,  Mr.  A.  magnetised  the  young  lady,  and  re-
quested her  to  visit  her  father's  dining-room.  (It  was  at
dinner-time.)  She  did  so,  and  saw  her  father  and  the  rest.
But  all  at  once  she  began  laughing,  and  said,  "What  does
my  father  mean  ?  He  has  put  a  chair  on  the  dinner-table,
and  the  dog  on  the  top  of  the  chair !"  Mr.  A.  sent  by  the
first  post  an  account  of  what  his  patient  had  seen,  which
was  received  next  morning,  and  in  answer  he  was  informed


TRAVELLING  CLAIRVOYANCE.  S40

that  she  had  seen  correctly,  for  that  her  father,  to  the
amazement  of  his  family,  had  put  the  chair  on  the  table,
and  the  dog  on  the  chair,  at  the  time  agreed  on.

Case  51. — Another  lady,  a  patient  also  of  Mr.  Atkinson's,
who,  by  a  long  and  laborious  magnetic  treatment,  cured  her
of  a  most  distressing  complaint  which  had  resisted  all  other
treatment,  became  highly  clairvoyant,  and  spontaneously,
in  the  sleep,  saw  and  described  the  house  of  a  near  relation,
at  a  great  distance  in  the  country,  with  its  inmates.  She
continued  for  a  long  time  to  visit  his  house,  and  one  time
saw  that  her  relative  was  dangerously  ill,  and  told  how
many  persons  were  in  the  sick-room;  saw  the  medical  men,
described  the  treatment,  and  pursued  the  case  from  day  to
day,  involuntarily  and  even  against  her  own  wish,  as  it  dis-
tressed her  severely,  till  the  distant  patient  died.  After
this,  she  was  still  involuntarily  drawn  to  the  scene  of  death,
saw  the  corpse,  described  its  appearance,  and  all  the  pro-
ceedings connected  with  the  interment.  Even  after  that,
she  felt  compelled  to  visit  the  corpse  in  its  grave,  and  de-
scribed with  horror  the  changes  which  took  place  in  it.  It
was  not  for  a  long  time  that  she  was  enabled  to  get  rid  of
these  painful  visions.  But  every  thing  that  could  be  ascer-
tained and  verified  was  found  exact.

The  next  case  was  communicated  to  me  by  Col.  .Gore
Browne,  21st  Fusileers.

Case  52.— Two  ladies,  the  Misses  B.,  being  in  Paris,  and
about  to  have  a  stance  with  Alexis,  wrote  to  their  sister  at
Nottington,  desiring  her  to  send  some  question  thence  in
writing.  She,  however,  only  wrote  the  following  words,
which  were  sealed  up  in  an  envelope.  "Your  letter  came
too  late  to  answer  in  time  for  your  soire'e."  This  was  given
to  Alexis,  while  in  the  sleep,  by  one  of  the  Misses  B.,  who
knew  neither  the  contents  of  the  letter,  nor  who  had  written
it.  He  took  her  hand  and  said,  in  French,  "You  do  not
know  who  wrote  it.  It  is  written  very  small,  and  is  English.
The  first  word  has  four  letters,  it  is  'your.'  It  is  written
so  small  that  I  can  read  no  more.  (It  was  very  small.)  It
is  a  lady  who  sent  it  to  me.  She  is  not  in  her  own  house.
She  is  living  with  another  person.  She  is  your  sister.  ^  A
man  has  had  something  to  do  with  what  is  written.  Your
sister  lives  with  a  lady  of  about  50,  in  England,  near  a  sea-
port, about  two  leagues  from  it. (Nottington  is  three  miles


346  CLAIRVOYANCE  OF  ALEXIS.

from  Weymouth.)  The  port  is  called  Weymouth.  I  see
your  sister  plainly.  She  has  a  high  black  dress,  a  cap,  and
her  hair  in  bandeaux.  She  has  a  very  slender  figure;  she
is  older  than  you;  her  shoulders  are  broader  than  yours.
She  is  lively,  and  talks  much,  indeed  continually.  She  has
twice  lately  gone  to  visit  this  lady.  She  is  very  well,  but
she  rose  late  this  morning.  At  present  she  is  about  to  read.
She  is  reading.  Besides  her,  I  see  two  ladies  and  a  gentle-
man. He  is  gone  out.  He  is  not  in  his  own  house ;  but  he
has  a  room  to  himself  in  the  lady's  house.  He  goes  there
often.  The  lady  of  the  house  has  a  high  dress  of  green
woollen  stuff.  (This  was  wrong.)  She  suffers  in  her  limbs;
and  uses  frictions.  She  is  magnetised;  she  does  not  sleep.
Your  sister  does  not  believe  in  clairvoyance.  She  speaks
very  little  French,  but  understands  it.  Present  my  compli-
ments, and  ask  her  to  send  me  a  line  in  French.  Then  I
shall  read  it  with  much  pleasure."

By  mistake,  a  note  addressed  to  a  servant  in  Dorsetshire,
had  been  put  into  the  envelope  shewn  to  Alexis.  He  being
asked  what  it  meant,  said,  "  That  is  not  your  affair;  it  has
been  written  by  a  lady  in  the  house  where  your  sister  is."
Observing  the  name  of  Mr.  B.  below  the  address  on  the
letter,  he  exclaimed,  "  Ah  !  there  is  the  name  of  the  gentle-
man*!'saw  in  the  house  with  your  sister."

Col.  Gore  Browne  informs  me  that  members  of  his  family
were  told  by  Alexis,  whose  powers  of  thought-reading  are
remarkable,  of  various  private  family  matters,  known  only
to  themselves.  And  I  have  lately  had  a  similar  account,
in  the  strongest  language,  from  a  very  intelligent  lady  who
lately  saw  him.  I  have  heard  of  many  instances  ofhis-
power  equally  remarkable,  but  I  shall  only  add  the  following,
which  are  short  and  striking.

Case  53.— Mons.  Sabine,  Chief  of  the  Station  of  the
Havre  Railroad,  went  a  few  days  ago  to  consult  Alexis,  who,
when  in  somnambulism,  said,  "  You  come  about  something
lost  in  the  service  to  which  you  belong?"  "  It  is  true,"
replied  he.  "  You  are  employed  on  the  Havre  Railroad  ?"
"  It  is  likewise  true.  (Mons.  Sabine  not  having  previously
stated  his  business  to  any  one.)  It  is  a  basket  that  is  missing,

containing  some  little  animals." "  They  are they  are

■ leeches. You  sent  to  enquire  about  the  basket  at  Rouen

and  at  Havre,  and  you  have  received  no  news  of  it. This


CLAIRVOYANCE  OF  ALEXIS.  847

is  what  has  taken  place. A  traveller,  going  to  Havre  by

your  carriages  on  the the the  11th  of  November,  was

greatly  annoyed,  on  arriving  at  his  destination,  to  find  only
one  basket  instead  of  two,  which  he  had  on  setting  off."
"  This  is  wonderful !"  said  Mons.  Sabine.  "  There  were  two
baskets  of  leeches."  "  The  train  (continued  Alexis)  on  ar-
riving at  Rouen,  left  several  travellers  with  their  luggage,
and  one  of  the  baskets  was,  by  mistake,  on  one  of  the  omni-
buses going  into  town,  and  the  conductor  was  surprised  to
find  that  no  one  claimed  it.  From  fear  of  being  scolded,  he
did  not  deposit  it  in  the  baggage  warehouse,  but  hid  it  for
some  time  in  his  stable  ;  and  while  it  was  there  you  wrote
to  Rouen  and  Havre  about  it,  the  reply  being  that  it  could
not  be  found.  A  few  days  ago  the  conductor  put  it  in  the
goods  depot,  near  the  entrance  and  beneath  the  first  window
on  the  right.  You  will  find  it  if  you  set  of  to  Rouen  ;  only,
on  account  of  the  length  of  time  that  has  elapsed,  you  will
find  about  200  leeches  dead."  On  the  next  day,  Mons.
Sabine  returned  from  Rouen,  having  found  the  basket  at  the
place  indicated  by  Alexis,  with  200  of  the  leeches  dead.
The  directors  of  the  railroad  expressed  themselves  doubly
obliged  to  the  somnambulist  and  his  magnetism,  inasmuch
as  the  proprietor  of  the  leeches,  perceiving  that  they  were
not  found  after  twenty-five  days,  had  stated  their  value  Jbo  be
double  what  it  actually  was.

In  the  autumn  of  1845,  Alexis  gave  a  series  of  mesmeric
seances  to  the  medical  men  of  Havre,  each  of  whom  were
permitted  to  bring  one  friend  to  witness  the  experiments.
One  of  them  took  with  him  Mr.  Featherstonhaugh,  the
Consul  at  Havre,  who  had  come  over  the  day  before  from
California,  and  was  a  decided  sceptic  as  to  mesmerism.  In
order  to  test  Alexis,  Mr.  Featherstonhaugh  put  in  his  pocket,
enclosed  in  a  box,  a  portion  of  a  Japanese  Idol  which  he
had  picked  up  out  of  the  wreck  of  a  vessel  from  Japan,
which  had  been  lost  on  the  coast  of  California  during  his
stay  there.  On  being  asked  by  Mr.  F.,  "  What  have  I  in
my  pocket?"  Alexis  answered,  "It  looks  like  a  beetle;
but  it  is  not  one,  but  part  of  a  Japanese  idol  with  an  inscrip-
tion on  it :  you  picked  it  up  during  a  walk  on  the  seashore
in  California,  and  thought  at  first  it  was  some  curious  stone,
but  you  afterwards  perceived  it  was  an  idol  which  had  been
washed  up  from  the  wreck  of  a  Japanese  vessel  that  was  lost


348  INTROVISION  AND  PREVISION.

on  that  coast  a  few  days  before."  The  relator  of  this  was
Monsieur  Paravet,  of  Havre,  to  whom  it  was  told  by  one  of
the  medical  men  present  at  the  time.


At  a  seance  which  took  place  before  the  elite  of  the  society
at  Versailles,  Dr.  Bataille,  one  of  the  principal  physicians
of  this  town,  placed  in  the  hands  of  Alexis  a  letter,  and  re-
quested him  to  describe  the  residence  of  his  son,  who  was
living  at  Grandville.  •"  Instead  of  giving  you  an  account
of  the  apartment  of  your  son,"  said  Alexis,  "  I  am  now
occupied  about  his  health,  which  is  very  bad."  "  How  !
bad?"  replied  his  interrogator.  "  You  have  in  your  hand
his  last  letter,  dated  six  days  ago,  in  which  he  states  him-
self to  be  very  well.  To-morrow ,"  rejoined  Alexis,  "you
will  receive  a  letter  from  his  wife,  announcing  to  you  that
he  is  very  ill.  I  recommend  you  on  the  receipt  of  this  to
set  off  immediately,  for,  knowing  as  you  do  the  constitution
of  your  son,  there  is  only  you  who  can  save  him.  He  is
very  ill."  The  next  day  the  letter  arrived,  and  Dr.  Ba-
taille immediately  set  off  for  Grandville,  found  his  son  very
ill,  and,  after  a  fortnight's  sojourn,  succeeded  in  restoring
him  to  health.  On  his  return  to  Versailles,  this  event  pro-
duced a  great  sensation  throughout  the  town.

I  have  given  these  few  instances  of  the  power  of  Alexis
in  thought-reading  and  clairvoyance,  because,  from  the  re-
ports of  many  friends  who  have  seen  him  tried,  on  many
different  occasions,  there  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt  that  he
does  possess,  at  all  events  at  some  times,  a  very  remarkable
degree  of  power ;  while  at  the  same  time,  I  believe  that  he
has  often  failed,  and  that  his  power  varies  very  much  at
different  times.  But,  as  I  have  explained  in  Part  I.,  failures
can  only  prove  the  absence  of  the  power  when  they  occur,
and  have  no  weight  in  opposition  to  well-attested  instances
of  success.  In  the  case  of  Alexis,  there  is  reason  to  think
that  failure  has  often  been  caused  by  over-exertion,  and  also
by  the  influence  exerted  on  him  by  the  bystanders,  to  which
he  is  peculiarly  susceptible.

F.  Introvision  and  Prevision  in  the  Magnetic  Sleep.

Introvision,  or  the  power  of  seeing  and  correctly  describing
the  interior  of  the  clairvoyant's  own  frame,  is  a  tolerably


INTUITION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  849

frequent  phenomenon,  but  it  has  not  occurred  in  any  of
those  persons  whom  I  have  myself  magnetised,  none  of  whom,
apparently,  have  yet  reached  a  stage  sufficiently  advanced
for  that  purpose.  It  is  possessed,  however,  in  a  high  degree,
by  the  girl  E.,  the  clairvoyante  of  Dr.  Haddock.  She  sees,
in  certain  states,  the  whole  of  her  frame  bathed  in  light,
transparent,  and  full  of  motion.  At  first,  as  often  happens,
she  was  much  frightened  and  agitated  at  what  she  saw,  but
soon  became  reconciled  to  it,  and  described  it  in  great  detail.
As  I  did  not  see  her  in  this  state,  I  shall  merely  say  that
Dr.  Haddock's  observations  on  this  point  in  her  case  may
be  received  with  confidence,  from  the  care  and  caution  with
which  they  are  made.  Many  other  cases  of  introvision  are
recorded,  but  space  does  not  permit  me  to  do  more  than  thus
briefly  refer  to  these.

Case  54. — Allied  to  introvision  is  the  power  of  seeing  in
the  same  way  the  interior  of  the  frame  of  others  en  rapioort
with  the  clairvoyant,  which  I  have  already  described.  I
may  here  adduce  one  instance  of  his  power,  as  exercised  by
E.  at  a  great  distance.  I  have  already  stated,  (see  Case
29,)  that  E.  in  Bolton,  described  my  son,  then  in  Edinburgh,
whom  she  has  never  yet  seen.  This  was  in  October,  and  was
done  with  the  aid  of  his  handwriting.  In  January  he  was
attacked  with  the  symptoms  of  inflammation  of  the  mem-
branes of  the  brain,  such  as  usually  precede  hydrocephalus  in
children.  While  he  was  ill,  I  happened  to  mention,  in  a  letter
to  Dr.  Haddock,  that  he  was  suffering  from  illness,  without
giving  any  details.  As  E.  had  expressed  a  great  liking  for
the  boy  when  she  saw  him  in  her  vision  of  October,  Dr.  H.
asked  her,  when  she  was  in  the  sleep,  if  she  could  see  him
and  tell  how  he  was.  She  had  no  writing  to  help  her,  but
soon  found  him,  and  without  having  been  told  of  his  illness,
at  once  said  that  he  was  very  ill,  and  proceeded  to  describe
minutely  the  state  of  the  cerebral  membranes  as  they  ap-
peared to  her.  She  gave  a  minute  detail  of  the  symptoms,
which  was  as  accurate  as  I  could  have  given  at  the  bed-side.
She  also  mentioned  that  he  had  studied  too  much,  which
had  hurt  him.  In  fact,  I  had  carefully  avoided  giving  him
too  much  to  do,  because  I  had  observed  a  tendency  to  the
affection  under  which  he  then  suffered ;  but  even  the  very
moderate  amount  of  study  allowed,  had  proved  too  much
for  him  for  some  time  before  the  inflammatory  symptoms
30


350  CLAIRVOYANT  PREVISION.

appeared.  It  was,  in  this  case,  quite  evident  to  all  who  saw
the  case,  and  read  E.'s  account  of  it,  that  she  had  seen  it
as  plainly  as  any  of  them  had  done,  and  her  account  of  the
state  of  the  membranes  was,  although  given  in  her  own
plain  language,  in  all  probability  quite  correct.  At  least
such  was  the  opinion  of  a  medical  friend  who  saw  the  boy,
and  who  was  very  much  struck  with  the  accuracy  of  E.'s
description.

1  may  here  state,  that  a  case  is  known  to  me  at  this  time,
to  which  I  cannot  more  particularly  refer,  in  which  the  sleep-
er, being  magnetised,  has  described  the  diseased  part  of  his
own  frame,  which  is  out  of  the  reach  of  ordinary  vision,  in
a  manner  not  only  very  remarkable,  but  in  all  human  pro-
bability correct.


With  regard  to  Prevision,  I  have  not  myself  had  oppor-
tunities of  seeing  much  of  it.  It  is  comparatively  rare,  and
I  have  mentioned,  in  Part  I.,  various  forms  in  which  a  cer-
tain degree  of  power  of  predicting  the  future  occurs.  The
commonest  is  that  of  predicting  the  occurrence  or  recurrence
of  fits  in  the  sleeper,  often  with  the  statement  that  the  fit
to  occur  at  a  specified  time,  will  be  the  last,  or  the  last  but
one,  &c.  Another  form  of  prevision,  which  I  have  also  describ-
ed in  Part  I.,  is  that  of  predicting  the  duration  of  the  sleep,
which  I  have  seen  ;  and  that  of  predicting  accurately  the
period  at  which  the  sleeper  will  become  lucid,  or  will  acquire
certain  powers.  In  the  case  of  Mr.  D.,  he  told  me  he  should
acquire  a  very  high  degree  of  lucidity  after  being  magnet-
ised a  number  of  times.  I  have  already  stated  that  he
could  not  specify  exactly  the  number  of  times,  but  that  he
went  on  improving  in  general  lucidity,  with  occasional  glimpses
of  a  higher  state,  as  long  as  I  was  able  to  magnetise  him.
I  had  done  so  about  45  times,  probably  not  much  more  than
the  half  of  the  number  required  for  full  lucidity,  and
was  in  hopes  of  getting  him  at  last  to  fix  the  precise
number,  and  of  ascertaining  how  far  he  would  be  correct,
when  his  illness  interfered,  and  on  his  recovery,  he  had  lost
the  extreme  susceptibility  he  at  first  exhibited,  so  that  I
must  once  more  begin  from  the  beginning.  But  this  I  can-
not now  attempt  for  some  time  to  come.

Some  clairvoyants predict  accident to themselves, and


PREVISION  OF  ACCIDENTS.  351

one  case  of  this  kind  is  alluded  to  in  Part  L,  which  I  owe
to  Mr.  Atkinson.  In  that  case,  the  predicted  accident  was
a  fall  on  the  steps  on  coming  out  of  church,  but  it  was  only
predicted  generally,  as  to  happen  at  a  certain  hour,  and  to
produce  certain  effects.  It  is  very  common  for  such  as  go
spontaneously  into  Trance  or  Extasis  to  predict  these  occur-
rences a  long  time  before.  I  shall  have  to  mention,  briefly,
a  case  of  this  kind  under  the  head  of  Extasis.

As  to  prevision  of  matters  unconnected  with  the  sleeper,
and  referring  to  other  parties,  this  is  much  more  rare,  and
I  have  not  met  with  it  in  any  of  my  own  cases.  But  it  has
been  frequently  recorded,  and  I  think  must  be  admitted  as
a  possible  occurrence,  beyond  our  power  at  present  to  ex-
plain. Major  Buckley  informs  me,  that  it  frequently  occurs
in  his  experience  ;  and  has  communicated  the  following  in-
stances.

Case  55. — A  young  lady  in  London,  being  magnetised,
saw  her  family  in  the  country,  described  their  occupation,
and  added  that  her  little  brother  had  got  the  measles.  Being
asked,  if  her  little  sister  had  not  also  got  the  measles,  she
said,  "No,  but  she  will  have  them  on  Wednesday.  Oh  !  my
elder  sister  will  have  them  too,  but  not  until  the  Wednesday
following." All  this  proved  correct.

Case  56. — A  lady  from  Canada,  who  was  present,  asked
the  clairvoyante  to  go  to  Quebec.  She  declined  then,  but
when  next  magnetised,  did  so,  and  correctly  described  the
house  and  its  inmates  that  she  was  desired  to  see.  She
then  said  the  lady  would  be  able  to  read  in  nuts  while
awake,  but  not  on  that  day ;  and  that  she  herself  would  do
so  first. She  was  right  in  both  predictions.

Case  57. — A  clairvoyante  told  Major  B.,  that  if  he  would
magnetise  a  certain  lady,  who  had  never  been  tried,  by
making  three  passes  round  her  head,  the  lady  would  be  able
to  read  three  words,  enclosed  in  boxes.  The  lady  did  sleep
after  the  third  pass,  and  read  only  three  words,  although
there  were  four  on  the  slip  of  paper  enclosed  in  the  boxes.

Major  Buckley  tells  me  that  he  finds  similar  predictions,
as  to  the  mode  of  magnetising  others,  and  the  powers  they
will  exhibit  at  certain  periods,  constantly  correct,  when
made  by  good  clairvoyantes.

Now  it  is  obvious,  that  if  prevision  can  exist  to  that  ex-
tent, it  may  go  still  farther. It  is  quite  as  difficult  to  fore-


352  TRANCE.

see  when  a  person  will  take  the  measles,  or  when  another
will  be  able  to  read  words  enclosed  in  nuts,  as  to  foresee
any  events  whatever.

It  appears  to  me  also,  as  I  have  hinted  in  Part  I.,  that
this  fact  furnishes  the  true  key  for  the  explanation  of  correct
dreams  of  future  events.  That  such  dreams  do  occur,  can-
not, I  think,  be  doubted ;  and  I  am  disposed  to  regard  them
as  instances  of  clairvoyant  prevision  occurring  during  sleep,
or,  as  sometimes  happens,  in  the  waking  hours,  most  pro-
bably in  a  state  of  reverie  or  abstraction,  which  resembles
sleep  in  the  circumstance  that  the  mind  is  not  dwelling  on
the  impressions  of  the  external  senses.  I  shall  have  occa-
sion to  give  a  few  instances,  when  I  come  to  spontaneous
prevision ;  here  I  have  only  to  do  with  that  which  occurs  in
the  magnetic  sleep.

In  one  or  two  cases,  I  have  known  of  predictions  being
made  in  the  sleep,  which  may  prove  correct,  but  the  ac-
curacy of  which  remains  to  be  ascertained,  since  the  pre-
dicted events  are  still  future.


LETTER  XVIII.

Trance.

The  state  of  Trance,  as  defined  in  Part  I.,  has  not  yet
occurred  in  my  experience  ;  but  various  cases  are  on  record.
I  can  only  refer,  here,  to  the  celebrated  Tinsbury  case,
recorded  in  the  early  transactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  in
which  the  trance  lasted,  with  hardly  an  interruption,  for
seventeen  weeks.  In  Mr.  Braid's  little  work  on  Trance,
recently  published,  the  reader  will  find  many  interesting
details  of  the  very  striking  case  of  Col.  Townsend,  who
could  produce  that  state  of  apparent  death  at  pleasure  ;
and  of  various  instances  of  the  Faquirs  in  India,  who  are
in  the  habit  of  doing  so,  and  of  allowing  themselves  to  be
buried  in  the  trance,  and  awakened  out  of  it  days,  weeks,
or  even  months  afterwards.  A  case,  similar  to  the  Tins-
bury  one,  lately  occurred  in  France.


CASE  OF  EXTASIS.


EXTASIS.


353


This  state  is  also  one  of  which  I  have  no  experience.
But  it  has  been  very  often  recorded,  and  I  shall  give  a  brief
notice  of  its  occurrence,  on  two  distinct  occasions,  in  the
girl  E.  at  Bolton.  Both  of  these  states  were  predicted
accurately  by  E.,  and  the  second  occurred  only  about  a
month  ago.  Dr.  Haddock  has  been  kind  enough  to  let  me
see  his  notes,  and  from  these  I  extract  a  brief  notice  of  the
phenomena,  which  will  be  fully  described  in  Dr.  II. 's  new
work.

Case  58.— In  the  summer  of  1848,  E.  frequently  went,
spontaneously,  and  without  any  warning,  into  a  state  of
extasis.  This  first  happened  on  the  3rd  of  July  1848.  By
degrees,  she  began,  in  the  usual  magnetic  sleep,  to  predict
the  occurrence  of  the  extasis,  and  in  one  case  did  so  two
months  before  it  occurred,  which  it  did  precisely  at  the  time
indicated.  The  same  accuracy  was  observed  in  all  her  pre-
dictions of  this  kind,  although  she  had  no  recollection,  in
her  waking  state,  of  having  made  them,  and  was  never  told
that  she  had  done  so.

In  the  state  of  extasis  she  sometimes  retained  a  recollec-
tion of  the  place  she  was  in,  and  of  the  persons  around  her,
but  her  mind  was  chiefly  occupied  with  visions,  apparently
of  another  state  of  existence,  and  of  what  appeared  to  be
spiritual  beings.  She  always  spoke  of  the  state  as  of  one
to  which  she  went  away,  or  was  taken  away,  and  on  return-
ing to  her  usual  magnetic  state,  she  would  remember  and
describe  what  she  had  seen  and  felt.  Her  eyes  were  turned
up,  and  she  was  entirely  insensible  to  pain.  At  first,  her
limbs  were  flexible,  but  subsequently  her  whole  frame  was
rigid.  She  could,  when  asked,  perceive  any  concealed
object  by  clairvoyance,  but  was  usually  too  much  engrossed
with  her  spiritual  perceptions  to  attend  to  such  matters.
On  one  occasion,  when  in  her  usual  magnetic  state,  she
told  Dr.  II.,  that  next  night,  a  person  long  dead  would  come
to  her,  and  show  her  a  book  with  some  words  in  it,  which
she  was  to  take  to  Dr.  H.  From  her  description  of  the
book,  Dr.  H.  conjectured  that  it  was  a  small  bible,  not  then
in  the  house ;  and  he  quietly  procured  it  and  placed  it
among  other  books. During  the  next  night,  she  awoke  in

30*


354  CASE  OF  EXTASIS.

a  kind  of  somnambulistic  extasis,  and  in  the  dark  went  down
two  nights  of  stairs,  selected  the  book,  and  brought  it  to
Dr.  H.,  opened  at  a  certain  page.  In  the  darkness  it  fell,
but  she  instantly  found  the  passage  by  placing  it  on  her
forehead  and  turning  over  the  pages.  She  said  the  passage
had  been  shewn  to  her  in  a  similar  but  larger  book  by  the
person  alluded  to,  and  she  added  many  circumstances  con-
nected with  the  history  of  the  book,  known  to  Dr.  H.  alone.
She  could  not  read,  but  explained,  that,  when  looking  for
the  passage  by  turning  over  the  leaves,  she  found  that,
when  she  came  to  it,  she  could  no  longer  turn  them  either
way.  This  experiment  was  often  repeated,  in  the  dark,
and  for  some  months  she  could  always  discover  the  passage,
when  magnetised  ;  but  after  a  time  she  ceased  to  be  able
to  do  so.  Here  it  is  evident,  that  while  her  extatic  vision
somehow  directed  her  to  the  book,  she,  who  could  not  read,
and  was  besides  in  the  dark,  had  some  means  by  which  she
saw  and  recognised  the  passage.  When  light  was  present,
she  never  attempted  to  use  her  eyes,  which  were  moreover
turned  up  and  closed,  but  always  placed  the  book  on  her
head,  and  there  turned  over  the  leaves.  This  vision  was
evidently  connected  with  her  states  of  spontaneous  extasis,
because  the  person  seen  was  one  who  had  always  appeared
to  her  in  that  state.

About  the  11th  of  December,  1850,  E.,  in  the  magnetic
state,  predicted  an  extasis  to  occur  on  the  8th  of  January
1851,  and  subsequently  fixed  the  hour  at  10  A.  M.  She
had  not  gone  into  this  state  for  some  time,  but  as  the  day
approached,. she  now  and  then  went  into  a  sort  of  partial
extasis,  and  became  almost  insensible  to  what  was  passing
around  her,  being  much  occupied  with  beings  who  came,  as
it  appeared,  to  her.  On  the  8th,  at  10  A.  M.,  the  predicted
extasis  occurred,  and  in  it  her  visions  were  not  only  of  an-
other state  and  of  spiritual  beings,  but  obviously  connected
with  all  the  former  instances  of  extasis,  of  which  the  last
well-marked  one  had  occurred  nearly  two  years  before.  I
do  not  enter  into  the  details  of  her  visions,  which  will  no
doubt  be  given  fully  in  Dr.  Haddock's  work,  now  in  the
press;  but  I  may  point  out  the  remarkable  clearness  and
consistency  of  these  visions,  which  indicate  a  very  peculiar
and  interesting  mental  state.  In  many  points,  her  notions
of  the  spiritual  world,  as  derived  from  the  visions,  agree


SPONTANEOUS  PHENOMENA.  600

with  those  of  the  somnambulists,  or  ecstatics  of  M.  Cahagnet,
alluded  to  in  Part  I. ;  but  it  is  remarkable,  not  only  that  these
notions  were  not  suggested  to  her,  for  Dr.  II.  most  care-
fully avoids  all  suggestion,  but  were  in  many  points  directly
opposed  to  the  ideas  that  she  had  formed  on  such  subjects
from  what  she  had  been  taught.  It  is  singular  that  E.  also,
like  the  French  ecstatics,  spoke  of  Swedenborg  as  appearing
to  her,  and  as  having  possessed  the  power  of  seeing  spirits.
This  is  a  subject  on  which  it  is  impossible  to  form  a  decided
opinion  without  far  more  extended  investigation  ;  but  I  may
be  allowed  to  observe,  first,  that  whatever  be  the  real  nature
of  these  visions  or  dreams,  they  appear  to  be  genuine ;  and
secondly,  that  their  occurrence  is  always  connected  with  a
high  degree  of  clairvoyant  power,  that  is,  with  exalted  per-
ceptive faculties,  acting  through  some  unknown  medium.
Thus  E.,  in  gradually  passing  from  her  full  state  of  extasis
to  her  ordinary  magnetic  state,  was  always  found  more  clair-
voyant than  usual.  It  must  therefore  be  admitted  as  possi-
ble, if  we  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  spiritual  world  at  all,
that  in  this  state  of  exalted  perception  we  may  come  into
communication  with  it.  Not  having  had  any  opportunity
of  examining  a  case  of  extasis,  I  can  only  judge  from  the
reports  of  others;  but  it  appears  plainly,  that  when  such
cases  occur,  we  ought  to  study  them  with  care  and  atten-
tion. In  this  way  alone,  and  not  by  rejecting  the  whole  as
imaginary,  can  we  hope  to  ascertain  the  true  nature  of  the
phenomena.  As  far  as  I  can  judge  at  present,  they  do  not
appear  to  be  suggested,  at  least  directly,  and  there  is  a
degree  of  harmony  between  the  accounts  of  diiferent  observ-
ers, which  is  not  easily  reconcilable  with  the  idea  that  they
are  altogether  delusive.  Certainly  the  clairvoyant  visions
of  absent  or  even  deceased  persons  (unknown  to  the  clair-
voyants, and  often  to  any  one  present,  but  subsequently
ascertained  to  be  correct,)  are  not  delusive,  although  beyond
our  power  to  explain.

Spontaneous  Magnetic  Phenomena.

We  have  already  seen  that  many  of  the  magnetic  phe-
nomena occur  spontaneously.  Somnambulism  is  nothing
else  than  the  magnetic  sleep  occurring  during  natural  sleep.
From  the  history  of  the  numerous  recorded  cases,  it  appears


356  SPONTANEOUS  CLAIRVOYANCE.

that  somnambulists  can  walk  securely  in  the  dark,  or  in
dangerous  situations,  while  the  eyes  are  either  closed  or  in-
sensible to  light.  They  are  often  deaf  to  the  loudest  sounds,
and  they  can  pursue  their  usual  occupations,  or  read  and
write  without  waking.  In  short,  they  seem,  like  persons  in
the  artificial  magnetic  sleep,  to  possess  a  new  sense  or  new
senses.  But  I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  studying  any
case  of  sleep-walking.

Cataleptic  rigidity  is  very  frequent  as  a  symptom  of  nerv-
ous disease,  and  is  generally  found  associated  with  extreme
susceptibility  to  the  magnetic  influence.

Spontaneous  Vision  of  Passing  Events.

Sympathy  with  those  who  are  absent  is  also  very  fre-
quent as  a  spontaneous  occurrence,  and  depends,  in  all  pro-
bability, on  the  fact,  that  an  impressible  state  is  developed,
either  as  a  symptom  of  nervous  disease,  or  in  health,  by
deep  concentration  or  abstraction.  In  this  state  the  mind
is  affected  by  impressions  which  are  usually  overlooked.  It
is  impossible  to  doubt,  that  in  many  instances,  sympathetic
warnings  of  the  death  or  illness  of  absent  friends  have  been
experienced.  Every  one  knows  of  some  such  instances,  and
it  has  been  frequently  stated,  I  believe  correctly,  that  the
persons  who  received  the  warnings,  were  those  of  whom  the
dying  or  sick  person  was  earnestly  thinking  at  the  moment.
At  p.  343,  I  have  alluded  to  a  case  in  which  this  sympathy
was  felt  at  the  distance  of  100  miles;  and  in  Part  I.,  I
have  mentioned  the  case  of  a  lady,  related  to  me,  who  fre-
quently had  such  warnings  of  the  death  of  friends  at  still
greater  distances,  which  were  always  found  true.  The  fol-
lowing cases  are  well  attested.  They  are  interesting,
because,  if  we  regard  them  as  dreams,  they  are  dreams
occurring,  at  the  same  moment,  to  different  persons,  who
all  supposed  themselves  awake.

Case  59. — A  gentleman  of  rank  and  property  in  Scotland
served  in  his  youth  in  the  army  of  the  Duke  of  York  in
Flanders.  He  occupied  the  same  tent  with  two  other  officers,
one  of  whom  was  sent  on  some  service.  One  night,  during
his  absence,  this  gentleman,  while  in  bed,  saw  the  figure  of
his  absent  friend  sitting  on  the  vacant  bed.  He  called  to
his  companion,  who  also  saw  the  figure,  which  spoke  to  them,


SYMPATHETIC  VISIONS.  357

and  said  he  had  just  been  killed  at  a  certain  place,  pointing
to  his  wound.  He  then  requested  them,  on  returning  to
England,  to  call  at  a  certain  agent's  house,  in  a  certain  street,
and  to  procure  from  him  a  document  of  great  importance  for
the  family  of  the  deceased.  If  the  agent,  as  was  probable,
should  deny  the  possession  of  it,  it  would  be  found  in  a  certain
drawer  of  a  cabinet  in  his  room.  Next  day,  it  appeared
that  the  officer  had  been  shot,  as  he  had  told  them,  in  the
manner,  and  at  the  time  and  place  indicated.  After  the
return  of  the  troops  to  England,  the  two  friends,  walking
together  one  day,  found  themselves  in  the  street  where  the
agent  lived,  and  the  request  of  their  friend  recurred  to  both,
they  having  hitherto  forgotten  it.  They  called  on  the  agent,
who  denied  having  the  paper  in  question,  when  they  com-
pelled him,  in  their  presence,  to  open  the  drawer  of  the
cabinet,  where  it  was  found,  and  restored  to  the  widow.
Such  is,  briefly,  the  story,  which  illustrates  the  effect  of
sympathy  in  producing  the  vision  of  the  absent  man  at  the
moment  of  his  death.  It  may  be  ridiculed  as  a  ghost  story ;
but  as  I  first  heard  it  from  a  relative  of  my  own,  who  was
a  neighbor  in  the  country  to  the  gentleman  to  whom  it
happened,  and  had  often  heard  it  from  himself,  as  I  subse-
quently heard  it  confirmed  by  the  gentleman  himself;  and
as  I  know  that  many  others  had  it  from  him,  I  am  satisfied
that  the  facts  are  true.  Even  if  we  suppose  the  persons
who  saw  the  vision  to  have  heard  the  details  given  by  the
figure  from  him  when  alive,  and  to  have  forgotten  them,
which  is  not  likely,  how  are  we  to  account  for  both  seeing
the  same  vision  at  the  same  time  ?  I  may  add,  that  a  lady
of  rank,  who  had  often  heard  the  story,  told  me,  that  when
she  or  some  one  else  once  spoke  of  it  in  a  company,  a  gentle-
man present  said,  "Perhaps  you  are  not  aware  that  the
officer  whose  figure  was  seen  was  my  father,  and  that  I  hold
certain  property  by  virtue  of  the  very  document  which  was
so  recovered."

Case  60. — An  officer  occupied  the  same  room  with  another
officer  in  the  West  Indies.  One  night  he  awoke  his  com-
panion, and  asked  him  if  he  saw  any  thing  in  the  room,
when  the  latter  answered  that  he  saw  an  old  man  in  the
corner,  whom  he  did  not  know.  That,  said  the  other,  is  my
father,  and  I  am  sure  he  is  dead.  In  due  time,  news  arrived
of  his  death  in  England  at  that  very  time. Long  afterwards,


358  SYMPATHETIC  VISIONS.

the  officer  took  his  friend  who  had  seen  the  vision  to  visit
the  widow,  when,  on  entering  the  room,  he  started,  and  said,
that  is  the  portrait  of  the  old  man  I  saw.  It  was,  in  fact,
the  portrait  of  the  father,  whom  the  friend  had  never  seen,
except  in  the  vision.  This  story  I  have  also  on  the  best
authority;  and  every  one  knows  that  such  stories  are  not
uncommon.  It  is  very  easy,  but  not  satisfactory,  to  laugh
at  them  as  incredible  ghost  stories ;  but  there  is  a  natural
truth  in  them,  whatever  that  may  be.

Case  61. — The  next  case  is  one  widely  known,  but  in-
teresting from  the  fact  that  the  vision  was  seen  by  many
persons.  At  a  mess-table  in  America,  the  whole  of  the
officers  present  saw  the  door  open,  and  a  figure  pass  through
the  room  to  an  inner  room.  It  was  that  of  an  absent  com-
rade. As  the  figure  did  not  reappear,  and  there  was  no
other  issue  from  the  inner  room,  the  company,  surprised,
looked  into  the  inner  room,  and  found  it  empty.  It  ap-
peared that  the  person  seen,  died  or  was  killed  at  the  same
time.  Here  it  is  very  remarkable,  that  the  sympathy
to  which  we  must,  in  all  probability,  ascribe  the  vision,
affected  so  many  persons.  But  the  most  striking  fact  was,
that  one  officer,  who  had  never  seen  the  absent  man,  saw
the  figure.  Some  years  afterwards,  this  officer,  (a  very
distinguished  one,)  being  in  the  streets  of  London,  along
with  another  who  had  also  been  present  when  the  figure
was  seen,  exclaimed,  on  seeing  a  gentleman,  "  There  is  the
man  whose  figure  I  saw!"  "No,''  replied  his  friend;  "it
is  not  he,  but  his  twin  brother."  So  that  the  officer,  who
had  never  seen  the  dead  man,  except  in  the  vision,  recog-
nised his  brother  by  his  strong  likeness  to  the  figure  he  had
seen.

Case  62. — A  lady  saw,  in  a  spontaneous  vision  or  dream,
a  hand  taking  a  brooch  from  her  desk,  where  she  had
shortly  placed  it  before.  She  saw  the  hand  so  plainly,
that  she  could  have  pointed  it  out  among  a  hundred,  and
recognised  it  as  the  hand  of  one  of  her  servants.  When
morning  came,  the  desk  was  examined,  and  the  brooch  was
gone.  As  it  was  not  ascertained,  in  this  case,  by  whom  it
had  been  taken,  we  have  not  the  full  proof  of  the  accuracy
of  the  vision ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  interesting.  The  same
lady  exhibited  many  remarkable  phenomena ;  but  was  not
found  to  be  clairvoyant  in  the  magnetic  sleep. On  one  oc-


SPONTANEOUS  RETltO VISION.  350

casion,  she  fell  into  a  state  of  trance,  resembling  death,  and
was  supposed  to  be  dead;  but,  as  happens  in  many  similar
cases,  she  was  conscious,  and  quite  aware  of  what  was
passing,  without  the  power  of  making  the  slightest  move-
ment, or  of  uttering  a  sound.  For  this  case  I  am  indebted
to  Mr.  Atkinson.


Spontaneous  Retrovision.

In  the  preceding  cases,  there  has  always  occured  the
vision  of  a  dying  person,  then  at  a  distance,  and  it  is  this
which  I  am  disposed  to  ascribe  to  what  we  call  sympathy
between  certain  persons  in  regard  to  events  then  passing.
But  it  would  appear  that  a  similar  sympathy  may  exist  in
reference  to  past  events,  just  as  we  have  seen  retrovision
occurring  in  clairvoyance.  It  is  well  known,  that  in  all
ages,  and  in  every  country,  the  belief  has  prevailed  that
certain  places  are  visited  by  visions  of  the  former  inhabi-
tants, and,  according  to  popular  belief,  this  occurs  chiefly
where  crimes  have  been  committed.  It  is  easy  to  see  how
many  such  stories  have  been  originated  in  the  minds  of  the
timid,  the  ignorant,  and  the  superstitious,  perhaps  from
dreams,  or  from  waking  visions ;  and  how  they  may  have
come  to  be  much  exaggerated  and  distorted.  Rut  there  ap-
pear to  be  cases  in  which  such  an  explanation  is  hardly  ad-
missible, and  in  which  the  same  vision  has  presented  itself,
at  long  intervals,  to  many  different  persons,  many  of  whom
had  never  heard  of  them.  Every  one  must  have  heard  of
many  such  cases,  apparently  well  attested;  and  I  confess
that  I  find  it  difficult  to  convince  myself,  that  this  universal
belief  is  altogether  destitute  of  a  true  natural  foundation.
On  the  contrary,  just  as  Reichenbach  has  shown,  that  one
kind  of  apparitions  is  caused  by  luminous  odylic  emanations
from  dead  bodies,  or  from  other  objects,  I  am  inclined  to
think  that  a  careful  study  of  Animal  Magnetism  would  clear
up  other  kinds  of  visions  or  spectres.  And  since  persons
in  the  magnetic  state  may  have  distinct  visions  of  past
events,  so  we  may  imagine  persons,  not  actually  in  that
state,  but  in  one  approaching  to  it,  in  which  they  are  in-
tensely susceptible  to  magnetic  influences,  to  possess,  occa-
sionally, the  power  of  seeing  past  events  imaged  before
them. The  chief  difficulty  is  to  understand  how  any  vision


360  SPONTANEOUS  RETROVISION.

comes  to  be  attached  to  any  special  locality.  But  since
highly  lucid  and  sensitive  subjects  often  perceive  the  traces
of  persons  in  places  where  they  no  longer  are,  we  may  sup-
pose such  traces  to  adhere  to  places,  and  to  act  on  or  be
perceived  by  the  sensitive,  at  a  great  distance  of  time.  The
following  case  will  illustrate  the  phenomenon  alluded  to.  I
have  it  on  very  good  authority,  and  have  every  reason  to
believe  that  the  facts  occurred  as  here  stated.

Case  63. — In  an  old  house  near  Edinburgh,  long  since
pulled  down,  resided  a  family,  in  which  was  a  negro  servant,
who  slept  in  a  wing  of  the  house.  The  first  time  he  slept
there,  he  saw  a  vision,  which  nearly  terrified  him  out  of  his
senses.  (It  is  to  be  remembered  that  negroes  are  very  sen-
sitive to  the  magnetic  influence.)  In  the  middle  of  the
night,  he  saw  the  figure  of  a  lady,  richly  dressed,  but  with-
out her  head,  and  carrying  a  child,  pass  through  his  room.
When  he  spoke  of  it,  the  family,  who  had  only  recently
rented  the  house,  ridiculed  him,  and  said  he  must  have  been
drunk  or  mad.  But  he  declared  he  had  been  quite  sober.
He  was,  however,  compelled  to  sleep  there  again,  and  again
saw  the  vision,  and  this  went  on  till  it  was  considered  cruel
to  insist  on  his  sleeping  there,  from  the  distress  and  terror
it  occasioned.  When  the  vision  was  mentioned  to  persons
belonging  to  the  family  who  were  the  proprietors  of  the
house,  it  was  instantly  recognised  as  one  which  had  often
appeared  to  those  who  slept  in  that  room.  Many  years
afterwards,  the  house  was  pulled  down,  and  in  a  hollow  in
the  wall  of  that  room  was  found  a  box,  snorter  than  a  coffin,
in  which  were  the  remains,  the  bones,  of  a  female  and  of  a
child,  the  head  of  the  female  being  at  the  side,  and  not  in
its  natural  place.  A  lady  who  heard  of  this,  and  had  also
known  of  the  negro's  vision,  found  him,  now  an  old  man,
living  in  a  remote  part  of  the  country,  and  without  telling
him  what  had  been  found,  got  him  to  tell  the  story  of  his
vision,  which  he  did,  word  for  word,  as  above  stated,  and,
even  at  that  period,  with  every  sign  of  terror.  The  only
idea  I  can  form  of  the  cause  of  the  vision,  which  was  known
in  the  family  to  have  appeared  to  various  persons,  is  this,
that  some  influence,  of  a  magnetic  or  odylic  nature,  pro-
ceeding from  the  remains,  acted  on  sensitive  persons  within
its  reach,  so  as  to  cause  them  to  have  a  clairvoyant  vision
of  the  past.


THE  TOWER  GHOST.  361

The  following  case,  which  was  mentioned  to  me  by  Sir
David  Brewster  as  well  attested,  is  of  a  similar  nature.  I
do  not  remember  the  names  of  the  parties,  but  I  believe  the
case  has  been  published.

Case  64. — A  nobleman  one  day  went  to  hear  a  very  dis-
tinguished Professor  of  Philosophy  lecture  in  Berlin.  Dur-
ing the  lecture,  which  turned  on  apparitions,  he  observed
the  Professor  to  be  much  agitated;  and  after  it  was  over,
he  mentioned  this  to  the  Professor,  and  begged  for  an  ex-
planation. This  he  gave,  observing  that  the  subject  ,was
one  on  which  he  could  not  dwell  without  deep  emotion.  It
appeared  that  he  had  once  been  appointed  to  a  living  in
East  Prussia,  where  his  predecessor  was  a  priest  generally
respected.  The  first  time  he  slept  there,  he  saw,  as  he
awoke  in  the  morning,  the  figure  of  a  priest  cross  the  room
leading  two  children  by  the  hand,  and  disappear  behind  the
stove.  If  I  remember  rightly,  he  recognised  the  priest  he
saw  to  be  the  late  incumbent,  from  a  portrait  in  the  room.
Having  discovered  it  was  a  vision  he  had  seen,  he  made
some  enquiries,  and  was  informed  that  two  children,  sup-
posed to  be  natural  children  of  the  late  incumbent,  and  who
lived  with  him,  had  disappeared.  For  some  time  nothing
more  was  discovered;  but  when  it  became  necessary  to  light
a  fire  in  the  stove,  behind  which  the  figures  had  vanished,  a
most  offensive  smell  was  observed  to  proceed  from  the  fire,
which  would  not  burn  properly,  and,  on  examination,  and
taking  down  the  wall  of  the  stove,  the  remains  of  two  chil-
dren were  found  concealed  in  it.

I  shall  here  mention  another  case,  kindly  communicated
to  me  by  Sir  David  Brewster.  It  is  that  of  the  "  Tower
Ghost."  Unlike  the  two  preceding  cases,  the  origin  of  it
is  quite  obscure.

Case  65. — "At  the  trial  of  Queen  Caroline,  in  1821,  the
guards  at  the  Tower  wTere  doubled,  and  Col.  S.,  the  keeper
of  the  Regalia,  was  quartered  there  with  his  family.  To-
wards twilight,  one  evening,  and  before  dark,  he,  his  wife,
son,  and  daughter,  were  sitting,  listening  to  the  sentinels,
who  were  singing  and  answering  one  another,  on  the  beats
above  and  below  them.  The  evening  was  sultry,  and  the
door  stood  ajar,  when  something  suddenly  rolled  in  through
the  open  space.  Col.  S.  at  first  thought  it  was  a  cloud  of
smoke,  but  it  assumed  the  shape  of  a  pyramid  of  dark  thick
31


362  THE  TOWER  GHOST.

gray,  with  something  working  towards  its  centre.  Mrs.  S.
saw  a  form.  Miss  S.  felt  an  indescribable  sensation  of  chill
and  horror.  The  son  sat  at  the  window,  staring  at  the
terrified  and  agitated  party,  but  saw  nothing.  Mrs.  S.
threw  her  head  down  upon  her  arms  on  the  table,  and
screamed  out,  'Oh!  Christ!  it  has  siezed  me!'  The  Colonel
took  a  chair,  and  hurled  it  at  the  phantom,  through  which
it  passed.  The  cloud  seemed  to  him  to  revolve  round  the
room,  and  then  disappear,  as  it  came,  through  the  door.
He  had  scarcely  risen  from  his  chair  to  follow,  when  he
heard  a  loud  shriek  and  heavy  fall  at  the  bottom  of  the  stair.
He  stopped  to  listen,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  guard  came
up  and  challenged  the  poor  sentry,  who  had  been  so  lately
singing,  but  wTho  now  lay  at  the  entrance  in  a  swoon.  The
serjeant  shook  him  rudely,  declared  he  was  asleep  on  his
post,  and  put  him  under  arrest.  Next  day  the  soldier  was
brought  to  a  court-martial,  when  Col.  S.  appeared  on  his
behalf,  to  testify  that  he  could  not  have  been  asleep,  for  that
he  had  been  singing,  and  the  Colonel's  family  had  been
listening,  ten  minutes  before.  The  man  declared  that,  while
walking  toward  the  stair  entrance,  a  dreadful  figure  had
issued  from  the  doorway,  which  he  took  at  first  for  an
escaped  bear,  on  its  hind  legs.  It  passed  him,  and  scowled
upon  him  with  a  human  face,  and  the  expression  of  a  demon,
disappearing  over  the  Barbican.  He  was  so  frightened  that
he  became  giddy,  and  knew  no  more.  His  story,  of  course,
was  not  believed  by  his  judges,  but  he  was  believed  to  have
had  an  attack  of  vertigo,  and  was  acquitted  and  released  on
Col.  S.'s  evidence.  That  evening,  Col.  S.  went  to  congratu-
late the  man ;  but  he  was  so  changed  that  he  did  not  know
him.  From  a  glow  of  rude  health  in  his  handsome  face,  he
had  become  of  the  color  of  bad  paste.  Col.  S.  said  to  him,
'  Why  do  you  look  so  dejected,  my  lad?  I  think  I  have
done  you  a  great  favor  in  getting  you  off;  and  I  would  ad-
vise you  in  future  to  continue  your  habit  of  singing.'  '  Col-
onel,' he  replied,  '  you  have  saved  my  character,  and  I  thank
you  ;  but  as  for  any  thing  else,  it  little  signifies.  From  the
moment  I  saw  that  demon,  I  felt  I  was  a  dead  man.'  He
never  recovered  his  spirits,  and  died  next  day,  forty-eight
hours  after  he  had  seen  the  spectre.  Col.  S.  had  conversed
with  the  serjeant  about  it,  who  quietly  remarked,  '  It  was  a
bad  job,  but  he  was  only  a  recruit,  and  must  get  used  to  it,


SPONTANEOUS  PREVISION.  803

like  the  rest.'  'What!'  said  Col.  S.,  'have  you  heard  of
others  seeing  the  same?"  '  Oh,  yes,'  answered  the  Serjeant ;
'  there  are  many  queer,  unaccountable  things  seen  here,  I
assure  you,  and  many  of  our  recruits  faint  a  time  or  two,
but  they  get  used  to  it,  and  it  don't  hurt  them.'  Mrs.  S.
never  got  used  to  it.  She  remained  in  a  state  of  dejection
for  six  weeks,  and  then  died.  Col.  S.  was  long  in  recover-
ing from  the  impression,  and  was  reluctant  to  speak  of  it  ;
but  he  said  he  would  never  deny  the  thing  he  had  seen."

It  is  evident  that,  in  this  case,  the  fatal  results  were
chiefly  caused  by  terror  ;  but  the  essential  fact  is,  that  some-
thing was  seen,  and  that,  too,  by  different  persons,  and
that  similar  things  had  been  seen  before.  It  is  worthy  of
notice,  that  what  to  some  appeared  as  a  horrible  human
form,  appeared  to  others  as  a  mass  of  grey  smoke,  and  was
not  visible  to  others.  Now,  this  is  one  of  the  characters  of
odylic  light.  Some  cannot  see  it;  others  see  only  a  faintly
luminous  grey  smoke  ;  others  a  more  luminous  and  less  dense
vapor;  and  others  a  bright  light;  the  differences  being
caused  by  various  degrees  of  sensitiveness,  and  by  the  dif-
ferent distances  at  which  the  light  is  seen,  as  well  as  its
various  degrees  of  intensity.  If  it  be  asked,  Could  a  mere
shapeless  luminous  cloud  or  emanation  assume  a  human  form
merely  by  the  force  of  imagination  ?  we  must  admit  this  to
be  possible.  But  we  do  not  know  that  all  odylic  emanations
are  shapeless,  when  viewed  at  the  proper  distance ;  nor  do
we  know  that  they  may  not,  in  some  cases,  possess  the  form
of  that  from  which  they  are  derived.

Spontaneous  Prevision.

We  now  come  to  Spontaneous  Prevision.  This  has  been
recorded,  as  occurring  in  all  ages,  sometimes  in  the  form  of
dreams,  at  other  times  in  that  of  waking  visions  or  second
sight.  By  far  the  most  remarkable,  because  the  best  at-
tested, instance,  in  modern  times,  is  the  celebrated  predic-
tion of  M.  Cazotte,  concerning  the  events  of  the  Reign  of
Terror.  I  shall  give  it  entire,  and  I  shall  only  promise,
that  it  was  well  known,  in  all  its  details,  both  in  Paris  and
London,  at  a  time  when  everyone  thought  it  a  mere  dream.
I  have  seen  persons  who  heard  of  it  very  soon  after  it
was  delivered,  and  who  remembered  hearing  it  ridiculed  in


364  PREDICTION  OF  CAZOTTE.

society  as  absurd.  It  is  particularly  worthy  of  notice,  that
Cazotte,  who  was  a  man  of  a  very  peculiar  turn  of  mind,
and  much  addicted  to  the  study  of  occult  science,  was  also
subject  to  fits  of  abstraction,  reverie,  or  dreaming,  in  which
he  seems  to  have  been  clairvoyant,  and  that  this  was  far
from  being  the  only  occasion  in  which  he  uttered  predictions
which  were  verified.  He  is  to  be  considered  as  a  man  sub-
ject to  fits  of  spontaneous  lucidity,  which,  in  his  case,  often
took  the  form  of  prevision.  The  following  account  is  ex-
tracted from  the  posthumous  memoirs  of  Laharpe.

Case  66. — "  It  appears  but  as  yesterday  ;  yet,  neverthe-
less, it  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1788.  We  were
dining  with  one  of  our  brethren  at  the  Academy, — a  man
of  considerable  wealth  and  genius.  The  company  was  nu-
merous and  diversified — courtiers,  lawyers,  academicians,
&c;  and,  according  to  custom,  there  had  been  a  magnificent
dinner.  At  dessert,  the  wines  of  Malvoisin  and  Constantia
added  to  the  gaiety  of  the  guests  that  sort  of  license  which
is  sometimes  forgetful  of  bon  ton : — we  had  arrived  in  the
world,  just  at  that  time  when  anything  was  permitted  that
would  raise  a  laugh.  Chamfort  had  read  to  us  some  of  his
impious  and  libertine  tales,  and  even  the  great  ladies  had
listened  without  having  recourse  to  their  fans.  From  this
arose  a  deluge  of  jests  against  religion.  One  quoted  a  ti-
rade from  the  Puselle ;  another  recalled  the  philosophic
lines  of  Diderot, —

'  Et  des  boyaux  du  dernier  pretre,
Serrer  le  cou  du  dernier  roi,'

for  the  sake  of  applauding  them.  A  third  rose,  and  hold-
ing his  glass  in  his  hand,  exclaimed,  '•Yes,  gentlemen,  I
am  as  sure  that  there  is  no  Grod,  as  I  am  sure  that  Homer
was  a  fool ;  and,  in  truth,  he  was  as  sure  of  the  one  as  the
other.  The  conversation  became  more  serious ;  much  ad-
miration was  expressed  on  the  revolution  which  Voltaire
had  effected,  and  it  was  agreed  that  it  was  his  first  claim
to  the  reputation  he  enjoyed : — he  had  given  the  prevailing
tone  to  his  age,  and  had  been  read  in  the  ante-chamber,  as
well  as  in  the  drawing-room.  One  of  the  guests  told  us,
while  bursting  with  laughter,  that  his  hairdresser,  while
powdering  his  hair,  had  said  to  him — '  Bo  you  observe,  sir,
that  although  I  am  but  a  poor  miserable  barber,  I  have  no


PREDICTION  OF  CAZOTTE.  365

more  religion  than  any  other.'  We  concluded  that  the  re-
volution must  soon  be  consummated, — that  it  was  indispen-
sable that  superstition  and  fanaticism  should  give  place  to
philosophy,  and  we  began  to  calculate  the  probability  of
the  period  when  this  should  be,  and  which  of  the  present
company  should  live  to  see  the  reign  of  reason.  The  oldest
complained  that  they  could  scarcely  flatter  themselves  with
the  hope ;  the  young  rejoiced  that  they  might  entertain
this  very  probable  expectation  ; — and  they  congratulated
the  Academy  especially  for  having  prepared  the  great  work,
and  for  having  been  the  great  rallying  point,  the  centre,
and  the  prime  mover  of  the  liberty  of  thought.

"  One  only  of  the  guests  had  not  taken  part  in  all  the
joyousness  of  this  conversation,  and  had  even  gently  and
cheerfully  checked  our  splendid  enthusiasm.  This  was  Ca-
zotte,  an  amiable  and  original  man,  but  unhappily  infatu-
ated with  the  reveries  of  the  illuminati.  He  spoke,  and
with  the  most  serious  tone.  'Gentlemen,'  said  he,  'be  satis-
fied ;  you  will  all  see  this  great  and  sublime  revolution,
which  you  so  much  admire.  You  know  that  I  am  a  little
inclined  to  prophesy:  I  repeat,  you  will  see  it.'  He  was
answered  by  the  common  rejoinder,  '  One  need  not  be  a  con-
juror to  see  that,'  'Be  it  so;  but  perhaps  one  must  be  a
little  more  than  conjuror,  for  what  remains  for  me  to  tell
you.  Do  you  know  what  will  be  the  consequence  of  this
revolution — what  will  be  the  consequence  to  all  of  you,  and
what  will  be  the  immediate  result — the  well-established
effect — the  thoroughly  recognised  consequence  to  all  of  you
who  are  here  present?'  'Ah!'  said  Condorcet,  with  his
insolent  and  half-suppressed  smile,  '  let  us  hear — a  philoso-
pher is  not  afraid  to  encounter  a  prophet.'  '  You,  Monsieur
de  Condorcet,  you  will  yield  up  your  last  breath  on  the  floor
of  a  dungeon ;  you  will  die  from  poison,  which  you  will  have
taken,  in  order  to  escape  from  execution — from  poison,
which  the  happiness  of  that  time  will  oblige  you  to  carry
about  your  person.'

"At  first  astonishment  was  most  marked,  but  it  was  soon
recollected,  that  the  good  Cazotte  is  liable  to  dreaming,
though  apparently  wide  awake,  and  a  hearty  laugh  is  the
consequence.  'Monsieur  Cazotte,  the  relation  you  give  is
not  so  agreeable  as  your  Diable  Amoureux' — (a  novel  of
Cazotte's).

31*


366  PREDICTION  OF  CAZOTTE.

"  But  what  diable  has  put  into  your  head  this  prison  and
this  poison,  and  these  executioners  ?  What  can  all  these
have  in  common  with  philosophy  and  the  reign  of  reason  V
'This  is  exactly  what  I  say  to  you;  it  is  in  the  name  of  phi-
losophy— of  humanity — of  liberty ; — it  is  under  the  reign
of  reason,  that  it  will  happen  to  you  thus  to  end  your  career  ;
— and  it  will  indeed  be  the  reign  of  reason;  for  then  she
will  have  her  temples,  and  indeed,  at  that  time,  there  will
be  no  other  temples  in  France  than  the  temples  of  reason.'
'By  my  truth,'  said  Chamfort,  with  a  sarcastic  smile,  ' you
will  not  be  one  of  the  priests  of  those  temples.'  'I  do  not
hope  it;  but  you,  Monsieur  de  Chamfort,  you  will  be  one,
and  most  worthy  to  be  so  ;  you  will  open  your  veins  with
twenty-two  cuts  of  a  razor,  and  yet  you  will  not  die  till  some
months  afterwards.'  They  looked  at  each  other  and  laughed
again.  You,  Monsieur  Yicq  d'Azir,  you  will  not  open  your
own  veins,  but  you  will  cause  yourself  to  be  bled,  six  times
in  one  clay,  during  a  paroxysm  of  the  gout,  in  order  to
make  more  sure  of  your  end,  and  you  will  die  in  the  night.
You,  Monsieur  de  Nicolai,  you  will  die  upon  the  scaffold; —
you,  M.  Bailly,  on  the  scaffold ; — you,  Monsieur  de  Male-
sherbes,  on  the  scaffold.' — '  Ah  !  God  be  thanked,'  exclaimed
Roucher,  'it  seems  that  Monsieur  has  no  eye,  but  for  the
Academy  ; — of  it  he  has  just  made  a  terrible  execution,  and

I,  thank  Heaven ' '  You  !  you  also  will  die  upon

the  scaffold.'  '  Oh,  what  an  admirable  guesser,'  was  uttered
on  all  sides;  'he  has  sworn  to  exterminate  us  all.'  'No,
it  is  not  I  who  have  sworn  it.' — 'But  shall  we  then  be  con-
quered by  the  Turks  or  the  Tartars  ? Yet  again '

'  N ot  at  all ;  I  have  already  told  you,  you  will  then  be  go-
verned only  by  philosophy — only  by  reason.  They  who  will
thus  treat  you,  will  be  all  philosophers — will  always  have
upon  their  lips  the  self-same  phrases  which  you  have  been
putting  forth  for  the  last  hour — will  repeat  all  your  maxims
— and  will  quote,  as  you  have  done,  the  verses  of  Diderot,
and  from  La  Pucelle.'  They  then  whispered  among  them-
selves— '  You  see  that  he  has  gone  mad' — for  he  preserved
all  this  time  the  most  serious  and  solemn  manner.  'Do  you
not  see  that  he  is  joking?  and  you  know  that  in  the  cha-
racter of  his  jokes,  there  is  always  much  of  the  marvellous.'
'  Yes,' replied  Chamfort,  'but  his  marvellousness  is  not  cheer-
ful— it  savors  too  much  of  the  gibbet  : — and  when  will  all


PREDICTION  OF  CAZOTTK.  367

this  happen  ?'  '  Six  years  will  not  have  passed  over  before
all  that  I  have  said  to  you  shall  be  accomplished.'

"  '  Here  are  some  astonishing  miracles,'  (and  this  time  it
was  myself  who  spoke,)  '  but  you  have  not  included  me  in
your  list.'  'But  you  will  be  there,  as  an  equally  extraor-
dinary miracle  ;  you  will  then  be  a  Christian.'

"Vehement  exclamations  on  all  sides.  'Ah,'  replied
Chamfort,  '  I  am  comforted ;  if  we  shall  perish  only  when
La  Harpe  shall  be  a  Christian,  we  are  immortal.'

"'As  for  that,' then  observed  Madame  la  Duchess  de
Grammont,  '  we  women,  we  are  happy  to  be  counted  for
nothing  in  these  revolutions :  when  I  say  for  nothing,  it  is
not  that  we  do  not  always  mix  ourselves  up  with  them  a
little,  but  it  is  a  received  maxim,  that  they  'take  no  notice
of  us,  and  of  our  sex.'  'Your  sex,  ladies,  will  not  protect
you  this  time  ;  and  you  had  far  better  meddle  with  nothing,
for  you  will  be  treated  entirely  as  men,  without  any  differ-
ence whatever.'  'But  what,  then,  are  you  really  telling
us  of,  Monsieur  Cazotte  ? — You  are  preaching  to  us  the  end
of  the  wrorld.'  '  I  know  nothing  on  that  subject ;  but  what
I  do  know  is,  that  you,  Madame  la  Duchesse,  will  be  con-
ducted to  the  scaffold,  you  and  many  other  ladies  with  you,
in  the  cart  of  the  executioner,  and  with  your  hands  tied
behind  your  backs.'  '  Ah  !  I  hope  that,  in  that  case,  I
shall  have  a  carriage  hung  in  black.'  '  No,  madame  ;
higher  ladies  than  yourself  will  go  like  you  in  the  common
car,  with  their  hands  tied  behind  them.'  '  Higher  ladies  !
what?  the  princesses  of  the  blood?'  'Still  more  exalted
personages.' — Here  a  sensible  emotion  pervaded  the  whole
company,  and  the  countenance  of  the  host  was  dark  and
lowering  : — they  began  to  feel  that  the  joke  was  become
too  serious.  Madame  de  Grammont,  in  order  to  dissipate
the  cloud,  took  no  notice  of  the  reply,  and  contented  her-
self with  saying,  in  a  careless  tone, — '  You  see  thai  he
will  not  leave  me  even  a  confessor.'  '  No,  Madame,  you
will  not  have  one,  neither  you,  nor  any  one  besides.  The
last  victim to whom  this favor  will  be  afforded,  will be

' He stopped  for  a  moment. '  Well !  who  then

will  be  the  happy  mortal,  to  whom  this  prerogative  will  be
given?'  '  'Tis  the  only  one  which  he  will  have  then  re-
tained— and  that  will  be  the  king  of  France.'

"  The  master  of  the  house  rose  hastily,  and  every  one  with


368  PREDICTION  OF  CAZOTTE.

him.  He  walked  up  to  M.  Cazotte,  and  addressed  him  with
a  tone  of  deep  emotion: — 'My  dear  Monsieur  Cazotte,  this
mournful  joke  has  lasted  long  enough.  You  carry  it  too
far, — even  so  far  as  to  derogate  from  the  society  in  which
you  are,  and  from  your  own  character.'  Cazotte  answered
not  a  word,  and  was  preparing  to  leave,  when  Madame  de
Grammont,  who  always  sought  to  dissipate  serious  thought,
and  to  restore  the  lost  gaiety  of  the  party,  approached  him,
saying,  '  Monsieur  the  prophet,  who  has  foretold  us  of  our
good  fortune,  you  have  told  us  nothing  of  your  own.'  He
remained  silent  for  some  time,  with  downcast  eyes.  c  Ma-
dame, have  you  ever  read  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  in  Jose-
phus  V  '  Yes  !  who  has  not  read  that  ?  But  answer  as  if  I
had  never  read  it.'  '  Well,  then,  Madame,  during  the  siege,
a  man,  for  seven  days  in  succession,  went  round  the  ram-
parts of  the  city,  in  sight  of  the  besiegers  and  besieged,
crying  unceasingly,  with  an  ominous  and  thundering  voice,
Woe  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  the  seventh  time  he  cried,  Woe  to
Jerusalem,  woe  to  myself — and  at  that  moment  an  enormous
stone,  projected  from  one  of  the  machines  of  the  besieging
army,  struck  him,  and  destroyed  him.'

"  And,  after  this  reply,  M.  Cazotte  made  his  bow  and  re-
tired.

"  When,  for  the  first  time,  I  read  this  astonishing  predic-
tion, I  thought  that  it  was  only  a  fiction  of  La  Harpe's,  and
that  that  celebrated  critic  wished  to  depict  the  astonishment
which  would  have  seized  persons  distinguished  for  their
rank,  their  talents,  and  their  fortune,  if,  several  years  before
the  revolution,  one  could  have  brought  before  them  the
causes  which  were  preparing,  and  the  frightful  consequences
which  would  follow.  The  enquiries  which  I  have  since  made,
and  the  information  I  have  gained,  have  induced  me  to
change  my  opinion.  M.  le  Comte  A.  de  Montesquieu,  hav-
ing assured  me  that  Madame  de  Genlis  had  repeatedly  told
him  that  she  had  often  heard  this  prediction  related  by  M.
de  La  Harpe,  I  begged  of  him  to  have  the  goodness  to  so-
licit from  that  lady  more  ample  details. This  is  her  reply: —

'"November,  1825.

"'I  think  I  have  somewhere  placed,  among  my  souvenirs,
the  anecdote  of  M.  Cazotte,  but  I  am  not  sure.  I  have
heard  it  related  a  hundred  times  by  M.  de  La  Harpe,  before
the  revolution,  and  always  in  the  same  form  as  I  have  met


PREDICTION  OF  CAZOTTE.  369

with  it  in  print,  and  as  he  himself  has  caused  it  to  he  printed.
This  is  all  that  I  can  say,  or  certify,  or  authenticate  by  my
signature. — Comtessb  de  Genlis.'

"  '  I  have  also  seen  the  son  of  M.  Cazotte,  who  assured
me  that  his  father  was  gifted,  in  a  most  remarkable  manner,
with  a  faculty  of  prevision,  of  which  he  had  numberless
proofs ;  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  which  was,  that  on
returning  home  on  the  day  on  which  his  daughter  had  suc-
ceeded in  delivering  him  from  the  hands  of  the  wretches  who
were  conducting  him  to  the  scaffold,  instead  of  partaking
the  joy  of  his  surrounding  family,  he  declared  that  in  three
days  he  should  be  again  arrested,  and  that  he  should  then
undergo  his  fate ;  and  in  truth  he  perished  on  the  25th  of
Sept.  1792,  at  the  age  of  72.'

"In  reference  to  the  above  narrative,  M.  Cazotte,  jun.,
would  not  undertake  to  affirm  that  the  relation  of  La  Harpe
was  exact  in  all  its  expressions,  but  had  not  the  smallest
doubts  as  to  the  reality  of  the  facts.

"  I  ought  to  add,  that  a  friend  of  Vicq  d'Azir,  an  in-
habitant of  Rennes,  told  me,  that  that  celebrated  physician,
having  travelled  into  Brittany  some  years  before  the  revo-
lution, had  related  to  him,  before  his  family,  the  prophecy
of  Cazotte.  It  seemed  that,  notwithstanding  his  scepticism,
Vicq  d'Azir  was  uneasy  about  this  prediction.

"Letter  on  this  subject  addressed  to  M.  Mialle  by  M.  le
Baron  Delamothe  Langon: —

"  'You  enquire  of  me,  my  dear  friend,  what  I  know  con-
cerning the  famous  prediction  of  Cazotte  mentioned  by  La
Harpe.  I  have  only  on  this  subject  to  assure  you  upon  my
honor,  that  I  have  heard  Madame  la  Comtesse  de  Beau-
harnais  many  times  assert  that  she  was  present  at  this  very
singular  historical  fact.  She  related  it  always  in  the  same
way,  and  with  the  accent  of  truth ; — her  evidence  fully
corroborated  by  that  of  La  Harpe.  She  spoke  thus,  before
all  the  persons  of  the  society  in  which  she  moved,  many  of
whom  still  live,  and  could  equally  attest  this  assertion.

"  '  You  may  make  what  you  please  of  this  communication.

"  'Adieu,  my  good  old  friend.  I  remain  with  inviolable
attachment,  yours,  Baron  Delamothe  Langox.

'■'Paris,  Dec.  18th,  1833.'"

— LaHarpe:  Posthumous  Memoirs,  Paris,  1806,  vol.  i.  p.  62.


370  SPONTANEOUS  PREVISION.

In  Part  L,  I  have  mentioned  the  case  of  a  lady,  who  had
fits  of  spontaneous  lucidity.  Mr.  Atkinson,  to  whom  I  am
indebted  for  the  instances  of  this  power  in  that  lady,  given
at  p.  141,  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  some  further  details
of  her  case,  from  which  it  appears  that  it  also  presented
some  phenomena  of  prevision.

Case  67. — The  lady  in  question,  is  one  possessed  of  the
highest  qualities  both  of  mind  and  person,  and  has  enjoyed
the  esteem  and  respect  of  many  distinguished  men.  She
has  always  had  the  power  of  clairvoyance,  both  as  to  pre-
sent events,  and  sometimes  as  to  future  events,  occurring
spontaneously,  and  generally  when  she  has  been  sitting
alone  and  quiet  in  the  evening,  (that  is,  in  circumstances
favorable  to  abstraction  or  concentration  of  thought.)  Her
visions  do  not  always  relate  to  important  events,  but  fre-
quently refer  to  some  trifling  occurrence  in  the  neighboring
street.  At  other  times  she  will  see  clearly  all  the  circum-
stances connected  with  the  death-bed  of  a  friend,  the  per-
sons present,  with  other  details,  the  whole  facts  perhaps
not  to  be  realised  for  some  years,  and  then  occurring  as
foreseen.  Sometimes  she  sees  what  appears  to  be  mere
optical  delusions,  as,  for  example,  an  empty  arm-chair
wiiere  no  chair  exists.  But  it  is  possible  that  even  these
visions,  if  understood,  or  properly  interpreted,  might  be
found  to  have  a  meaning.  The  case  narrated  at  p.  141,  is
an  excellent  example  of  her  power  of  seeing  present  or
passing  events,  and  although  I  am  not  permitted  to  give  in
detail  any  instances  of  her  prevision,  I  have  no  doubt  that
she  has  repeatedly  possessed  that  power.  It  is  indeed  im-
possible to  form  a  satisfactory  theory  to  explain  this,  but
neither  can  we  explain  the  power  of  seeing  passing  events.
One  point  in  this  case  is  very  interesting,  namely,  that  the
lady,  besides  being  subject  to  fits  of  spontaneous  clairvoy-
ance, is  also,  as  might  be  expected,  of  an  exceedingly  sensi-
tive and  impressible  nature.  Thus,  on  one  occasion,  when
a  gentleman  visited  her  house,  she  experienced  a  very  un-
comfortable sensation  so  long  as  he  was  present,  and  ob-
served a  spot  or  sore  on  his  cheek.  Two  days  after,  a
similar  spot  or  sore  appeared  on  her  own  cheek,  in  precisely
the  same  situation,  and  with  the  same  characters.  It  is
evidently  in  such  idiosyncrasies  that  spontaneous  clairvoy-
ance is  most  likely  to  appear.


PROPHETIC  DREAM.  • 1  (  i

To  Mr.  Atkinson,  who  has  profoundly  and  acutely  studied
the  whole  of  this  subject,  I  am  also  indebted  for  the  follow-
ing instance  of  spontaneous  prevision,  in  the  shape  of  a
dream,  in  the  words  of  the  gentleman  who  had  the  dream.

Case  68. — "  My  brother,  who  was  an  officer  in  the  Royal
Engineers,  and  to  whom  I  was  tenderly  attached,  died  in
the  West  Indies  in  the  autumn  of  1826.  As  well  as  I  can
recollect,  about  a  month  before  the  news  of  his  death  ar-
rived, I  had  the  following  dream  concerning  him.  I  was
then  pursuing  my  studies  in  the  University  of  Dublin,  and
used  generally  to  spend  my  evenings  at  a  friend's  house.
I  dreamed  that,  on  returning  to  my  lodgings  one  night,  I
received  a  message  from  my  uncle,  who  resided  in  Dublin,
to  come  to  him  directly ;  that  I  accordingly  went,  and  was
ushered  into  his  private  room ;  that  he  was  seated  at  his
desk  in  a  particular  corner,  and  asked  me  to  take  a  chair  at
the  fire.  He  then  told  me,  he  was  sorry  to  say  that  he  had
bad  news  to  communicate  to  me  respecting  my  brother,  and
that,  in  fact,  he  was  no  more.  I  thought  that  I  then  im-
mediately replied,  Is  there  any  evidence  to  show  in  what
state  of  mind  he  died  ?  to  which  my  uncle  replied  there
was,  and  then  handed  to  me  the  letters  which  he  had  re-
ceived, upon  which  I  took  my  departure.  Such  was  the
dream,  and  it  made  so  strong  an  impression  on  my  mind
that  I  was  greatly  distressed,  and  could  not,  as  I  had  always
hitherto  done,  make  mention  of  him  in  my  prayers.  I  re-
lated the  dream,  at  the  time,  to  the  lady  to  whom  I  was
afterwards  married,  and  she  has  a  perfect  recollection  of  all
the  circumstances.  After  a  little  time,  the  impression  wore
off,  and  I  had  nearly  forgotten  it,  when  returning  to  my
lodgings  one  evening,  I  was  informed  that  my  cousin  had
called,  and  had  left  an  urgent  request  for  me  to  proceed  to
his  father's  house  as  soon  as  I  came  home.  I  accordingly
went,  and  was  shown  into  his  room ;  he  was  seated  in  the
same  spot  in  which  I  had  seen  him  in  my  dream  ;  the  desk,
papers,  and  even  candles,  were  in  exactly  the  same  position.
He  invited  me  to  a  chair  at  the  fire,  and  the  same  conver-
sation took  place,  verbatim,  as  in  my  dream.  He  made  the
communication  to  me  precisely  in  the  same  words,  and  I
made  exactly  the  same  reply,  as  related  above.  He  then
handed  me  the  letters,  and  I  took  my  leave,  being  too  much
agitated  and  shocked  to  continue  the  conversation. But


372  SPONTANEOUS  PREVISION.

strange  to  say,  I  did  not  recollect  the  dream  till  the  inter-
view was  over,  when  it  suddenly  recurred  to  me,  with  very
startling  effect."  Mr.  Atkinson  adds:  "The  subject  of
this  dream  is  a  clear  and  sober-minded  clergyman,  greatly
respected  by  all  who  know  him,  and  on  the  accuracy  of
whose  statements  you  may  place  the  fullest  reliance." — It
is,  I  think,  evident  that  mere  coincidence  is  not  sufficient
to  account  for  the  accuracy  of  this  prevision,  even  were  it
a  solitary  case.  And  if  the  facts  be  admitted,  they  are  quite
as  marvellous  and  inexplicable  as  any  recorded  prediction
whatever.

Case  69. — A  lady,  who  had  left  her  only  child  in  Edin-
burgh, and  was  then  in  Germany,  told  me  at  the  time  that
she  had  seen  a  vision  or  dream  of  her  son  seriously  ill  in
bed,  and  of  his  nurse  standing  in  a  particular  spot,  where
he  could  not  see  her,  in  great  distress,  watching  the  sick
child.  On  returning  home,  she  pointed  out  the  spot  where
she  had  seen  the  nurse,  who  had  stood  for  a  long  time  there,
watching  her  patient.  She  was  then  informed  that  he  had
been  seriously  ill,  which  had  not  been  mentioned  before,  as
he  had  soon  recovered.  But  while  abroad,  she  had  often
told  me  that,  from  what  she  saw,  she  felt  sure  he  had  been
very  ill,  although  her  letters  had  only  alluded  to  a  very
slight  indisposition.  I  cannot  now  ascertain  whether  this
vision  occurred  precisely  at,  or  before  or  after  the  time  at
which  the  child  was  so  ill.  It  was  certainly  very  near  to
the  time.

Case  70. — Major  Buckley,  twenty-three  years  ago,  before
he  had  heard  of  Animal  Magnetism,  was  on  the  voyage  be-
tween England  and  India,  when  one  day  a  lady  remarked,
that  they  had  not  seen  a  sail  for  many  days.  He  replied,
that  they  would  see  one  next  day  at  noon,  on  the  starboard
bow.  Being  asked  by  the  officers  in  the  ship  how  he  knew,
he  could  only  say  that  he  saw  it,  and  that  it  would  happen.
When  the  time  came,  the  captain  jested  him  on  his  predic-
tion, when  at  that  moment  a  man  who  had  been  sent  aloft
half  an  hour  before,  in  consequence  of  the  prophecy,  sung
out,  "  A  sail !"  "Where  ?"  "  On  the  starboard  bow."—
I  consider  this  case  interesting,  because  it  tends  to  show  a
relation  between  magnetic  power,  wliich  Major  Buckley
possesses  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  susceptibility  to  the
magnetic  or  other  influences  concerned.  The  same  combi-
nation is  found  in  Mr.  Lewis.


CURATIVE  AGENCY  OF  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM. 37-3

Case  71.— A  soldier  in  a  Highland  regiment,  then  in
America,  named  Evan  Campbell,  was  summoned  before  his
officer  for  having  spread  among  the  men  a  prediction  that  a
certain  officer  would  be  killed  next  day.  He  could  only
explain  that  he  had  seen  a  vision  of  it,  and  that  he  saw  the
officer  killed,  in  the  first  onset,  by  a  ball  in  the  forehead.
He  was  reprimanded,  and  desired  to  say  no  more  about  it.
Next  day,  an  engagement  took  place,  and  in  the  first  attack
the  officer  was  killed  by  a  ball  in  the  forehead.  I  am  told
that  this  instance  of  second  sight  may*  be  entirely  de-
pended on.

The  above  cases  are  only  a  few  out  of  many  that  might
be  adduced,  and  tend  to  show  that,  by  some  obscure  means,
certain  persons,  in  a  peculiar  state,  may  have  visions  of
events  yet  future.  And  indeed  it  is  only  by  admitting  some
such  influence,  that  we  can  at  all  account  for  the  fulfilment
of  prophetic  dreams,  which,  it  cannot  be  doubted,  has  fre-
quently taken  place.  Coincidence,  as  I  have  before  re-
marked, is  insufficient  to  explain  even  one  case,  so  enor-
mously great  are  the  chances  against  it ;  but  when  several
cases  occur,  it  is  absolutely  out  of  the  question  to  explain
them  by  coincidence.


LETTER  XIX.

Therapeutic  Use  of  Animal  Magnetism.

This  part  of  the  subject  may  be  considered  under  several
heads.  First,  the  use  of  Animal  Magnetism  in  relieving
pain  and  curing  disease;  secondly,  its  use  in  preventing
pain  in  surgical  operations;  thirdly,  the  use  of  magnets,
crystals,  and  other  inanimate  objects,  as  well  as  of  magnet-
ised water,  or  magnetised  objects  of  any  kind;  and,  lastly,
the  use  of  clairvoyance  in  diagnosis.  My  own  experience
in  these  matters  is  very  limited  indeed,  so  that  I  cannot
enter  into  minute  details  ;  but  I  have  seen  enough  to  con-
vince me,  that  Animal  Magnetism  is  a  most  powerful  and
valuable  ally  to  the  physician.  I  have  already  mentioned,
that  the  persons  magnetised  by  me  have  generally  been
32


374  MR.  ATKINSON'S  LETTER

healthy ;  but  I  have  also  described  one  case,  that  of  the
blind  Mr.  H.  W.,  in  which,  without  intention  on  my  part,  I
cured  him  of  an  obstinate  and  annoying  discharge  from  the
nose,  by  a  few  operations.  A  remarkable  improvement
also  took  place  in  his  general  health,  insomuch  that,  after
fifteen  or  twenty  operations,  his  whole  aspect  was  changed
for  the  better,  and  his  strength  and  spirits  very  much  im-
proved. At  the  same  time,  a  slow  but  steady  improvement
in  his  eyesight  has  continued  to  appear,  he  having  now,  in
about  three  months,  been  operated  on  nearly  fifty  times.
It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  say  whether  his  sight  will  ever
be  restored ;  but  the  results,  up  to  the  present  time,  are
such  as  to  yield  some  hope,  and  the  state  of  the  eye,  ex-
ternally, has  certainly  undergone  a  most  marked  change,
so  that  it  is  now  natural  in  color  and  moisture,  which  was
not  the  case  when  I  began.

Every  one  who  tries  it  will  find  that,  by  means  of  Ani-
mal Magnetism,  various  pains,  especially  neuralgic  and
rheumatic  pains,  may  be  very  often  and  easily  relieved.
Cases  of  this  kind  occur  every  day.  You  will  find,  in  the
Zoist,  and  in  the  foreign  journals,  innumerable  cases  re-
corded, most  of  them  by  medical  men,  of  cures  effected  by
Animal  Magnetism,  and  very  often  in  cases  which  had  baf-
fled all  other  treatment.  It  appears  that  some  individuals
possess  much  greater  curative  virtue  than  others,  although
all  healthy  persons  probably  possess  the  power  of  curing  in
this  way  in  a  greater  or  less  degree.  The  celebrated  Valen-
tine Greatrakes  obviously  possessed  an  unusual  share  of
magnetic  power ;  but,  at  the  present  day,  we  have  a  remark-
able instance  of  it  in  Mr.  Capern,  a  gentleman  of  Devon-
shire, who  has  just  published  a  small  work,  giving  an  account
of  his  magnetic  practice.  This  work,  which  is  a  simple,
unaffected  statement  of  facts,  is  well  worthy  of  perusal,  and
I  cannot  do  better  than  refer  you  to  it.  I  might  quote  also
many  other  instances  of  magnetic  cures,  performed  by  per-
sons known  to  me,  and  among  them  a  large  number  by  Mr.
Lewis,  whose  power  is  very  great;  but  my  space  forbids  me
to  do  this,  and  it  would  lead  to  a  tedious  repetition  of  de-
tails. In  connection  with  the  use  of  Animal  Magnetism  as
a  curative  agent,  I  prefer,  therefore,  to  give  some  extracts
from  a  communication  kindly  made  to  me  by  Mr.  H.  G.
Atkinson,  who  not  only  has  great  magnetic  power,  but  very


ON  MAGNETISM  AS  A  CUKE.  375

great  experience,  and  has  studied  the  whole  subject  pro-
foundly. It  will  be  seen  that  his  observations  illustrate
some  very  important  points  in  magnetic  treatment,  and
more  particularly  the  very  curious  question  of  the  trans-
ference of  pain  or  disease.  Mr.  A.  described  his  first  ex-
periment on  the  conveyance  of  magnetic  influence  to  a  dis-
tance, by  means  of  inanimate  objects,  as  follows : —

Case  72. — "  I  was  requested  by  a  physician  to  try  the
effect  of  mesmerism  on  a  lady  who  was  suffering  fearfully
from  tic,  a  complaint  to  which  she  had  been  subject  for
many  years.  The  trial  was  most  successful,  but  before  a
cure  could  be  effected,  the  lady  was  obliged  to  go  to  Paris
with  her  husband.  Now,  as  my  peculiar  influence  had  so
good  an  effect  upon  her,  it  seemed  most  desirable  to  continue
the  process,  if  possible ;  and  as  I  had  already  tested  the
fact,  that  mesmeric  power  could  be  conveyed  by  water,  cot-
ton, leather,  and  other  substances,  I  suggested  the  plan  of
sending  her  mesmerised  gloves  by  post  to  Paris.  The  experi-
ment succeeded  perfectly;  the  glove  put  on  her  hand  always
sent  her  into  mesmeric  sleep,  and  relieved  her  intense  suf-
fering, which  all  other  means  had  wholly  failed  to  do.  The
mesmerised  glove  by  use  gradually  lost  its  property,  and
then  failed  to  cause  sleep,  after  a  third  time;  so  that  I
had  to  send  newly  mesmerised  gloves  every  week,  and  the
old  ones  were  from  time  to  time  returned,  to  be  charged
afresh.  This  led  to  the  observation  of  a  very  striking
fact.  I  found  that,  before  I  could  renew  the  healthy  power,
I  had  to  remove  the  unhealthy  influence  or  contagion,
which  the  glove  had  absorbed  from  the  patient.  I  felt  in
my  hand,  on  approaching  the  old  gloves,  the  same  unpleasant
sensations  as  I  have  from  touching  a  diseased  individual,  be-
sides absolute  pain  from  the  tic.  The  sensations  were  as
clear  and  unmistakeable  as  those  of  heat  from  a  flame,  or  of
the  roughness  or  smoothness  of  objects.  The  pain  was  the
same  in  character  as  that  of  the  patient.  After  I  had  mes-
merised the  glove  for  two  or  three  minutes,  the  sensations
ceased,  and  the  glove  was  now  cleansed  from  the  influence  it
had  absorbed  and  brought  with  it.  The  sensation  now  was
the  same  as  I  have  when  I  relieve  pain  by  mesmerising ;
when  I  can  tell  at  once  that  the  pain  is  relieved.  I  was  in
fact  a  complete  mesmerometer,  and  had  within  myself  the
most  convincing  proof  of  the  mesmeric  fact,  and  of  its  rela-


876  MR.  ATKINSON  ON

tion  to  ordinary  contagion.  It  might  be  supposed,  that  the
influence  of  the  gloves  on  the  patient  was  due  only  to  the
imagination;  but  I  tested  this,  by  sending  sometimes  un-
mesmerised  gloves,  and  at  other  times  such  as  had  been  used
by  the  patient,  without  doing  anything  to  them,  and  always
found  that  the  unmesmerized  gloves  had  no  effect,  and  the
used  gloves  a  most  disagreeable  one.  I  have  made  the  ex-
periment in  a  great  many  cases,  and  with  the  same  results.
The  perception  I  had  of  pain  and  other  states  appeared  at
first  very  strange  to  me,  as  if  it  was  a  new  sense ;  but  I  soon
became  familiar  with  it,  so  that  it  ceased  to  attract  notice,
My  patients  used  to  try  to  deceive  me  as  to  their  pains,  but
could  never  succeed,  and  they  used  to  remark  that  I  knew
their  sensations  better  than  they  did.  When  mesmerising
nervous  patients,  I  have  felt  a  prickling  sensation  in  my
hand,  but  as  soon  as  the  sleep  came  on,  I  felt  a  slight  shock,
as  it  were;  all  disagreeable  feelings  ceased,  and  I  experi-
enced an  agreeable  influence  in  their  place.  On  the  occur-
rence of  any  decided  change  in  the  patients,  as  from  trance
to  somnambulism,  I  felt  the  same  slight  shock.  I  have  found
that  one's  own  peculiar  mesmeric  power  may  be  in  a  mea-
sure conveyed  to  another,  and  also  that  the  peculiar  mes-
meric state  or  sleep  may  be  conveyed  from  one  patient  to
another.  This  accounts  for  the  occasional  contagion  of  fits,
and  for  such  phenomena  as  the  contagious  preaching  mania
in  Sweden.  I  have  experienced  the  same  sympathetic  in-
fluence as  in  the  case  of  gloves,  from  letters,  especially  if  the
paper  were  glazed ;  and  I  could  thus  tell  the  state  of  the
patient  before  reading  the  letter.  Sometimes  the  heat  and
prickling  have  been  so  strong,  that  I  have  laid  the  letter  on
the  table,  to  read  without  touching  it.  The  influence  from
a  feverish  state  would  cause  my  hand  to  feel  hot  and  fever-
ish, even  to  others,  the  whole  day.  On  one  occasion,  on
reading  a  letter  from  a  distance,  I  had  the  sensation  of  tears.
It  was  so  strong,  that  I  felt  sure  the  writer  had  been  in  tears
while  writing  it,  although  nothing  in  the  case,  or  in  the  let-
ter, led  to  this  conclusion.  It  proved,  however,  on  enquiry,
that  the  writer  had  been  in  tears,  and  that  the  tears  had
fallen  on  the  paper.  In  one  case,  in  which  the  patient,  a
lady,  was  too  sensitive  to  be  treated  in  the  usual  way,  I  gave
her  mesmerised  water,  which  immediately  caused  her  to  sleep,
and  she  was  thus  cured  of  sleeplessness. Once,  when  she


TRANSFERENCE  OF  PAIN.  377

sent  for  the  water,  I  could  not  venture  to  mesmerise  it,  as  I
had  just  been  mesmerising  a  diseased  subject,  so  I  sent  or-
dinary water,  without  any  remark.  In  a  few  days,  I  re-
ceived a  note  to  say,  that  the  water  had  lost  its  power,  and
no  longer  caused  sleep.  On  one  occasion  I  breathed  a  dream
into  a  glove,  which  I  sent  to  a  lady ;  the  dream  occurred.
One  of  the  ladies  above  mentioned,  with  her  whole  family,
are  sensitive  to  the  approach  of  iron,  which  recals  the  facul-
ty possessed  by  some,  of  discovering  veins  of  ore,  or  springs
of  water  under  ground.  I  found  that  if,  when  engaged  in
mesmerising  for  pain,  my  mind  was  bent  on  what  I  was  do-
ing, I  received  little  or  no  influence.  I  could  at  will  either
impress  the  patients,  or  absorb  their  condition.  In  either
case,  if  the  will  was  active,  the  influence  never  affected  me
beyond  the  hand  used ;  but  if  I  were  thinking  of  other  things,
I  experienced  the  whole  symptoms  of  the  patients,  so  far  as
pain  was  concerned ;  and  I  thus  approached  to  the  state  of
the  somnambulist  who  detects  the  diseases  of  others. — The
following  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  sympathy.  I  had  mes-
merised a  young  lady,  who  was  living  with  my  brother  and
sister,  twenty  miles  from  town.  She  proved  an  excellent
clairvoyante.  One  Sunday  I  was  walking  with  a  lady,  after
church,  in  her  garden,  in  St.  John's  Wood,  when  I  found
the  dead  body  of  a  new-born  infant,  wrapped  up  in  a  clean
cloth ;  it  must  have  been  thrown  over  the  wall.  Next  morn-
ing I  received  a  note  from  my  sister,  telling  me  that  my
patient  had  on  the  Sunday,  after  church,  insisted  on  taking
her  all  about  the  garden  to  look  for  a  baby,  because  she  was
sure  she  should  find  one.  Once  when  I  had  been  mesmeris-
ing the  same  young  lady  before  a  company,  and  was  making
a  cross  pass  to  wake  her,  a  lady  standing  close  by  received
the  influence  from  my  hand,  and  ran  away  screaming  like
one  possessed.  .From  that  time,  whenever  I  mesmerised  my
patient,  which  was  at  very  uncertain  times,  when  I  could  get
away  from  London,  this  lady,  living  four  miles  off,  fell  into
mesmeric  sleep  at  the  same  time,  and  her  case  exhibited  the
same  phenomena  of  clairvoyance.  Two  of  my  patients  fell
into  a  dead  sleep  or  trance,  so  deep  that  I  believe  you  might
have  cut  them  to  pieces,  and  they  would  have  felt  nothing.
No  ordinary  means  could  arouse  them ;  yet  if  a  drop  of
water  fell,  even  on  their  dress,  it  immediately  set  them  a-
trembling;  the  touch  of  a  piece  of  silver  convulsed  them


378  EFFECTS  OF  METALS.

with  laughter,  which  the  touch  of  another  metal  instantly
stopped.  The  trembling  and  laughing  seemed  wholly  with-
out consciousness,  a  kind  of  life  in  death,  or  merely  spas-
modic. I  have  seen  and  heard  some  patients  writhe  and
groan  and  scream  as  if  in  agony,  and  yet  on  awaking  declare
they  had  had  delightful  dreams.  Here  a  conscious  and  an
unconscious  state  seem  to  exist  together,  so  that  the  persons
may  be  truly  said  to  be  beside  themselves.  One  lady  whom
I  know,  suffers  acutely  from  the  contact  of  metals.  She
feels  a  pricking  sensation,  with  general  discomfort,  and  at
times  even  sickness.  A  brass  thimble  caused  her  finger  to
swell,  and  she  was  forced  to  leave  it  off.  She  is  compelled
to  eat  with  wooden  spoons,  and  to  use  her  handkerchief  to
open  the  door  when  the  door-handle  is  of  metal.  This  sen-
sitiveness is  not  uncommon,  and  should  be  carefully  attended
to,  as  it  may  be  the  unsuspected  cause  of  much  suffering.
In  general,  medical  men  pay  no  attention  to  such  things,  and
call  them  nervous  or  hysterical,  and  thus  save  the  trouble  of
investigation.  Sir  C.  Bell  said  that  the  eternal  answer  of
the  indolent  is,  'It  is  hysterical.'  But  supposing  them  hys-
terical, what  then  ?  They  are  not  the  less  real  nor  the  less
interesting."

The  above  extracts  contain  a  number  of  facts  well  worthy
of  consideration,  in  reference  to  the  curative  agency  of  Animal
Magnetism ;  and  may  serve  to  show  how  much  there  is  for
us  to  learn,  and  how  much  any  of  us  might  contribute  to  the
advancement  of  knowledge  in  these  obscure  subjects,  if  we
availed  ourselves  of  our  opportunities  with  the  same  zeal  and
the  same  patience  as  Mr.  Atkinson.  I  ought  to  mention
that  Mr.  A.  is  not  a  medical  man,  but  has  often  generously
devoted  his  time  for  weeks  and  months  to  the  relief  of  suffer-
ing ;  and  it  is  in  this  benevolent  occupation  that  he  has  met
with  so  many  interesting  facts,  of  which  a  few  are  briefly
sketched  above.  It  will  be  observed,  that  several  of  the
facts  above  related  tend  to  throw  light  on  the  propagation
of  disease  by  contagion,  and  if  duly  investigated,  may  lead
to  results  of  great  importance.  We  may  also  see,  in  the  very
powerful  effects  produced  by  inanimate  bodies,  such  as  metals,
a  glimpse  of  the  principle  on  which  the  effects  of  minute  doses
of  medicines  are  produced  in  certain  constitutions.  It  can-
not be  doubted,  that  in  some  cases  the  infinitesimal  doses
used  in  Homoeopathy  do  produce  strong  and  marked  effects,
which  cannot  be  explained  on  the  ordinary  principles of


MAGNETS  AND  CRYSTALS.  379

medicine;  but  we  can  see  how,  in  susceptible  subjects,  not
only  a  minute  dose,  but  the  mere  approach  of  certain  sub-
stances, may  have  a  decided  action.  Many  persons  in  the
magnetic  sleep,  or  in  a  certain  stage  of  it,  exhibit  a  singular
degree  of  sensitiveness  to  the  influence  of  different  sub-
stances; and  Reichenbach  has  proved  that  the  same  sensitive-
ness, in  various  degrees,  is  found  in  many  persons  in  the
ordinary  conscious  state,  so  that,  by  feeling  the  substances,
or  even  the  bottles  which  contain  them,  these  persons  can
infallibly  distinguish  one  from  the  other.

It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  give  details  of  cases  concerning
the  possibility  of  magnetising  water,  and  other  substances,
so  that  they  shall  act  strongly  on  the  susceptible.  Nothing,
as  Reichenbach  justly  remarks,  can  more  satisfactorily  prove
the  existence  of  an  influence,  capable  of  being  transferred
from  the  hand  of  the  operator  to  the  patient,  or  to  any  sub-
stance, than  this  simple,  fundamental  experiment.  Any  one
may  easily  satisfy  himself  of  the  fact,  as  soon  as  he  finds  a
case  in  which  he  can  produce  the  magnetic  sleep.

As  to  the  action  of  magnets,  crystals,  and  metals,  nume-
rous cases  occur,  and  are  daily  to  be  met  with,  in  which  pain
is  relieved  by  the  contact  or  approach  of  these  bodies.  I
know  of  one  lady,  subject  to  severe  nervous  headaches,  who
is  relieved  at  once  by  holding  in  her  hand  a  large  crystal
of  fluor  spar,  which  generally  throws  her  into  magnetic  sleep.
The  effect  is  so  well  marked,  that  when  she  suffers,  her  chil-
dren always  beg  her  to  use  the  crystal.  But,  in  exact  corres-
pondence with  what  Reichenbach  has  observed,  the  position
of  the  poles  of  the  crystal  must  be  reversed  if  it  be  shifted
from  one  hand  to  the  other.  The  action  of  magnets,  and
even  of  galvanic  rings,  in  relieving  rheumatic  pains,  is  very
far  from  being  imaginary  in  many  cases.  It  has  been  gene-
rally rejected  by  medical  men,  because  they  could  not  explain
it ;  and  it  has  been  said,  that  since  the  galvanic  rings  could
not  cause  a  current  of  galvanic  electricity,  they  could  have
no  effect.  But  this  is  a  non  sequitur.  Not  only  rings  of
two  metals,  but  rings  or  other  masses  of  one  metal,  often
produce  strong  effects,  relieve  pain,  and  cause  sleep ;  as  do
magnets  also;  and  on  the  principles  developed  by  Reichen-
bach, they  act,  not  by  electricity,  nor  by  ferro-magnetism,
but  by  their  odylic  force.  Instead  of  rejecting  the  facts,
therefore,  on  theoretical  grounds,  or  because  we  cannot  ex-
plain them,  we  ought  rather  to  multiply  our  observations


380  CLAIRVOYANT  DIAGNOSIS.

and  from  them,  in  process  of  time,  deduce  our  theory  or  ex-
planation.

With  regard  to  the  use  of  Animal  Magnetism  or  clair-
voyance in  diagnosis,  I  have  already  given  several  instances
of  it,  and  from  what  I  have  seen,  I  am  satisfied  that,  with
a  good  subject,  much  may  be  done  in  this  way.  Did  my
space  permit,  I  could  give  very  many  instances,  in  the  prac-
tice of  others,  in  which  the  clairvoyant,  either  by  contact
with  the  patient,  or  with  the  aid  of  his  hair  or  handwriting
at  a  distance,  has  most  accurately  described  the  whole
symptoms,  and  often  has  detected  the  true,  though  unsus-
pected cause  of  these.  As  my  space,  however,  is  exhausted,
I  shall  only  quote  one  recent  case,  very  briefly.

Case  73. — Count  K.,  a  Polish  nobleman,  gave  me  the
address  of  a  letter  in  the  handwriting  of  a  cousin  of  his,  a
Polish  lady,  living  in  Poland,  whom  I  had  never  seen.  He
only  knew  that  she  was  ill,  but  not  the  details  of  her  illness.
I  sent  the  writing  to  Dr.  Haddock,  and  requested  him  to
try  E.  with  it.  She  soon  saw  the  lady,  and  described  her,
and  went  on  to  say  that  she  was  ill,  and  had  been  using
mineral  waters  for  her  health.  She  described  minutely  the
symptoms,  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  here.  Count
K.  sent  the  account  to  his  cousin,  and  in  her  answer  she
states,  that  every  thing  the  clairvoyant  had  said  was  exact,
save  that  she  did  not  think  herself  quite  so  weak  as  she
appeared  to  the  clairvoyant  to  be.  It  is  very  likely  that
the  terms  used  may  have  been  somewhat  misunderstood  on
such  a  point,  as  they  passed  through  several  hands  and  two
languages;  but  the  symptoms  were  strikingly  accurate.
E.  also  gave  her  view  of  the  cause  of  illness,  but  into  that  I
do  not  enter,  as  it  cannot  be  ascertained  with  certainty.
But  it  is  needless  to  point  out  the  value  of  such  a  power,  in
obscure  cases,  when  employed  by  a  well-informed  physician,
and  when  the  clairvoyant  is  found  by  experience  to  be
trustworthy.

For  some  remarks  on  the  use  of  magnetism  in  Insanity,
I  am  compelled,  by  want  of  space,  to  refer  to  what  is  said
at  pp.  204  et  seq.

I  had  collected  a  number  of  cases  to  illustrate  the  thera-
peutic action  of  Animal  Magnetism,  but  I  find  I  must  omit
them. This  I  do  with  the  less  regret,  that  this  branch  of


THERAPEUTIC  ACTION.  381

the  subject  is  sure  to  be  worked  out  by  many  persons,  while
the  works  of  Dr.  Esdale  and  Mr.  Capcrn,  besides  others,
and  the  long  lists  of  cases  published  in  the  Zoist  by  Dr.  El-
liotson,  and  many  other  medical  men,  as  well  as  in  the
foreign  Journals,  has  sufficiently  established  the  great  value
and  importance  of  magnetic  treatment.  Moreover,  the
cases  which  I  had  collected  being  from  the  practice  of
others,  and  very  much  of  the  same  character  as  the  pub-
lished cases,  would  merely  have  added  to  the  size  of  the
work,  without  the  advantage  of  any  thing  new.  No  one
who  has  attended  to  the  subject  can  doubt  the  value  of
Animal  Magnetism  as  a  therapeutic  agent,  and  for  the  pre-
sent we  must  admit  this  application  of  Animal  Magnetism
to  be  the  most  important,  and  to  be  worthy  of  the  attentive
study  of  medical  men.

Dr.  Esdaile's  admirable  work  on  Mesmerism  in  India,  has
firmly  established  the  value  of  Animal  Magnetism  as  a
means  of  preventing  pain  during  surgical  operations;  it  has
also  been  used  extensively  for  that  purpose,  both  in  this
country  and  in  France.  The  fact,  recently  demonstrated
here,  to  the  satisfaction  of  many  medical  and  scientific  men
by  Mr.  Lewis  and  by  Dr.  Darling,  that  complete  insensi-
bility to  pain,  either  general  or  local,  may  be  produced  in
many  persons  in  the  conscious  state,  will  tend  to  dissipate
the  incredulity  which  still  lingers  in  some  quarters  as  to
the  possibility  of  rendering  patients  insensible  to  pain  by
magnetism,  even  although  some  should  still  persist  in  as-
cribing the  result  to  the  imagination.  In  the  conscious  state
it  is  certainly  done  by  suggestion,  but  it  is  also,  without  any
suggestion  whatever,  a  frequent  feature  of  the  magnetic
sleep.  The  essential  point  is,  that  such  a  state  can  be  pro-
duced in  various  ways,  and  this  can  no  longer  be  doubted  by
any  one  who  has  examined  the  subject.  I  have  myself
often  seen  it  produced  by  others,  and  also  produced  it  my-
self, both  in  the  conscious  state  and  in  the  magnetic  sleep.
In  fact,  this  was  done,  in  many  instances,  long  before  the
powers  of  ether  and  chloroform  were  discovered ;  and  although
at  that  time  many  at  once  rejected  the  alleged  fact,  with-
out enquiry,  who  afterwards  at  once  admitted  the  correspond-
ing fact  in  regard  to  ether,  the  evidence  for  both  is,  and
always  was,  the  same  in  kind.  The  only  difference  is,  that
in  the  case  of  ether,  the  existence  of  a  drug,  a  tangible
agent,  is  supposed  by  many  to  enable  us  to  understand  or


382  INSENSIBILITY  TO  PAIN.

explain  the  result,  while,  because  in  the  magnetic  power
the  agent  is  not  tangible,  they  reject  the  fact.  Nothing
can  be  more  illogical ;  for  in  the  case  of  ether  or  chloro-
form, we  only  know  that  they  act,  but  not  how  they  act,  which
no  one  can  explain ;  and  in  the  case  of  magnetism,  whether
we  can  explain  it  or  not,  the  fact  is  equally  certain.  Be-
sides, the  magnetic  sleep  and  insensibility  to  pain  may  be
produced  by  means  as  tangible  as  ether,  namely,  by  mag-
nets, crystals,  and  other  bodies,  such  as  magnetised  water.
The  following  case  will  show,  in  addition  to  those  already
given,  that  in  susceptible  persons,  ether  or  chloroform  may
be  dispensed  with,  and  the  full  effect  produced  by  sug-
gestion. The  experiment  was  performed  in  my  house,  in
the  presence  of  Sir  D.  Brewster  and  Sir  W.  C.  Trevelyan,
besides  others.

Case  74. — Mr.  B.,  a  student  of  medicine,  was  found  to  be
easily  thrown  either  into  the  magnetic  sleep,  or  the  con-
scious impressible  state,  by  Mr.  Lewis.  Mr.  L.,  when  the
patient  was  quite  conscious,  gave  him  a  handkerchief  mois-
tened with  ordinary  water,  and  told  him  that  it  was  chloro-
form, and  that  he  was  to  breathe  it,  and  to  become  uncon-
scious "and  insensible  to  pain.  Although  Mr.  B.  knew  it  to
be  water,  he  could  not  resist  the  suggested  impression ;  he
breathed  exactly  as  one  does  with  chloroform,  and  in  about
a  minute  became  unconscious,  when  he  was  found  utterly
insensible  to  pain.  On  waking,  he  had  no  recollection  of
what  had  passed.  Some  time  afterwards,  he  put  the  wet
handkerchief  in  his  pocket,  and  as  long  it  remained  there,
he  fell  asleep  every  few  minutes  till  Mr.  Lewis  removed  it,
when  that  effect  ceased.  Nothing  can  show  more  strongly
the  power  of  suggestion  in  certain  states.

On  the  same  evening  I  had  occasion  to  observe  a  fact,
which  is  of  some  importance,  as  showing  that  causes,  hither-
to unsuspected,  may  interfere  with  our  experiments.

Case  75. — There  were  present  on  that  evening,  in  all,  ten
persons,  including  Sir  D.  Brewster,  Sir  Walter  C.  Trevel-
yan, Mr.  B.,  Mr.  Lewis,  Mr.  H.  AY.,  the  blind  German  for-
merly mentioned,  and  myself,  besides  four  ladies.  Mr.  H.
W.,  whom  I  was  then  in  the  habit  of  magnetising  daily  in
the  forenoon,  told  me,  a  few  minutes  after  he  entered  the
room,  that  he  felt  the  influence  of  Mr.  Lewis  very  strongly,
and  soon  afterwards,  while  Mr.  L.  was  trying  to  put  Mr.
B.  to  sleep  in  the  front  room,  Mr.  W.,  who  was  engaged  in


THE  INFLUENCE  TRANSFERRED.  383

conversation  in  the  back  room,  fell  asleep.  At  the  same
time,  Mr.  B.,  who  had  gone  into  the  sleep,  suddenly  awoke.
Mr.  L.  then  showed  his  power  of  controlling  the  muscular
motions  of  Mr.  B.,  which  he  did  for  a  time  very  completely,
but  all  at  once  Mr.  B.  said,  "  I  feel  that  you  have  no  longer
any  power  over  me;"  and  at  the  same  instant  M.  W.,  who
was  now  nearer  than  before,  fell  into  a  deep  magnetic  sleep.
Mr.  L.  was  not  aware  of  his  having  previously  fallen  asleep,
and  had  not  thought  of  affecting  him  ;  but  it  appeared  as  if
he,  being  more  susceptible,  had  twice  carried  off  the  influ-
ence from  Mr.  B.,  without  knowing  it.  But  this  was  not
all ;  for  it  soon  appeared,  that  all  the  four  ladies  were  more
or  less  affected,  although  Mr.  L.  had  never  tried  to  affect
them.  It  was  proposed  that  he  should  put  one  of  the  ladies
fully  to  sleep,  with  the  view  of  then  awaking  her,  and  thus
removing  her  unpleasant  sensations.  This  she  declined ;
but  Mr.  L.,  at  my  request,  tried  to  put  her  to  sleep  by  silent
volition.  This  had  just  begun  to  act,  when  Mr.  B.  came,
not  knowing  what  was  going  on,  and  sat  down,  nearer  to  Mr.
L.  than  the  lady  ;  and  almost  instantly  he  fell  asleep.  The
lady  then  allowed  Mr.  L.  to  put  her  to  sleep,  which  he  did,
and  then  awoke  her,  now  free  from  all  unpleasant  sensa-
tions ;  but  as  she  awoke,  Mr.  B.  again  fell  asleep.  Another
lady  was  then  put  to  sleep,  and  was  soon  in  a  very  deep
sleep ;  but  when  I,  observing  M.  B.  asleep,  spoke  to  him,
and,  finding  that  he  would  not  answer  me,  took  hold  of  his
hand,  he  suddenly  awoke,  and  at  the  same  instant  the  sleep-
ing lady,  about  14  feet  off,  suddenly  awoke  also.  All  this
was  before  the  handkerchief  was  tried;  and  it  plainly  showed,
that  where  a  powerful  magnetiser  is  in  the  same  room  with
several  susceptible  persons,  the  results  are  very  apt  to  be
very  much  confused,  and  experiments  may  fail  which  would
succeed  perfectly  if  only  one  susceptible  subject  were  present.


I  must  now  conclude,  and  I  would  do  so  by  once  more
pointing  out,  that  my  object  has  not  been  to  explain  the
facts  I  have  described,  but  rather  to  show  that  a  large  num-
ber of  facts  exist,  which  require  explanation,  but  which
never  can  be  explained,  unless  we  study  them.  I  am  quite
content  that  any  theoretical  suggestions  I  have  made  should
be  thrown  aside  as  quite  unimportant,  provided  only  the  facts
be  attended  to ;  because  I  consider  it  too  early  for  a  com-


384  SUMMARY.

prehensive  theory,  and  because  I  believe  that  the  facts  are
as  yet  but  very  partially  known.

But  I  think  we  may  regard  it  as  established;  first,  that
one  individual  may  exercise  a  certain  influence  on  another,
even  at  a  distance ;  secondly,  that  one  individual  may  ac-
quire a  control  over  the  motions,  sensations,  memory,  emo-
tions, and  volition  of  another,' both  by  suggestion,  in  the
conscious,  impressible  state,  and  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  with
or  without  suggestion;  thirdly,  that  the  magnetic  sleep  is  a
very  peculiar  state,  with  a  distinct  and  separate  conscious-
ness ;  fourthly,  that  in  this  state,  the  subject  often  possesses
a  new  power  of  perception,  the  nature  of  which  is  unknown,
but  by  means  of  which  he  can  see  objects  or  persons,  near
or  distant,  without  the  use  of  the  external  organs  of  vision ;
fifthly,  that  he  very  often  possesses  a  very  high  degree  of
sympathy  with  others,  so  as  to  be  able  to  read  their  thoughts ;
sixthly,  that  by  these  powers  of  clairvoyance  and  sympathy,
he  can  sometimes  perceive  and  describe,  not  only  present,
but  past,  and  even  future  events;  seventhly,  that  he  can
often  perceive  and  describe  the  bodily  state  of  himself  or
others;  eighthly,  that  he  may  fall  into  trance  and  extasis,
the  period  of  which  he  often  predicts  accurately ;  ninthly,
that  every  one  of  these  phenomena  has  occurred,  and  fre-
quently occurs,  spontaneously,  which  I  hold  to  be  the  funda-
mental fact  of  the  whole  enquiry;  Somnambulism,  Clair-
voyance, Sympathy,  Trance,  Extasis,  Insensibility  to  pain,
and  Prevision,  having  often  been  recorded  as  natural  occur-
rences. Tenthly,  that  not  only  the  human  body,  but  inani-
mate objects,  such  as  magnets,  crystals,  metals,  &c.  &c,
exert  on  sensitive  persons  an  influence,  identical,  so  far  as  it
is  known,  with  that  which  produces  Animal  Magnetism ;  that
such  an  influence  really  exists,  because  it  may  act  without
a  shadow  of  suggestion,  and  may  be  transferred  to  water
and  other  bodies;  and  lastly,  that  it  is  only  by  studying  the
characters  of  this  influence,  as  we  should  those  of  any  other,
such  as  Electricity  or  Light,  that  we  can  hope  to  throw
light  on  these  obscure  subjects.  Let  us  in  the  meantime
observe  and  accumulate  facts ;  and  whether  we  succeed  or.
not  in  tracing  these  to  their  true  causes,  the  facts,  if  well
observed,  and  faithfully  recorded,  will  remain,  and  in  a
more  advanced  state  of  science,  will  lead  to  a  true  and
comprehensive  theory.

THE  END.
