Selected Epistles of Gregory the Great, Books IX-XIV (Gregory the Great)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 Selected Epistles

 OF

 Gregory THE GREAT

 BISHOP OF ROME,

 (Books IX.--XIV.)

 Translated, with Notes and Indices,

 by the late

 REV. James Barmby, D.D.

 General Literature

 of

 Gregory's Life and Times.

 ------------------------

 Barmby (James), D.D., Gregory the Great; part of "The Fathers for
 English readers."  Lond., 1879, 8^o.

 -------- -- re-issue.  Lond., 1892, 8°.

 (Qy.), Gregorius I., Pope, in Dictionary of Christian Biography, Vol.
 II. Lond., 1880.

 Bianchi-Giovini (A.), Pontificato di San Gregorio il Grande.  Milano,
 1844, 8°.

 Callias Caryon (A.), Apologie pour S. Gregoire evecque de Rome premier
 du nom, autrement dit, Gregoire le Grand...  a Sedan, 1603, sm. 8°.

 Du Moulin (P.), the Elder.  La vie et religion de deux bons papes Leon
 premier et Gregoire premier...  Sedan, 1650, 12°.

 Sedan, 1650, 12°.

 Ewald (P.), Die älteste Biographie Gregors I. (p. 17 of Histor.
 Aufsätze dem Andenken an G. Waitz.)  Hannover, 1886, 8°.

 Guettée (F. R.), La Papauté moderne condamnée par le Pape Saint
 Grégoire le Grand....Extraits des ouvrages de St. Grégoire...  Paris.,
 1861, 8°.

 Joannes, diaconus:  S. Gregorii Migni vita.  (Patrol. Lat. ed. Migne,
 tom. 75, col. 59.)  Paris., 1849, 8°.

 Lau (G. J. T.), Gregor I. der Grosse nach seinem Leben und seiner Lehre
 geschildert.  Leipzig, 1845, 8°.

 Leblanc (H. J.), Utrum B. Gregorius Magnus litteras humaniores et
 ingenuas artes odio persecutus sit disputationem proponebat...H. J. L.
 Parisiis, 1852, 8°.

 Luzarche (V.) [Editor], Vie du Pape Grégoire le Grande.  Légende
 française [en vers].  Publiée pour la première fois par V. L.  Tours,
 1857, 8°.

 Maggio (G.), Prolegomeni alla storia di Gregorio il Grande e de' suoi
 tempi.  Prato, 1879, 8°.

 Maimbourg (L.), Histoire du Pontificat de S. Grégoire le Grand.  Paris,
 1686, 4°.

 Paulus, diaconus Aquileiensis dictus Winfridus:  S. Gregorii Magni vita
 auctore Paulo diacono monacho Cassinensi.  (Patrol. Lat. ed. Migne,
 tom. 75, col. 41.)  Paris., 1849, 8°.

 Pfahler (G.), of Ellwangen.  Gregor der Grosse und seine Zeit.  Bd. I.
 [No more published.]  Frankfurt am Main, 1852, 8°.

 Pingaud (L.), La politique de Saint Grégoire le Grand.  Thèse...Paris.
 Paris, 1872, 8°.

 Pozzo (F. dal), Istoria della vita e del pontificato di S. Gregorio
 Magno Papa...Con un ragionamento sopra gli studi ecclesiastici.  Rome,
 1758, 4°.

 Sainte-Marthe (Denys de), Histoire de S. Grégoire le Grand,...Tirée
 principalement de fes Ouvrages.  a Rouen, 1697, 4°.

 Saxton (Rev. A. J.), Saint Gregory the Great (Penny Biographical
 series).  Lond. [1892], 8°,

 Simrock (C.) [Editor], Eine schöne merkwürdige Historie des heiligen
 Bischofs Gregorius auf dem Stein genannt.  Berlin [1838?], 8°.

 Snow (T. B.), abbot of St. Mary's, Liverpool.  St. Gregory the Great.
 His work and his spirit.  (Heroes of the Cross.)  Lond., 1892, 8°.

 Stute (J. P.), Gregorius Magnus Papa Lutheranus; sive Der Lutherische
 Pabst.  Contra Papistas, imprimis Monachos Parienses Ordinis S.
 Benedicti, S. Marthe, Bellarminum,...aliosque ex S. Gregorii libris et
 epistolis vindicatus...  Lipsiæ, 1715, 4°.

 Welin (L. G.), Resp.:  Legend om Pafven Gregorius den Store.  Praes. J.
 H. Schröder.  Stockholm, 1848, 8°.

 Wiggers (G. F.), De Gregorio Magno ejusque placitis anthropologicis
 commentatio prior [-- posterior].  Rostochii, 1838-40, 4°.

 Zype (F. vander), Sanctus Gregorius Magnus...ex...Dei familia
 Benedictina oriundus...  Ipris, 1610, 8°.

 Regula Pastoralis.

 ------------------------

 Important MSS.

 1.  Troyes 504.  End of the 6th or beginning of the 7th cent.  In
 uncials and majuscules.  Formerly in the library of the Collège des
 Oratoriens de Troyes.  (Migne, no. 1.)

 2.  Corvey no. 93.  (Codex Corbeiensis, Migne, no. 2.)  [The library at
 Corvey has now been dispersed.]

 3.  Chartres 65 (6.) of the 9th cent.  (St. Père.)

 4-6.  St. Gallen 216-217, 219.  All of the 9th cent.

 7.  St. Germain 12260. of the 9th cent.

 8.  St. Germain 12261. of the 9th cent.

 9.  Laon 187. of the 9th or 10th cent.  (St. Vincent.)

 10.  Oxford, Bodl. Laud misc. 263. of the 9th or 10th cent.; (probably
 the 10th).

 11.  Codex Belvacensis, written about the middle of the 10th cent.
 (Migne.)

 12.  Rouen 500 (A. 260.) of the 11th cent.  (Cathédrale de Rouen.)

 13.  Chartres 114 (62.) of the 12th cent.  (Chapitre.)

 14.  Rouen 501 (A. 368.) of the 12th cent.  (St. Ouen de Rouen.)

 15.  Troyes 752. of the 12th cent.  (Clairvaux.)

 16.  Oxford, Bodl. Hatton 20.  In English minuscule of the 10th cent.,
 containing the Anglo-Saxon version made by King Alfred.  It formerly
 belonged to Worcester [cathedral].

 Editions.

 1.  ...lib' Regule pastoral'.  [Ulric Zell? Cologne, 1470?] 4°.

 2.  ...liber regule pastoral'.  [M. Flach:  Strasburg, 1475?] 4°.

 3.  ...liber cure pastoralis.  n. pl. 1482, 8°.

 4.  Paftoralis.  Venetiis per Hier. de Paganinis, 1492, 4°.

 5.  Paftorale.  Argentine, 1496, 4°.

 6.  Paftorale.  in vrbe Bafílíenfí (Mich. Furter) 1496, 4°.

 7.  Liber cure paftoralis...Parrhisiis per Vdalricu' gering & Magiftru'
 Berchtoldu' renbolt focioru', 1498, 4°.

 8.  in Gregorii Magni opera, beneficio Bertholdi Renbolt.  In edibus J.
 Parvi:  Parrhisiis, 1518, fol.

 9.  Do. ed. Franc. Regnault.  Rothomagi (Paris), 1521, fol.

 10.  Pastoralis diui Gregorii; At fol. cciii. of Opera...  Paris., ex
 officina Claudii Chevalon, 1523, fol.

 11.  in opera...  1533, fol.

 12.  Do.  Basil., 1550.

 13.  Do. cura Huldrici Coccii.  Basil., ap. Froben. 1564, fol.

 14.  Pastoralia; at col. 869, tom. I. of Opera...ed. Ioannes Gillotius
 Campanus.  Paris., 1571, fol.

 15.  Pastoralis; at fol. 2, tom. II. of opera, Antverpiæ, 1572, fol.

 16.  [another ed. of no. 14.]  Paris., 1586.

 17.  Liber pastoralis curæ; at p. 143, tom. III. of opera...ed. Petrus
 Tossinianensis episc. Venusinus.  Romæ, ex typis Vaticanis, 1588-93,
 fol.

 18.  in Opera, Sixti V....jussu emendata...[by R. Rodulphus, bp. of
 Venosa.]  Paris., 1605, fol.

 19.  in Opera...  Romæ, 1613, 8°.

 20.  Do.  Draci, 1615.

 21.  Do. emendata...[by P. Rodulphus].  Antverpiæ, 1615, fol.

 22.  Do.  Paris., 1619.

 23.  ...Cura Pastoralis...opera...Matthiæ Abbatis Admentensis...in hanc
 formam recusa.  Monaci, 1622, 12°.

 24.  De cvra pastorali liber verè aureus, accuratè emendatus...è Vet.
 MSS....ab eximijs aliquot Acad. Oxoniensis theologis; editus à Ieremia
 Stephano...  Londini, 1629, 8°.

 25.  Liber pastoralis curæ; at p. 169 of Septem tubæ orbis
 Christiani..., operâ J. M. Horstii...'  Coloniæ Agrippinæ, 1635, 4°.

 26.  in Opera.  Paris., 1640.

 27.  Do. ed. Petr. Gussanvillaeus.  Paris., 1675, fol.

 28.  Regulæ pastoralis liber; at col. 1-102 of tom. II. of
 opera...studio & labore monachorum ord. Sancti Benedicti è congr. S.
 Mauri...  Par., 1705, fol.

 29.  ...Regulæ pastoralis liber...juxta editionem Parisiensium
 Monachorum Ord. S. Benedicti per B. Campagnolam...emendatus, variisque
 lectionibus illustratus.  Veronæ, 1739, 12°.

 30.  in Opera ed. Gallicciolli.  Venetiis, 1768-76, 4°.

 31.  Regulæ pastoralis liber; in tom. 13 of Sanctæ...catholicæ ecclesiæ
 dogmatum et morum ex selectis veterum patrum operibus veritas
 demonstrata, &c.'  By A. M. Cigheri.  Florentiæ, 1791, 4°.

 32.  --[another ed.] in vol. I. of Biblio-theca Pastoralis...
 Oenïponte, 1845, 12°.

 33.  --Novam editionem curavit E. W. Westhoff.  Monasterii
 Westphalorum, 1846, 8°.

 34.  --[another ed.] col. 13, tom. III. of opera in Migne's Patrologia,
 tom. 75-9.  Parisiis, 1849, la. 8°.

 35.  --[another ed.]  Romæ, 1849, 12°.

 36.  --[another ed.]  Ex Benedictinorum recensione.  Præmissa est vita
 S. Gregorii a Paulo Diacono conscripta.  [Edited by G. Leonhardi]
 Lipsiæ, 1873, 8°.

 37.  --[another ed.] in vol. 20 of Sanctorum Patrum opuscula selecta.
 Edidit...H. von Hurter.  Oeniponti, 1874-85, 16°.

 38.  S. Gregorii Magni Regulæ Pastoralis Liber.  S. Gregory on the
 Pastoral charge; the Benedictine text, with an English translation
 by...H. R. Bramley.  Oxford, 1874, 8°.

 38*.  The book of Pastoral rule, and selected epistles, of Gregory the
 Great, bp. of Rome; transl., with introduction, notes, and indices, by
 the Rev. J. Barmby, D.D. (Pt. I.) (A select library of Nicene and
 post-Nicene fathers of the Christian Church.  2nd Ser., vol. XII.)
 Oxford & New York, 1895, la. 8°.

 39.  King Alfred's West-Saxon Version of Gregory's Pastoral Care.  With
 an English translation.  Edited for the Early English Text Society, by
 H. Sweet.  Lond., 1871, 2, 8°.

 40.  Le Livre de S. Gregoire le Grand...du soin et du devoir des
 pasteurs....Nouvelle traduction [by J. le C. C. de S...., i.e. Jean Le
 Clerc, Curê de Soisy.]  Paris, 1670, 8°.

 41.  Die Pastoralschriften des hl. Gregor des Grossen und des hl.
 Ambrosius von Mailand, übersetzt von. C. Haas.  Tübingen, 1862, 8°.

 42.  Il libro della Regola Pastorale di S. Gregorio Magno
 volgarizzamento inedito del secolo xiv., tratto da un Manoscritto della
 Biblioteca Ambrosiana da A. Ceruti,...  Milano, 1869, 8°.

 [Amongst Rawlinson's MSS. in the Bodleian [MS. Rawl. D. 377, fol. 86]
 are 2 specimen leaves of an edition, giving the Latin text, with King
 Alfred's translation, designed by E. Thwaites;

 Oxford? c. 1700, 4°.]

 Literature.

 Dewitz (A.), Untersuchungen über Alfreds des Grossen west-sächsische
 Übersetzung der "Cura pastoralis" Gregors und ihr Verhaltnis zum
 Originale.  Inaug.-Diss....Breslau.  Bunzlau, 1889, 8°.

 Fleischhauer (K. W.), Ueber den Gebrauch des Conjunctivs in Alfred's
 altenglischer Uebersetzung von Gregor's Cura Pastoralis.
 Inaug.-Diss....Göttingen.  Göttingen, 1885, 8°.

 Gieschen (K. L.), Die Charakteristischen Unterschiede der einzelnen
 Schreiber im Hatton MS. der Cura Pastoralis.
 Inaug.-Diss....Greifswald.  Greifswald, 1887, 8°.

 Glossarium zum Werke des heil.  Gregorius:  Liber regulæ pastoralis,
 aus einer Handschrift des zehnten Jahrhunderts in der Stiftsbibliothek
 zu St. Florian, aus geschrieben von F. Kurz.  Aus dem xxxvii. Bde der
 Jahrbücher der Literatur besonders abgedruckt.  Wien, 1827, 8°.

 Wack (Gustav), Über das Verhältnis von König Aelfreds Übersetzung der
 Cura Pastoralis...zum Originale.  Inaug.-Diss....Greifswald.
 Greifswald, 1889, 8°.

 Registrum Epistolarum.

 ------------------------

 Important MSS.

 1.  Cologne 92. of the 8th cent.  Held by Ewald to be the best of all
 the MSS.

 2.  St. Petersburg 6 F. 1. 7.  (Formerly at Corvey; then at St.
 Germain-des-Prés.) 8th cent.  The first in the list of MSS. given by
 Migne.

 3.  Berlin theol. 322. of the 9th cent.

 4.  Dusseldorf B. 79. of the 9th cent.

 5.  Munich 14641. of the 9th cent.

 6.  Paris 11674. (St. Germain 282.) of the 9th cent.

 7.  Vienna 934. of the 9th cent.

 8.  The Escurial d. I. 1. (the Codex Emilianus).  Written in
 West-Gothic minuscule, and finished in 992.

 9.  Bamberg 601. of the 10th cent.

 10.  Cologne 94. of the 10th cent.

 11.  Paris 2279.  (Formerly in the library of St. Martial de Limoges;)
 of the 10th cent.

 12.  St. Gallen 670. of the 10th cent.

 13.  Trier 171. of the 10th cent.

 14.  Monte Cassino 71.  Written in a Lombardic hand of the end of the
 11th cent.

 15.  Wolfenbüttel 155. (75.) of the 11th cent.

 16.  Cologne 95. ofthe 12th cent.

 17.  Vatican 619. of the 12th cent.

 Editions.

 1.  Liber Ep'larum beati Gregorii Pape...  (Augustæ Vindel., G. Zainer,
 c. 1472) fol.

 2.  Epiftole ex Regiftro:  (cum vita Gregorii præfixa).  Venetiis per
 Laz. Soardum, 1505, fol.

 3.  Do.  Parisiis, 1508, 4°.

 4.  in Gregorii Magni opera, beneficio Bertholdi Renbolt.  In edibus J.
 Parvi:  Parrhisiis, 1518, fol.

 5.  Do. ed. Franc. Regnault.  Rothomagi (Paris), 1521, fol.

 6.  ...epiftole ex Regiftro fa'cti Gregorii pape; At fol. ccclvi. of
 Opera...  Paris., ex officina Claudii Chevalon, 1523, fol.

 7.  Do.  1533, fol.

 8.  Registrum Epistolarum.  Lugduni, 1539, 4°.

 9.  Do. ed. Guillart.  Paris., 1542, fol.

 10.  in Opera...tom. II.  Basil, 1550.

 11.  in Opera...cura Huldrici Coccii.  Basil., ap. Froben., 1564, fol.

 12.  Epiftolæ ex Regiftro; col. 433-825 of Vol. II. of Opera...ed.
 Ioannes Gillotius Campanus.  Paris, 1571, fol.

 13.  Registrum Epistolarum.  Venetiis, 1571.

 14.  Epistolæ ex Registro; fol. 168^v of Vol. II. of Opera, Antverpiæ,
 1572, fol.

 15.  Do.  Venetiis, 1583.

 16.  [another ed. of No. 12].  Paris., 1586.

 17.  Registrum Epistolarum; Vol. IV. of Opera...ed. Petrus
 Tossinianensis episc. Vennsinus.  Romæ, ex typis Vaticanis, 1588-93.

 18.  in Opera, Sixti V....jussu emendata...[by R. Rodulphus, bp. of
 Venosa].  Paris., 1605, fol.

 19.  in Opera...Romæ, 1613, 8°.

 20.  Do.  Duaci, 1615.

 21.  Do. emendata...[by P. Rodulphus.]  Antverpiæ, 1615, fol.

 22.  Do.  Paris., 1619.

 23.  Do.  Paris., 1640.

 24.  Epistolæ; col. 1027, Vol. V. Conciliorum, studio Ph. Labbei et G.
 Cossartii.  Paris., 1671, fol.

 25.  in Opera...ed. Petr. Gussanvillæus, tom. II. pp. 359-1150.
 Paris., 1675. fol.

 26.  Do....studio &. labore monachorum ord. Sancti Benedicti è
 congregatione Sancti Mauri...tom. II., col. 477-1317.  Par., 1705, fol.

 27.  in Opera...ed. Gallicciolli, tom. 7-9.  Venetiis, 1768-76, 4°.

 28.  in Opera...tom. 75-79 of Migne's Patrologia, tom. III., col. 441.
 Parisiis, 1849, la. 8°.

 29.  Gregorii I. pap--Registrvm epistolarvm.  Tomi I. pars I. Liber
 i.-iv.  Edidit Pavlvs Ewald.  Tomi I. pars II. Libri v.-vii. Tomi II.
 partes I., II. Libri viii.-xiv.  Post Pavli Ewaldi obitvm edidit
 Lvdovicvs M. Hartmann.  (Mon. Germ. Hist.--Epistolarum tomi I., II.)
 Berl., 1887-95, 4°.

 30.  --; Uebersetzt...von M. Feyerabend.  6 vols.  Kempten, 1807-9.

 [See also no. 38* in list of editions of "Cura Pastoralis."]

 The text in Migne's ed. is a reprint of the edition by the monks of St.
 Maur, of 1705.

 By far the best edition of the Epistolæ yet attempted is that begun by
 Ewald, who died after editing pt. I., bks. I.-IV.  The work is being
 continued on the same scale by L. M. Hartmann.

 Literature.

 Antonii DadiniAlteserræ Antecessoris Tolosani, Notæ et observationes in
 xii. libros epistolarum B. Gregorii papæ...  Tolosæ, 1669, 4°.

 Baumgarten (P. M.), Ueber eine Handschrift der Briefe Gregors I. [B.
 M., King's libr. 6, C. x.]  (Neues Archiv d. Gesselsch. f. a. deutsch.
 Gesch. xv., 1890, p. 60.)

 Bembus (Matthæus), Pastor vigilans:  sive ars regendi animas ex
 epistolis D. Gregorii Magni excerpta...  Colon. 1618, 8°.

 Ewald (P.), Studien zur Ausgabe des Registers Gregors I.  (Neues
 Archiv, iii., 1878, pp. 433-625.)

 Hartmann (L. M.), Ueber zwei Gregorbriefe.  (Neues Archiv, xvii., 1892,
 p. 193.)

 --------Zur Chronologie der Briefe Gregors I.  (--------xv., 1890, p.
 411.)

 --------Zur Orthographie Papst Gregors I. (--------xv., 1890, p. 529.)

 Jaffé (Ph.) [Editor].  S. Gregorius I., ed. P. Ewald:  pp. 143-219, of
 vol. I., and p. 738 of vol. II., of Regesta pontificum Romanorum, ed.
 P. Jaffé.  Lipsiæ, 1885, 6, 4°.

 James (Thomas), Vindiciæ Gregorianæ, seu restitutus innumeris pæne
 locis Gregorius ex variis MSS. vt magno labore, ita Singulari fide
 collatis.  Genevæ, 1625, 4°.

 Kellet (F. W.), Pope Gregory the Great and his relations with Gaul.
 (Cambridge historical essays.) Lond. 1889, 8°.

 Lampe (Fel.), Qui fuerint Gregorii Magni papæ temporibus in imperii
 Byzantini parte occidentali exarchi et qualia eorum iura atque
 officia.  Diss....Berlin.  Berlin, 1892, la. 8°.

 Maasen (F.), Ueber eine Sammlung von Schreiben Gregors I.  u.
 Verordnungen der Kaiser u. Könige.  Wien, 1877, 8°.

 Mommsen (Th.), Zu den Gregorienbriefen.  (Neues Archiv, xvii., 1892, p.
 189.)

 Pflugk-Harttung (J. v.), Papst Gregor d. Gr.  (Münchener allgem.
 Zeitung, 1888.  Beilage no. 209-215.)

 Savini (F.), Se il Castrum Aprutiense delle lettere di s. Gregorio
 Magno fu l'odierna Teramo e se la voce Aprutium servi nel primitivo
 medio evo a denominare la città di Teramo, ovvero solo il suo
 territorio.  (Archivio storico Italiano Ser. v. tom. X. 1892, p. 3.)

 Wisbaum (W.), Die wichtigsten Richtungen und Ziele der Thätigkeit des
 Papstes Gregors des Grossen.  Inaug. Diss....Bonn.  Koln (1884), 8°.

 Wolfsgruber (C.), Die vorpäpstliche Lebensperiode Gregors d. Gr. Nach
 seinen Briefen Dargestellt. Progr....Schotten.  Wien, 1886, 4°.

 --------Gregor der Grotze...  Saulgau, 1890, 8°.

 Wollschack (Th.), Die Verhältnisse Italiens, insbesondere des
 Langobardenreichs, nach dem Briefwechseb Gregors I.  Progr....Horn.
 Horn, 1888, 4°.

 Book IX.

 Epistle I.

 To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari).

 Gregory to Januarius, &c.

 The preacher of Almighty God, Paul the apostle, says, Rebuke not an
 elder (1 Tim. v. 1).  But this rule of his is to be observed in cases
 where the fault of an elder does not draw through his example the
 hearts of the younger into ruin.  But, when an elder sets an example to
 the young for their ruin, he is to be smitten with severe rebuke.  For
 it is written, Ye are all a snare to the young (Isai. xlii. 22).  And
 again the prophet says, The sinner being an hundred years old is
 accursed (Isai. lxv. 20).  But so great wickedness has been reported to
 us of thy old age that, unless we were humanely disposed, we should
 smite thee with a definitive curse.  For it has been told me that on
 the Lord's day, before celebrating the solemnities of mass, thou
 wentest forth to plough up the crop of the bearer of these presents,
 and after ploughing it up didst celebrate the solemnities of mass.
 Also, after the solemnities of mass thou didst not fear to root up the
 landmarks of that possession.  What punishment ought to follow such
 deeds all who hear of them know.  We had, however, been in doubt as to
 so great perversity in thee as this; but our son Cyriacus the abbot [1]
 , having been questioned by us, declared that when he was at Caralis he
 knew it to be the case.  And, seeing that we still spare thy gray
 hairs, bethink thee at length, old man, and restrain thyself from such
 levity of behaviour, and perversity of deeds.  The nearer thou art
 approaching death, the more careful and fearful oughtest thou to
 become.  And indeed a sentence of punishment had been launched against
 thee; but, since we know thy simplicity accompanying thy old age, we
 meanwhile hold our peace.  Those, however, by whose advice thou hast
 done these things we decree to be excommunicated for two months; but so
 that, if within the space of two months anything should happen to them
 after the manner of humanity they be not deprived of the blessing of
 the viaticum.  But do thou henceforth be cautious to stand aloof from
 their counsels, lest, if thou be their disciple in evil whose master
 thou oughtest to have been in good, we no longer spare either thy
 simplicity or thy old age.

 [1] See V. 2, note 1.

 Epistle II.

 To Vitalis, Guardian (Defensorem) of Sardinia.

 Gregory to Vitalis, &c.

 What we have learnt about our brother the bishop Januarius the bearers
 of these presents, as well as the copies of our letters, will
 sufficiently inform you; and so let thy Experience judiciously carry
 into effect the excommunication which we have decreed to be pronounced
 on his perverse counsellors, that they may learn by falling not to walk
 unwarily.

 Moreover, we have sent back by Redemptus the guardian (defensorem), the
 bearer of these presents, the wheat which had been sent to us under the
 name of a present.  Let thy experience see that neither thou nor he who
 brought it presume to partake of anything out of it as a bounty [2] ,
 but restore the whole of it without abatement to the several persons,
 or to all of them together, and send me their receipts for the value;
 for, should I ascertain that anything has been done otherwise than as I
 direct, I will visit the offence with no slight severity.

 [2] In pretio commodi.  Oncommodum, see I. 44, p. 90, note 4.

 Epistle III.

 To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari).

 Gregory to Januarius, &c.

 The most distinguished lady Nereida has complained to us that your
 Fraternity does not blush to exact from her a hundred solidi for the
 burial of her daughter, and would bring upon her the additional
 vexation of expense over and above her groans of sorrow.  Now, if the
 truth is so, it being a very serious thing and far from a priest's
 office to require a price for earth that is granted to rottenness, and
 to wish to make profit out of another's grief, let your Fraternity
 refrain from this demand, and be no more troublesome to her, especially
 as she tells us that Hortulanus, to whom she asserts she bore this
 daughter, had formerly been munificent to your Church in no small
 degree.  Now as to this abuse, we ourselves, after we had by God's
 permission acceded to the dignity of the episcopate, forbade it
 entirely in our Church, and by no means permitted the evil custom to be
 taken up anew, remembering that, when Abraham demanded for a price a
 sepulchre for the burial of his wife's body from the sons of Emor, that
 is from Ephron the son of Seor, the latter refused to accept a price,
 lest he should appear to have made profit out of a corpse (Gen.
 xxiii.).  If then a man that was a pagan showed such great
 consideration, how much more ought we, who are called priests, not to
 do this thing?  Wherefore I admonish you that this abuse, which comes
 of avarice, be not ventured on any more, even in the case of
 strangers.  But, if at any time you allow any one to be buried in your
 Church, and the parents, relations, or heirs of such person should of
 their own accord wish to offer something for lights, we do not forbid
 it to be accepted.  But we altogether forbid anything to be asked for
 or exacted, this being a very irreligious proceeding, lest (which God
 forbid) the Church should haply be spoken of as venal, or you should
 seem to take joy in men's deaths, if you endeavour in any way whatever
 to seek profit out of their corpses.

 With regard to other cases included in the petition of the aforesaid
 Nereida, we exhort thee, if possible, to settle them by an amicable
 arrangement, or certainly not to omit sending an instructed person to
 the court, deputed by us, for which purpose we have sent to your parts
 Redemptus our guardian (defensorem), the bearer of these presents, that
 he may compel the parties to appear for trial, and carry out with
 summary execution what may be adjudged.

 Epistle IV.

 To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari).

 Gregory to Januarius, a Bishop of Sardinia.

 We knew before the letter of your Fraternity reached us what our
 enemies had effected in Sardinia.  And, having for some time feared
 that this would be so, we now groan with you on what we foresaw having
 come to pass.  But, if attention had been paid to what we wrote to our
 most excellent son Gennadius [3] , as well as to yourself, telling you
 that this would be so, the enemy would either not have come into your
 regions, or, when they came, they would have incurred the danger which
 they have caused.  Even now, then, let what has happened sharpen your
 vigilance for the future.  For we, too, by no means omit whatever we
 are able to do for good, the Lord helping us.

 Know, moreover, that the abbot [4] whom, now a considerable time ago,
 we sent to Agilulph, has by the mercy of God arranged a peace with him,
 so far as was directed in writing by the most excellent Exarch.  And
 so, till such time as the agreements for the confirmation of this peace
 shall be drawn up, lest perchance our enemies during the present delay
 should be inclined to come again into those parts, do you cause watches
 of the walls to be kept up, and careful attention given in all places.
 And we trust in the power of our Redeemer that the incursions or plots
 of our adversaries will not injure you anew.

 As to your saying in your letter that many persons lay complaints
 against you before us, this is true; but among various things nothing
 has distressed us so much as what our most beloved son, the abbot
 Cyriacus, has reported to us; namely, that on the Lord's day before
 mass you caused a crop of corn to be ploughed up in the field which is
 in the possession of Donatus, and, as if that were not enough, went,
 after the sacrifice was finished, in person to the place, and dug up
 the boundaries [5] .  For this reason I exhort thee to consider with
 anxious attention the office which thou bearest, and to avoid entirely
 whatever may injure thy reputation or thy soul, and let no one persuade
 thee to do the like again.  For know that thou hast not undertaken the
 care of earthly things, but the leadership of souls.  On this,
 therefore, thou oughtest to fix thy heart, thy anxiety, thy entire
 devotion., and to give thy diligent thought to the winning of souls,
 that when thou shalt render to the Lord at His coming the talents that
 He has delivered to thee multiplied, thou mayest be counted worthy to
 receive from Him the fruit of retribution, and to be exalted among His
 faithful servants in eternal glory.  Know, however, that what I now say
 in the way of reproach or blame comes not from asperity, but from
 brotherly love, since I desire thee to be found a priest before
 Almighty God, not in name only, which tends only to punishment, but
 also in desert, which looks to recompense.  For, we being one member in
 the body of our Redeemer, as I am rent asunder in thy fault, so also am
 I rejoiced in thy good conduct.

 Furthermore, with regard to your desire that we should depute a person
 from our side (a nostro latere), to whom you may communicate in detail
 the cases that are to be referred to us, write whatever you will to our
 most beloved son Peter and to Theodore the counsellor (consiliario),
 that, when it has been communicated to us through them, whatever reason
 may commend may be settled, the Lord revealing the way.  Moreover,
 concerning our brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus [6] , cognizance
 will be taken, when peace with the aforesaid Agilulph shall have been
 fully confirmed, and whatever the order of reason may dictate will be
 done.

 [3] Gennadius was Exarch of Africa.

 [4] Probably the Abbot Probos.  See IX. 43, 9.

 [5] See also IX. 1.

 [6] A bishop in Sardinia, see I. 61.  What his case was does not
 appear.

 Epistle V.

 To Marcellus, Pro-Consul of Dalmatia [7] .

 Gregory to Marcellus, &c.

 We have received the letter of your Greatness, in which you speak of
 having incurred our displeasure, and of your wish to be in favour with
 us through direct satisfaction.  And indeed we have heard such things
 of your Greatness as ought never to have been committed by a faithful
 man.  For all assert that you are the author of all that great mischief
 in the case of Maximus, and that the spoiling of that Church, and the
 perdition of so many souls, and the audacity of that unheard-of
 presumption, had their beginning through you.  And indeed, with regard
 to your seeking to be in favour with us, it is fitting that with your
 whole heart and soul, and with tears, as becomes you, you should
 satisfy our Redeemer for such things as these:  for, unless
 satisfaction is made to Him, what certain good can our forgiveness or
 favour do thee?  But while we observe thee to be still implicated in
 the ruinous conduct of pretenders, or in the advocacy of those who have
 gone astray, we see not of what sort your satisfaction is either to God
 or men.  For then your Greatness may know that you openly and evidently
 satisfy God and men, when you bring back both what is devious to
 rectitude and what is presumptuous to the rule of humility.  If this is
 done, you may know that you will thus be in favour both with God and
 men.

 [7] See III. 47, note 2.

 Epistle VI.

 To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari).

 Gregory to Januarius, &c.

 The Jews who have come hither from your city have complained to us that
 Peter, who has been brought by the will of God from their superstition
 to the worship of Christian faith, having taken with him certain
 disorderly persons, on the day after his baptism, that is on the Lord's
 day of the very Paschal festival, with grave scandal and without your
 consent, had taken possession of their synagogue in Caralis, and placed
 there the image of the mother of our God and Lord, the venerable cross,
 and the white vestment (birrum) with which he had been clothed when he
 rose from the font.  Concerning which thing also the letters of our
 sons, the glorious Magister militum Eupaterius, and the magnificent
 governor, pious in the Lord, concur in attesting the same.  And they
 add also that this had been foreseen by you, and that the aforesaid
 Peter had been prohibited from venturing on it.  On learning this we
 altogether commended you, since, as became a truly good priest, you
 wished nothing to be done whence just blame might arise.  But, since by
 not having at all mixed yourself up in these wrong doings you shew that
 what was done displeases you, we, considering the bent of your will in
 this matter, and still more your judgment, hereby exhort you that,
 having removed thence with fitting reverence the image and the cross,
 you should restore what has been violently taken away; seeing that, as
 legal enactment does not suffer Jews to erect new synagogues, so also
 it allows them to keep their old ones without disturbance.  Lest, then,
 the above-named Peter, or others who have afforded him assistance or
 connivance in the wrongfulness of this disorderly proceeding, should
 reply that they had done it in zeal for the faith, in order that a
 necessity of being converted might thereby be imposed on the Jews, they
 should be admonished, and ought to know, that moderation should rather
 be used towards them; that so the will not to resist may be elicited
 from them, and not that they should be brought in against their will:
 for it is written, I will sacrifice to thee willingly (Ps. lviii. 8);
 and, Of my own will I will confess to him (Ps. xxvii. 7).  Let, then,
 your Holiness, taking with you your sons who with you disapprove of
 these things, try to induce good feeling among the inhabitants of your
 city, since at this time especially, when there is alarm from the
 enemy, you ought not to have a divided people.  But, being anxious with
 regard to ourselves no less than with regard to you, we think it right
 to give you to understand that when the present truce is over, the king
 Agilulph will not make peace with us [8] .  Whence it is necessary for
 your Fraternity to see to fortifying your city or other places more
 securely, and to give earnest attention to providing stores of
 provisions therein, that, when the enemy, with God incensed against
 him, shall come thither, he may find no harm that he can do, but may
 retire discomfited.  But we also take thought for you as far as we can,
 and press upon those whose concern it is that they should prepare
 themselves for resistance, since, as you regard our tribulations as
 yours, so we in like manner count your afflictions as our own.

 [8] For references to the truce now in course of negotiation (a.d.
 598-9), with the Lombard King Agilulph, cf. IX. 4, 42, 43, 98.

 Epistle VII.

 To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari).

 Gregory to Januarius, &c.

 It has been laid down by the plain definition of the law that those who
 go into a monastery for the purpose of entering on monastic life are no
 longer at liberty to make wills, but that their property passes into
 possession of the same monastery [9] .  This being known to almost all,
 we have been greatly surprised by the notification of Gavinia, abbess
 of the monastery of Saints Gavinus and Luxorius, to the effect that
 Sirica, abbess of her monastery, after receiving the office of
 government, had made a will leaving certain legacies.  And when we
 enquired of the Solicitude of your Holiness why you endured that
 property belonging to the monastery should be detained by others, our
 common son Epiphanius, your archpresbyter, being present before us,
 replied that the said abbess had up to the day of her death refused to
 wear the monastic dress, but had continued in the use of such dresses
 as are used by the presbyteresses [10] of that place.  To this the
 aforesaid Gavinia replied that the practice had come to be almost
 lawful from custom, alleging that the abbess who had been before the
 above-written Sirica had used such dresses.  When, then, we had begun
 to feel no small doubt with regard to the character of the dresses, it
 appeared necessary for us to consider with our legal advisers, as well
 as with other learned men of this city, what was to be done with regard
 to law.  And they, having considered the matter, answered that, after
 an abbess had been solemnly ordained by the bishop, and had presided in
 the government of a monastery for many years until the end of her life,
 the character of her dress might attach blame to the bishop for having
 allowed it so to be, but still could not prejudice the monastery, but
 that her property of manifest right belongs to the same place from the
 time of her entering it and being constituted abbess.  And so since she
 [i.e. the abbess Gavinia] asserts that a guest-house (xenodochium)
 retains possession unduly of the property unlawfully devised, we hereby
 exhort you, both the monastery and the guest-house itself being situate
 in your city, to make provision with all care and diligence, to the end
 that, if this possession is derived from no previous contract, but from
 the bequest of the said Sirica, it be restored to the said monastery
 without dispute or evasion.  But, if by any chance it is said to have
 accrued from another contract, either let your Fraternity, having
 ascertained the truth between the parties, determine as legal order may
 seem to demand, or let them by mutual consent choose arbitrators, who
 may be able to decide between their allegations.  And whatever be
 appointed by them, let it be so observed under your care that no grudge
 may remain between the venerable places, which ought by all means to be
 cherished in mutual peace and concord.  Wherefore all other things
 which are detained under the will of the above-named Sirica, seeing
 that none of them is permitted by legal sanction, must needs be
 carefully restored to the possession of the monastery through the
 priestly care of your Fraternity:  for it is plainly laid down by the
 imperial constitutions that what has been done contrary to the laws
 should not only be inoperative, but also be held as not having been
 done at all.

 [9] Cf. I. 44, p. 92, note 2.

 [10] Presbyteræ.  So the wives of presbyters who had been married
 before their ordination were called.  So in Canon XIX. of the second
 council of Tours, "Si inventus fuerit presbyter cum sua presbytera,"
 and Canon XXI. of Council of Auxerre, "Non licet presbytero, post
 acceptam benedictionem, in uno lecto cum presbytera sua dormire."  Or
 deaconesses may possibly be meant, one designation of whom in Greek was
 presbutides.

 Epistle VIII.

 To the Bishops of Sardinia.

 Gregory to Vincentius, Innocentius, Marinianus, Libertinus, Agatho, and
 Victor, Bishops of Sardinia.

 We have learnt that it is the custom of your island after the paschal
 festival, for you to go, or to send your representatives to your
 Metropolitan, and for him, whether you know the time or not, to give
 you directions by a written announcement concerning the following
 Easter.  And, as report goes, some of you, neglecting to do this
 according to custom, pervert the hearts of others also to
 disobedience.  It is added also that some of you, when seeking parts
 beyond sea in cases that arise touching their churches, venture to
 travel without the knowledge of their aforesaid metropolitan, or
 letters from him, such as canonical order prescribes.  We therefore
 exhort your Fraternity that, conforming to the custom of your churches,
 as well with respect to the announcement of Easter, as also if need
 should compel any of you to travel anywhere for business of your own,
 you should ask leave of your said metropolitan according to the rule
 imposed upon you; except that, if (as we hope will not be the case) you
 should happen to have a case against your said Metropolitan, then those
 who are in haste on this account to seek the judgment of the Apostolic
 See have licence to do so, as you know is allowed in the canons by the
 institution even of the ancient Fathers.

 Epistle IX.

 To Callinicus, Exarch of Italy [11] .

 Gregory to Callinicus, &c.

 In the midst of what you have announced to me of your victories over
 the Sclaves, know that I have been refreshed with great joy that the
 bearers of these presents, hastening to be joined to the unity of holy
 Church from the island of Capritana [12] , have been sent by your
 Excellency to the blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles.  For hereby
 you will the more prevail over your enemies, if you recall under the
 yoke of the true Lord those whom you know to be the enemies of God; and
 you will prosecute your causes among men with all the more effect as
 with sincere and devout mind you maintain the causes of God.

 Now as to your having desired that a copy should be shewn me of the
 order [13] that has been sent to you for the defence of the schismatic,
 your to me most sweet Excellency ought to have considered carefully how
 that, although that order has been elicited, you are still not therein
 enjoined to repel those who come to the unity of the Church, but only,
 at this unsettled time, not to compel those who are unwilling to come.
 Whence it is necessary for you with all speed to inform our most pious
 Emperors of these things, to the end that they may be aware how that in
 their times, through the succour of Almighty God and your exertions,
 schismatics are hastening to return of their own accord.  What I have
 decided as to the ordering of things in the island of Caritana, your
 Excellency will learn through our most reverend brother and
 fellow-bishop Marinianus [14] .  But I would have you know that this
 has caused me no slight distress; that your Majordomo, who took charge
 of the petition of the bishop who was wishing to return, declared that
 he had lost it, and that afterwards he was got hold of by the
 adversaries of the Church:  which proceeding, in my opinion, was due
 not to his neglect but to his venality.  Wherefore I wonder that your
 Excellency has not in any way visited his fault in him.  And yet I soon
 blamed myself for wondering at this, for where the lord Justinus gives
 advice, there heretics cannot be arraigned.

 Moreover you tell us that you wish to keep the anniversary of Peter,
 Prince of the apostles, in the city of Rome.  And we pray Almighty God
 to protect you with His mercy, and grant you a fulfilment of your
 desires.  But I beg that the aforesaid most eloquent man may come with
 you, or that, if he does not come, he may retire from attendance on
 you.  Or certainly, if your Excellency should be unable to come owing
 to business that may arise, let him either communicate with the unity
 of holy Church, or I beg that he may not be a sharer of your counsels.
 For I hear of him as a good man, were he not in most mischievous
 error.  As to the cause of Maximus, inasmuch as we can no longer stand
 against the importunity of your Sweetness, you will learn from
 Castorius, the notary, what we have determined.

 [11] Callinicus had recently succeeded Romanus at Ravenna as Exarch of
 Italy.  The main purport of this letter to him is to secure his
 hoped-for co-operation in bringing back the Istrian and Venetian
 schismatics to Catholic communion.  See I. 16, note 3; also II. 46,
 51.  The predecessor of Callinicus, viz. Romanus, had given great
 dissatisfaction to Gregory by his conduct with regard to the
 schismatics (see II. 46); but better things are expected from the new
 Exarch.  See also below, Ep. XCIII., &c.  As to the case of Maximus of
 Salona, briefly referred to at the end of the letter, see III. 47, note
 2.

 [12] Capritana was a small island in the Adriatic, not far from the
 shore of Venetia, containing the episcopal see of Capsula, or Cahorla.
 More about the desire of the church of this island to return to
 communion with Rome will be found in the letter which follows to
 Marinianus, bishop of Ravenna.

 [13] Mention of a previous order from the emperors, during the
 exarchate of Romanus, to Gregory himself, bidding him refrain from
 compelling the Istrians to return to communion, will be found in II.
 46.

 [14] See the letter following.

 Epistle X.

 To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

 Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

 The bearers of these presents, the most distinguished men, Vicedominus
 and Defensor [15] , came to us asserting that a certain bishop, by name
 John, coming from Pannonia, had been constituted in the castle which is
 called Novæ, to which castle their island, which is called Capritana,
 had been appended as a diocese [16] .  They add that, the bishop having
 been violently withdrawn and expelled from this same castle, another
 had been ordained there; concerning whom, however, they allege that it
 has been resolved that he ought not to have lived in the aforesaid
 castle, but in his own island.  They say further that, while he abode
 with them there, he was unwilling to remain in schismatical error, and
 together with all his people presented a petition to our most excellent
 son Callinicus the Exarch, desiring to be united, with all those that
 were with him, to the Catholic Church, as we have already said.  But
 they say that, being persuaded by the schismatics, he afterwards
 recanted, and that now all the population of the aforesaid island are
 deprived of the protection of a Bishop, since, while desiring to be
 united to holy Church, they cannot now receive him who has turned to
 the error of the schismatics; and they desire to have another ordained
 for them.  But we, inasmuch as it is necessary to investigate all
 things strictly and thoroughly, have taken the precaution of ordering
 as follows; namely that thy Fraternity should send to the said Bishop,
 and admonish him to return to the unity of the Catholic Church and to
 his own people.  If, after admonition, he should scorn to return, the
 flock of God ought not to be deluded in the error of its pastor; and
 therefore let thy Holiness in that case ordain a Bishop there, and let
 him have the said island for his diocese, till such time as the
 Histrian Bishops shall return to the Catholic Faith; so that each
 Church may have the rights of its own diocese preserved to it, and that
 a population destitute of a pastor may not be without the protection
 and oversight of government.  In all these things, however, it becomes
 thy Fraternity to take vigilant heed that this same people which comes
 back to the Church be very studiously admonished, to the end that it
 may be firmly fixed in its return, lest through wavering thoughts it
 fall back into the pit of error.  But take care to request the most
 excellent Exarch, in his despatches, to notify these same things to the
 most pious ears of the Emperors, since, although the order which has
 been conveyed to him appears to have been elicited from them, yet he is
 not forbidden in that order to allow such as wish it to return to the
 Church, but only, at the present time, to compel the unwilling.  Let,
 then, our aforesaid son take into his charge the management of this
 affair, to the end that he may so frame his reports, that whatever he
 may ordain may not be dubious.  We have, however, ourselves also
 written to our common son Anatolius [17] , bidding him notify these
 things fully to the most pious princes.

 I have received repeated and pressing letters from my most excellent
 son, the lord Exarch Callinicus, in behalf of Maximus [18] .  Overcome
 by his importunity, I see nothing further to be done but to commit the
 cause of Maximus to thy Fraternity.  If, therefore, this same Maximus
 should come to thy Fraternity, let Honoratus, archdeacon of his Church,
 appear also; that thy Holiness may ascertain if he was rightly
 ordained, if he fell into no simoniacal heresy, if there was nothing
 against him in respect of bodily transgressions, if he did not know
 himself to be excommunicated when he presumed to celebrate mass; and
 whatever may seem right to thee in the fear of God do thou determine,
 that we, under God, may give our assent to thy ordering.  But, if our
 aforesaid son should hold thy Fraternity in suspicion, let our most
 reverend brother Constantius, bishop of Milan, come also to Ravenna,
 and sit with thee; and do you decide together on the said cause:  and
 whatever may seem good to both of you, hold it for certain that it will
 seem good to me.  For, as we ought not to be obstinate towards the
 humble, so we ought to shew ourselves strict towards the proud.  Let,
 then, your Fraternity, as you have learnt in the pages of holy
 Scripture, decide in this business whatever you may consider just.

 [15] So, with initial capitals as proper names, in the Benedictine
 Edition.  Perhaps rather, "the steward (vicedominus) and the guardian
 (defensor)."

 [16] Erat quasi per diocesim conjuncta.  The meaning is, that the
 castellum Novæ on the main land had been made the episcopal see of a
 diocese of the island of Capritana, though not properly within its
 limits.  Cf. IX. 9, note 3.

 [17] At this time Gregory's apocrisiarius at Constantinople.  Cf. VII.
 30.

 [18] See III. 47, note 2.

 Epistle XI.

 To Brunichild, Queen.

 Gregory to Brunichild, Queen of the Franks [19] .

 With what firmness the mind of your Excellency is settled in the fear
 of Almighty God you shew in a praiseworthy manner, among the other good
 things that you do, by your love also of His priests; and great joy for
 your Christianity is caused us, since you study to advance with honours
 those whom you love and venerate as being truly Christ's servants.  For
 it becomes you, most excellent daughter, it becomes you to be such as
 to be able to subject yourself to a lord above you.  For in submitting
 the neck of your mind to the fear of the Almighty Lord you confirm your
 dominion also over subject nations, and by subjecting yourself to the
 service of the Creator you bind your subjects the more devotedly to
 yourself.  Wherefore, having received your letters, we signify to you
 that your Excellency's earnest desire has greatly pleased us, and we
 have been desirous of sending the pallium to our brother and
 fellow-bishop Syagrius [20] , inasmuch as the disposition of our most
 serene lord the Emperor is also favourable, and, so far as we have been
 informed by our deacon, who was the representative of our Church at his
 Court, he is altogether desirous that this thing should be granted [21]
 , and many good reports have reached us of our aforesaid brother both
 on your testimony and that of others; and especially we learnt what his
 life is from John the Regionarius [22] on his return to us.  And
 hearing what he did in the case of our brother Augustine, we bless our
 Redeemer, because we feel that he fulfils in his deeds the meaning of
 his name of priest.

 But there have been many hindrances which have meanwhile prevented us
 from doing this thing.  First indeed, that he who had come to receive
 this pallium is implicated in the error of the schismatics [23] ;
 further, that you wished it to be understood that it was sent, not on
 your petition, but from ourselves.  But there was this besides; that
 neither had he who desires to use it requested it to be granted him by
 a special petition addressed to us:  and it was by no means right for
 us to concede so great a matter without his request; especially as an
 ancient custom has obtained, that the dignity of the pallium shall not
 be given except when the merits of a case demand it, and to one who
 urgently requests it.  Still, lest we should seem perchance to wish,
 under pretext of any excuse, to put off the desire of your Excellency,
 we have provided for the pallium being sent to our most beloved son
 Candidus the presbyter, charging him, with befitting precaution, to
 deliver it in our stead.  Hence it is requisite that our above-written
 brother and fellow-bishop Syagrius must hope for it, when he has of his
 own motion drawn up a petition with some of his bishops; and this he
 must give to the aforesaid presbyter, to the end that he may be in a
 position to obtain properly the use of the same pallium with the favour
 of God.

 In order, then, that the charge you bear may be of fruit to you before
 the eyes of our Creator, let the solicitude of your Christianity be
 diligently on the watch, and suffer no one who is under your dominion
 to attain to holy orders by the giving of money, or the patronage of
 any persons whatever, or by right of relationship; but let such a one
 be elected to the episcopate, or to the office of any other sacred
 order, as his life and manners have shewn to be worthy; lest if, as we
 do not expect, the dignity of the priesthood should be venal,
 simoniacal heresy, which was the first to come up in the Church, and
 has been condemned by the sentence of the Fathers, should arise in your
 parts, and (which God forbid) should weaken the powers of your
 kingdom.  For it is a serious matter, and a wickedness beyond what can
 be told, to sell the Holy Spirit, who redeemed all things.

 But let this also be your care, that, since, as you know, the excellent
 preacher entirely forbids a novice to accede to the ruling position of
 priesthood, you suffer no one to be consecrated bishop from being a
 layman.  For what sort of master will he be who has not been a
 disciple?  Or what kind of leadership can he supply to the Lord's flock
 who has not been previously subjected to a shepherd's discipline?  If,
 then, any one's life should be such as to shew him worthy of being
 promoted to this order, he ought first to serve in the ministry of the
 Church, to the end that by the experience of long practice he may see
 what to imitate, and learn what to teach; lest perchance the newness of
 his charge bear not the burden of government, and occasion of ruin
 arise from the immaturity of his promotion.

 Moreover, how your Excellency conducted yourself towards our brother
 and fellow-bishop Augustine, and how great charity, through the
 inspiration of God, you bestowed upon him, we have learnt from the
 relation of divers of the faithful; for which we return thanks, and
 implore the mercy of Divine Power to keep you here under its
 protection, and cause you to reign, as among men, so also after a
 course of many years in life eternal.

 Furthermore, those whom the error of the schismatics severs from the
 unity of the Church, strive ye, for your own reward, to recall to the
 unity of concord.  For on no other ground are they enveloped so far in
 the blindness of their ignorance but that they may escape
 ecclesiastical discipline, and have licence to live perversely as they
 please, since they understand neither what they defend nor what they
 follow.  But as for us, we venerate and follow in all respects the
 synod of Chalcedon, from which they take to themselves the clouds of a
 pestiferous excuse; and, if any one should presume to diminish or add
 anything with regard to the faith thereof, we anathematize him.  But
 they are so impregnated with the taint of error that, giving credence
 to their own ignorance, they reject the universal Church, and all the
 four patriarchs, not with reason, but with malicious intent; so that he
 who was sent to us by your Excellency, when he was asked by us why he
 stood separated from the universal Church, acknowledged that he did not
 know.  But neither what he said nor what else he gave ear to had he the
 power of knowing.  As to this also we no less exhort you, that you
 should restrain the rest of your subjects under the control of
 discipline from sacrificing to idols, being worshippers of trees, or
 exhibiting sacrilegious sacrifices of the heads of animals; seeing that
 it has come to our ears that many of the Christians both resort to the
 churches and also (horrible to relate!) do not give up their
 worshipping of demons.  But, since these things are altogether
 displeasing to our God, and He does not own divided minds, provide ye
 for their being salubriously restrained from these unlawful practices;
 lest (God forbid it!) the sacrament of holy baptism serve not for their
 rescue, but for their punishment.  If therefore you know of any that
 are violent, if of any that are adulterers, if of any that are thieves,
 or bent on other wicked deeds, make haste to appease God by their
 correction, that He may not bring upon you the scourge due to
 unfaithful races, which, so far as we see, is already lifted up for the
 punishment of many nations; lest, if--as we do not believe will be the
 case--the wrath of Divine vengeance should be kindled by the doings of
 the wicked, the plague of war should destroy the sinners whom the
 precepts of God recall not to the way of rectitude.  We must, then,
 needs make haste, with all earnestness and continual prayer, to betake
 ourselves to the mercy of our Redeemer, wherein there is a place of
 safety and great security for all.  For whoso steadfastly abides there,
 him danger crushes not, nor fear alarms.

 We have sent the volume, as you desired us by letter, to our aforesaid
 most beloved son Candidus the presbyter, to be offered to you, being in
 haste to be sharers in your good purpose.  May Almighty God keep you
 under His protection, and by His outstretched arm defend your kingdom
 from unbelieving nations, and bring you after long courses of years to
 eternal joys.  Given in the month of October, the first indiction [24]
 .

 [19] Four Vatican mss. and Cod. Colbert give a date to this epistle,
 viz. "mense Octobris, indictione prima," i.e. Oct. a.d. 597.  The
 Benedictine editors assign it, from certain internal evidence to the
 following year, and have therefore placed it in this ninth Book of the
 Epistles.  There is this additional reason for placing it later than
 a.d. 597.  Its first purpose is to reply to a request from queen
 Brunechild that a pallium should be sent to Syagrius, bishop of
 Augustodunum (Autun).  Now Autun was in the kingdom of Burgundy, which
 was reigned over at that time by Brunechild's younger grandson
 Theoderic II.  But it was not till the year 599, according to Gregory
 of Tours (Hist. Franc. xi. 19), that she had been expelled from the
 kingdom of Austrasia, and taken up her residence with Theoderic.  She
 had previously been guardian of her elder grandson Theodebert II., who
 reigned over Austrasia, having his capital at Metz, and she was more
 likely to have sought the pall for the bishop Autun after she had
 become the virtual potentate of the Burgundian kingdom than previously;
 and indeed she seems to be evidently addressed as ruling the country to
 which the letter refers.  The date assigned to this epistle by the
 Benedictine editors, viz. Indiction 2 (i.e. from September 598 to
 September 599), is consistent with these circumstances.

 [20] Bishop of Augustodunum (Autun), one of the bishops to whom
 Augustine had carried commendatory letters from Gregory on his progress
 to England (VI. 54).  The see of Augustodunum was under the
 metropolitan jurisdiction of Lugdunum (Lyons); and Brunechild, for some
 reason, appears to have desired to have it invested with peculiar
 dignity.  She afterwards founded a church, a nunnery, and a hospital
 there (see XIII. 6).  It is to be observed that the sending of the
 pallium to a bishop did not in all cases imply metropolitan
 jurisdiction.  It did not in this case.  See Epistle CVIII. to
 Syagrius, in which he is told that the Metropolitan of Lyons was to
 retain his position unimpaired; only that the bishop of Autun was
 thenceforth to be next to him in place and dignity.

 [21] We observe here the requirement of the Emperor's consent for
 sending the Pallium to a see not previously thus dignified.

 [22] It seems not to be known with any certainty what the title
 Regionarius, thus used absolutely, implies, though no doubt some
 honourable function.  John the Deacon (Vit. S. Gregor.) speaks of
 Gregory's father Gordianus, a layman, as having been a Regionarius.  As
 to Notarii regionarii, Sub-diaconi regionarii, Defensores regionarii,
 cf. VIII. 14.

 [23] Meaning those who were out of communion with Rome with regard to
 "The Three Chapters," see I. 16, note 3.  There were some in Gaul, as
 well as in Istria and elsewhere, who long refused assent to the
 condemnation of the Chapters by the fifth Council.  Cf. IV. 2, 3, 4,
 38, 39; XVI. 12.

 [24] See note 1.

 Epistle XII.

 To John, Bishop of Syracuse.

 Gregory to John, &c.

 One coming from Sicily has told me that some friends of his, whether
 Greeks or Latins I know not, as though moved by zeal for the holy Roman
 Church, murmur about my arrangements [i.e. of divine service], saying,
 How can he be arranging so as to keep the Constantinopolitan Church in
 check, when in all respects he follows her usage?  And, when I said to
 him, What usages of hers do we follow? he replied; you have caused
 Alleluia to be said at mass out of the season of Pentecost [25] ; you
 have made appointment for the sub-deacons to proceed disrobed [26] ,
 and for Kyrie Eleison to be said, and for the Lord's Prayer to be said
 immediately after the canon.  To him I replied, that in none of these
 things have we followed another Church.

 For, as to our custom here of saying the Alleluia, it is said to be
 derived from the Church of Jerusalem by the tradition of the blessed
 Jerome in the time of pope Damasus of blessed memory; and accordingly
 in this matter we have rather curtailed the former usage which had been
 handed down to us here from the Greeks.

 Further, as to my having caused the sub-deacons to proceed disrobed,
 this was the ancient usage of the Church.  But it pleased one of our
 pontiffs, I know not which, to order them to proceed in linen tunics.
 For have your Churches in any respect received their tradition from the
 Greeks?  Whence, then, have they at the present day the custom of the
 subdeacons proceeding in linen tunics, except that they have received
 it from their mother, the Roman Church?

 Further, we neither have said nor now say the Kyrie Eleison, as it is
 said by the Greeks:  for among the Greeks all say it together; but with
 us it is said by the clerks, and responded to by the people; and as
 often as it is said, Christe Eleison is said also, which is not said at
 all among the Greeks.  Further, in daily masses we suppress some things
 that are usually said, and say only Kyrie Eleison, Christe Eleison, so
 as to devote ourselves a little longer to these words of deprecation.
 But the Lord's prayer (orationem Dominicam) we say immediately after
 the prayer (mox post precem) for this reason, that it was the custom of
 the apostles to consecrate the host of oblation to (ad) that same
 prayer only.  And it seemed to me very unsuitable that we should say
 over the oblation a prayer which a scholastic had composed, and should
 not say the very prayer [27] which our Redeemer composed over His body
 and blood [28] .  But also the Lord's Prayer among the Greeks is said
 by all the people, but with us by the priest alone.  Wherein, then,
 have we followed the usages of the Greeks, in that we have either
 amended our own old ones or appointed new and profitable ones, in
 which, however, we are not shewn to be imitating others?  Wherefore,
 let your Charity, when an occasion presents itself, proceed to the
 Church of Catana; or in the Church of Syracuse teach those who you
 believe or understand may possibly be murmuring with respect to this
 matter, holding a conference there, as though for a different purpose,
 and so desist not from instructing them.  For as to what they say about
 the Church of Constantinople, who can doubt that it is subject to the
 Apostolic See, as both the most pious lord the emperor and our brother
 the bishop of that city continually acknowledge?  Yet, if this or any
 other Church has anything that is good, I am prepared in what is good
 to imitate even my inferiors, while prohibiting them from things
 unlawful.  For he is foolish who thinks himself first in such a way as
 to scorn to learn whatever good things he may see.

 [25] I.e. the fifty days between Easter and Whitsuntide.  It appears
 from St. Augustine (see Migne, Patrolog. note in loc.) that it was the
 custom everywhere to sing the Alleluia between Easter and Pentecost,
 but that its use at other times varied.  The point of what Gregory here
 says seems to be that the Roman custom of saying it at other times had
 not been derived from the Greeks; but that, on the contrary, it was
 said at other times less frequently at Rome than among the Greeks.

 [26] Procedere spoliatos:  i.e. to proceed to the altar for celebration
 without linen tunics on.  The verb procedere and the noun processio are
 commonly used by Gregory and others in the special sense of approaching
 the altar for mass.  It would seem from what is here said that the
 subdeacons at mass had not been originally distinguished by a vestment,
 and that some pope before Gregory had first vested them at Rome.  He,
 as further appears, had disrobed the subdeacons; and his point here is,
 that his doing so was not an imitation of the Greeks, but a return to
 ancient usage.

 [27] The word found here is traditionem:  but, because of the undoubted
 reference to the Lord's Prayer (dominica oratio), and of the verb
 composuit, it is conjectured that the reading ought to be orationem.

 [28] This whole passage in the original is;--"Orationem vero Dominicam
 idcirco mox post precem dicimus, quia mos apostolorum fuit ut ad ipsam
 solummodo orationem oblationis hostiam consecrarent.  Et valde mihi
 inconveniens visum est ut precem quam scholasticus composuerat super
 oblationem diceremus, et ipsam traditionem (Qy. for orationem?) quam
 Redemptor noster composuit super ejus corpus et sanguinem non
 diceremus."  It is to be observed that, for lack of suitable words in
 English, the translation does not retain the distinction in the
 original between precem and orationem, the former denoting the prayer
 of consecration in the Canon, exclusive of the Lord's Prayer, the
 latter the Lord's Prayer itself, which Gregory appended to it.  By the
 scholasticus, to whom he assigns the composition of the former, is
 meant apparently the liturgist, whoever he might be, who had compiled
 the Canon of the Mass.  It would thus seem that, according to the Roman
 use before the time of Gregory, the Lord's Prayer did not occur at all
 "over the oblation," or "over the Body and Blood," i.e. (as the
 expression must be taken to mean) between consecration and
 distribution, though, of course, it may have been used before or
 after.  Such omission was undoubtedly peculiar.  Among other
 authorities for the general usage, S. Augustine (Ep. CXLIX. ad Paulin.)
 affirms that nearly every Church concludes the whole petition (i.e. the
 prayer of consecration of which he has been speaking) with the Lord's
 Prayer:--"Quam totam petitionem fere omnis Ecclesia Oratione Dominica
 concludit."  In saying "fere omnis," he may possibly have had the Roman
 Church in view.  As to what is said by S. Gregory of the custom of the
 Apostles, the most obvious meaning of which is, that they used no
 prayer of consecration but the Lord's Prayer, we have no means of
 ascertaining whence he derived this tradition, or what the value of it
 might be.  It does not, of course, imply that the words of institution
 were not said over the elements by the Apostles, but only that they
 used no other prayer for the purpose of consecration.  Ways have been
 suggested, though not satisfactory, for evading the apparent meaning of
 the statement.

 Epistle XVII.

 To Demetrian and Valerian.

 Gregory to Demetrian and Valerian, clerks of Firmum (Fermo).

 Both the ordinances of the sacred canons and legal authority permit
 that ecclesiastical property may be lawfully expended for the
 redemption of captives.  And so, since we are informed by you that,
 nearly eighteen years ago, the most reverend Fabius, late bishop of the
 Church of Firmum, paid to the enemy eleven pounds of the silver of that
 Church for your redemption, and that of your father Passivus, now our
 brother and fellow-bishop, but then a clerk, and also that of your
 mother, and that you have some fear on this account, lest what was
 given should at any time be sought to be recovered from you;--we have
 thought fit by the authority of this precept to remove your suspicion,
 ordaining that you and your heirs shall henceforth sustain no annoyance
 for recovery of the debt, and that no process shall be instituted
 against you by any one; since the rule of equity requires that what has
 been paid with a pious intent should not be attended with burden or
 distress to those who have been redeemed.

 Epistle XVIII.

 To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).

 Gregory to Romanus, &c.

 Our care for the purpose before us prompts us to commit the looking
 after ecclesiastical interests to active persons.  And so, since we
 have found thee, Romanus, to have been a trusty and diligent guardian,
 we have thought fit to commit to thy government from this present
 second indiction the patrimony of the holy Roman Church, which by the
 mercy of God we serve, lying in the parts about Syracuse, Catana,
 Agrigentum, and Mile (partibus Milensibus).  Hence it is needful that
 thou go thither immediately, that, in consideration of the divine
 judgment, and in memory also of our admonition, thou mayest study to
 acquit thyself so efficiently and faithfully that thou mayest be found
 to incur no risk for negligence or fraud, which God forbid should be
 the case.  But act thus all the more in order that thou mayest be
 commended to divine grace for thy faithfulness and industry.  Moreover,
 we have sent orders according to custom to the familia of the same
 patrimony [29] , that there may be nothing to hinder thy carrying out
 what has been enjoined thee.

 [29] See the following Epistle XIX.  For the meaning of familiahere see
 note 3 to the same epistle.  Gregory sent at the same time letters
 (which have not been translated) to three influential laymen in Sicily,
 desiring them to assist and support Romanus in the exercise of his
 authority.  Four other letters (23, 24, 26, 27) are translated, as
 intimating the kind of duties devolving on Romanus in connexion with
 his government of the Patrimony.

 Epistle XIX.

 To the Husbandmen (Colonos) of the Syracusan Patrimony [30] .

 Gregory to the Coloni, &c.

 I would have you know that we have arranged for you to be put under the
 care of our guardian (defensoris).  And accordingly we order you to
 obey him without any reluctance in what he may see fit to do, and
 enjoin on you to be done, for the advantage of the Church.  We have
 given him such power as to enable him to inflict strict punishment on
 those who may attempt to be disobedient or contumacious.  And we have
 likewise charged him that he delay not with instant attention to
 recover to ecclesiastical jurisdiction any slaves who are in hiding
 outside their limits, or any one by whom boundaries have been invaded.
 For know that he has been warned on his peril, that he presume not ever
 under any kind of excuse to do any wrong or robbery in regard to what
 belongs to others.

 [30] For the meaning of Coloni, see I. 44.  The body of them is called
 the familia of the patrimony in the preceding epistle to Romanus (Ep.
 XVIII.).

 Epistle XXIII.

 To John, Bishop of Syracuse.

 Gregory to John, &c.

 Our son the glorious exconsul Leontius has made a serious complaint to
 us of our brother and fellow-bishop Leo; and his complaint has
 altogether disturbed us, since a bishop ought not to have acted so
 precipitately and lightly.  This case we have committed, to be
 thoroughly enquired into, to our Guardian (defensoris) Romanus when he
 comes to you.  Further, the messenger who was sent by him (i.e. by
 Leontius) complains of your Fraternity, that in the defence of the
 illustrious physician Archelaus the interests of our brother and
 fellow-bishop, the Metropolitan Domitian, suffer damage [31] .  And
 indeed your Fraternity ought justly to protect your sons, or it may be
 in this case the interests of holy Church, and to give no occasion for
 evil-speaking to adversaries.  I doubt not, however, even while thus
 speaking, that you do take heed to this:  yet we have enjoined on the
 same Romanus, when he comes to you, to arrange with you what is right
 with regard to this case also.

 [31] This Domitian was bishop of Melitina and Metropolitan of Armenia,
 being a relation of the Emperors, see III. 67.  The physician Archelaus
 is commended in an epistle not translated (V. 32) to Cyprian, the
 previous rector patrimonii in Sicily, for protection in some question
 about property.

 Epistle XXIV.

 To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).

 Gregory to Romanus, &c.

 Our son Theodosius, abbot of the Monastery founded by the late
 Patrician Liberius in Campania, is known to have intimated to us that
 the late illustrious lady Rustica about one and twenty years ago, in
 the will that she made, appointed in the first place Felix, her
 husband, to be her heir, and delegated to him the foundation of a
 Monastery in Sicily; but on this condition,--that if he should not
 within the space of one year pay all the legacies bequeathed to her
 freedmen, or establish the aforesaid Monastery as she desired, then the
 holy Roman Church should have undisputed claim to the portion which she
 was understood to have in the farm of Cumas, and that it should lend
 aid for paying the above legacies, and for the construction of the said
 monastery.  Hence, seeing that, as is said, the bequeathed property has
 not so far been made over in full to this same monastery, and some part
 of the possession is up to this time detained by her heirs, let thy
 Experience thoroughly enquire into and examine the case.  And in the
 first place indeed, if under the conditions of the will any heirship
 comes in wherein our Church may have a plea, we desire thee to
 investigate and clearly ascertain it, and act for the advantage of the
 poor, as the order of the business may require; and then to be
 instantly solicitous for the due establishment of that cell, and the
 recovery of the bequeathed property, to the end that the pious desire
 of the testatrix may be fulfilled in both respects, and the unjust
 detainers of the property may learn from just loss the guilt of their
 undue retention.  With all vivacity, then, we desire thee both to
 enquire into this case and, with the help of the Lord, to bring it to
 an issue, that the pious devotion of the ordainer may at length take
 effect.  But we desire thee also, as far as justice allows, to succour
 this monastery in all ways, that lay persons who ought to have rendered
 the succour of their assistance may not, as is asserted, have power of
 doing hurt in the name of the founder.

 Epistle XXVI.

 To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).

 Gregory to Romanus, &c.

 Although the law with reason allows not things that come into
 possession of the Church to be alienated, yet sometimes the strictness
 of the rule should be moderated, where regard to mercy invites to it,
 especially when there is so great a quantity that the giver is not
 burdened, and the poverty of the receiver is considerably relieved.
 And so, inasmuch as Stephania, the bearer of these presents, having
 come hither with her little son Calixenus (whom she asserts that she
 bare to her late husband Peter, saying also that she has laboured under
 extreme poverty), demanded of us with supplication and tears that we
 should cause to be restored to the same Calixenus the possession of a
 house in the city of Catana, which Ammonia, her late mother-in-law, the
 grandmother of Calixenus, had offered by title of gift to our Church;
 asserting that the said Ammonia had not power to alienate it, and that
 it belonged altogether to the aforesaid Calixenus, her son; which
 assertion our most beloved son Cyprian, the deacon, who was acquainted
 with the case, contradicted, saying that the complaint of the aforesaid
 woman had not justice to go on, and that she could not reasonably claim
 or seek to recover that house in the name of her son; but, lest we
 should seem to leave the tears of the above named woman without effect,
 and to follow the way of rigour rather than embrace the plea of pity,
 we command thee by this precept to restore the said house to the
 above-named Calixenus, together with Ammonia's deed of gift with
 respect to this same house, which is known to be there in
 Sicily;--since, as we have said, it is better in doubtful cases not to
 execute strictness, but rather to be inclined to the side of benignity,
 especially when by the cession of a small matter the Church is not
 burdened, and succour is mercifully given to a poor orphan.

 Given in the month of November, Indiction 2.

 Epistle XXVII.

 To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).

 Gregory to Romanus, &c.

 It has come to our ears that certain men, having altogether too little
 discernment, desire us to become implicated in their risks, and wish to
 be so defended by ecclesiastical persons, that the ecclesiastical
 persons themselves may be bound by their guilt.  Wherefore I admonish
 thee by this present injunction, and through thee our brother and
 fellow-bishop, the lord John, or others whom it may concern, that with
 regard to ecclesiastical patronage of people (whether you should have
 received letters from me, or none should have been addressed to you),
 you should bestow it with such moderation that, if any have been
 implicated in public peculations, they may not appear to be unjustly
 defended by us, lest we should in any way transfer to ourselves, by
 venturing on indiscreet defence, the ill repute of evil doers:  but so
 far as becomes the Church, by admonishing and applying the word of
 intercession, succour whom you can; so that you may both give them aid,
 and not stain the repute of holy Church.

 Epistle XXXIII.

 To Andrew [32] .

 Gregory to Andrew.

 On hearing that your Glory had been severely afflicted with grief and
 sickness, I condoled with you exceedingly.  But learning presently that
 the malady had entirely left you, I soon turned my sorrow into joy, and
 returned great thanks to Almighty God for that He smote that He might
 heal, afflicted that He might lead to true joys.  For hence it is
 written, Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son
 whom he receiveth (Heb. xii. 6).  Hence the Truth in person says, My
 Father is the husbandman, and every branch in me that beareth not
 fruit, he will take away; but every branch that beareth fruit, he will
 purge it, that it may bring forth more fruit (John xv. 1, 2).  For the
 unfruitful branch is taken away, because a sinner is utterly rooted
 up.  But the fruitful branch is said to be purged, because it is cut
 down by discipline that it may be brought to more abundant grace.  For
 so the grain of the ears of corn, beaten with the threshing instrument,
 is stript of its awn and chaff.  So the olives, pressed in the
 oil-press, flow forth into the fatness of oil.  So the bunches of
 grapes pounded with the heels, liquify into wine.  Rejoice, therefore,
 good man, for that in this thy scourge and this thy advancement thou
 seest that thou art loved by the Eternal Judge.

 Furthermore, I beg that my daughter Gloriosa, your wife, be greeted in
 my name.  Now may Almighty God keep you under heavenly protection, and
 comfort you both now with abundance of gifts and hereafter with the
 retribution of reward.

 [32] Andreas Scholasticus, so addressed V. 48.

 Epistle XXXVI.

 To Fortunatus, Bishop of Neapolis (Naples).

 Gregory to Fortunatus, &c.

 Having learnt what zeal inflames your Fraternity in behalf of Christian
 slaves whom Jews buy from the territories of Gaul, we apprize you that
 your solicitude has so pleased us that it is also our own deliberate
 judgment that they should be inhibited from traffic of this kind.  But
 we find from Basilius, the Hebrew, who has come here with other Jews,
 that such purchase is enjoined on them by divers judges of the
 republic, and that Christians along with pagans come to be thus
 procured.  Hence it has been necessary for the business to be adjusted
 with such cautious arrangement that neither they who give such orders
 should be thwarted, nor those who say they obey them against their will
 should bear any expense unjustly.  Accordingly, let your Fraternity
 with watchful care provide for this being observed and kept to; that,
 when they [i.e. the Jewish dealers] return from the aforesaid province,
 Christian slaves who may happen to be brought by them be either handed
 over to those who gave the order, or at all events sold to Christian
 purchasers within forty days.  And after the completion of this number
 of days let none of them in any way whatever remain in the hands of the
 Jews.  But, should any of these slaves perchance fall into such
 sickness that they cannot be sold within the appointed days, care is to
 be taken that, when they are restored to their former health, they be
 by all means disposed of as aforesaid.  For it is not fit that any
 should incur loss for a transaction that is free from blame.  But
 since, as often as anything new is ordained, it is usual so to lay down
 the rule for the future as not to condemn the past in large costs, if
 any slaves have remained in their hands from the purchase of the
 previous year, or have been recently taken away from them by you, let
 them have liberty to dispose of them while they are with you.  So may
 there be no possibility of their incurring loss for what they did in
 ignorance before the prohibition, such as it is right they should
 sustain after being forbidden.

 Further, it has been reported to us that the above-named Basilius
 wishes to concede to his sons, who by the mercy of God are Christians,
 certain slaves, under the title of a gift, with the view that, under
 cover of the opportunity thus afforded, they may serve him as their
 master all but in name; and that, if after this any should perchance
 have believed that they might fly to the Church for refuge in order to
 become Christians, they may not be reclaimed to freedom, but to the
 dominion of those to whom they had before been given.  In this matter
 it befits your Fraternity to keep becoming watch.  And, if he should
 wish to give any slaves to his sons, that all occasion of fraud may be
 removed, let them by all means become Christians, and let them not
 remain in his house; but, when circumstances may require that he should
 have their services, let them be commanded to render him what, even in
 any case, from his sons, and for God's sake, it is fitting should be
 supplied to him.

 Epistle XLI.

 To Julianus, Scribo [33] .

 Gregory to Julianus, &c.

 If in secular offices order and the discipline handed down by our
 ancestors is observed, who may bear to see ecclesiastical order
 confounded, to disregard such things when heard of, and postpone their
 amendment by improperly condoning them?  And indeed you do well to love
 charity and to persuade to concord.  But, since we are compelled by
 consideration of our position, and for God's sake, by no means to leave
 uninvestigated the things that have come to our knowledge, we shall
 take care, when Maximus comes, to require a strict account from him of
 the things that have been said about him.  And we trust in the
 guardianship of our Creator, that we shall not be turned aside by
 either the favour or the fault of any man from maintenance of the
 canons and the straight path of equity, but willingly observe what is
 agreeable to reason.  For if (which God forbid) we neglect
 ecclesiastical solicitude and vigour, indolence destroys discipline,
 and certainly harm will be done to the souls of the faithful, while
 they see such examples set them by their pastors.  But with regard to
 your saying in your letter that the good will of the palace and the
 love of the people are not alienated from him, this circumstance does
 not recall us from our zeal for justice, nor shall it cause our
 determination to enquire into the truth to fail through sin of ours.
 Every one, then, should strive, magnificent son, to conciliate to
 himself the love of God.  For without divine favour what can I say that
 human love will do for us hereafter, when even among ourselves it harms
 us the more?

 [33] Cf. II. 32, note 7; V. 30, note 8.  On the subject of the epistle,
 see III. 47, note 2.

 Epistle XLII.

 To Agilulph, King of the Lombards.

 Gregory to Agilulph, &c.

 We return thanks to your Excellency, that, hearkening to our petition,
 you have concluded such a peace as may be of advantage to both parties,
 as we had confidence in you that you would.  On this account we greatly
 commend your prudence and goodness, since in choosing peace you have
 shewn that you love God, who is its author.  For, if unhappily peace
 had not been made, what else could have ensued but, with sin and danger
 on both sides, the shedding of the blood of miserable peasants [34] ,
 whose labour profits both?  But, that we may feel the advantage to us
 of this peace, as it has been made by you, we beg you, greeting you
 with paternal charity, that as often as opportunity offers itself, you
 would enjoin by letters on your dukes in divers places, and especially
 those who are constituted in these parts, that they keep this peace
 inviolate, as has been promised, and not seek for themselves any
 occasions whence either any contention or any ill-feeling may arise, to
 the end that we may be able to give thanks still more for your good
 will.  We received the bearers of these presents, as being in very
 truth your own people, with the affection that was becoming, since it
 was right both to receive and dismiss with charity men who are wise,
 and who announced that by the favour of God peace had been concluded.

 [34] Rusticorum.  Cf. I. 44, p. 88, note 1, and Prolegom., p. viii.

 Epistle XLIII.

 To Theodelinda, Queen of the Lombards.

 Gregory to Theodelinda, &c.

 How your Excellency has laboured earnestly and kindly, as is your wont,
 for the conclusion of peace we have learnt from the report of our son,
 the abbot Probus.  Nor indeed was it otherwise to be expected of your
 Christianity than that you would in all ways skew your assiduity and
 goodness in the cause of peace.  Wherefore we give thanks to Almighty
 God, who so rules your heart with His loving-kindness that, as He has
 given you a right faith, so He also grants you to work always what is
 pleasing in His sight.  For you may be assured, most excellent
 daughter, that for the saving of so much bloodshed on both sides you
 have acquired no small reward.  On this account, returning thanks for
 your goodwill, we implore the mercy of our God to repay you with good
 in body and soul here and in the world to come.

 Moreover, greeting you with fatherly affection, we exhort you so to
 deal with your most excellent consort that he may not reject the
 alliance of the Christian republic.  For, as I believe you know
 yourself, it is in many ways profitable that he should be inclined to
 betake himself to its friendship.  Do you then, after your manner,
 always strive for what tends to goodwill and conciliation between the
 parties, and labour wherever an occasion of reaping a reward presents
 itself, that you may commend your good deeds the more before the eyes
 of Almighty God.

 Epistle XLIX.

 To Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch [35] .

 Gregory to Anastasius, &c.

 I received the letters of thy Fraternity, rightly holding fast the
 profession of the faith; and I returned great thanks to Almighty God,
 who, when the shepherds of His flock are changed, still, even after
 such change, guards the faith which He once delivered to the holy
 Fathers.  Now the excellent preacher says, Other foundation can no man
 lay than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus (1 Cor. iii. 2).
 Whosoever, then, with love of God and his neighbour, holds firmly the
 faith that is in Christ, he has laid for himself the same Jesus Christ,
 the Son of God and man, as a foundation.  It is to be hoped therefore
 that, where Christ is the foundation, the edifice also of good works
 may follow.  The Truth also in person says, He that entereth not by the
 door into the sheep-fold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a
 thief and a robber; but he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd
 of the sheep (Joh. x. 1).  And a little after He adds, I am the door.
 He, then, enters into the sheep-fold through the door who enters
 through Christ.  And he enters through Christ who thinks and preaches
 what is true concerning the same Creator and Redeemer of the human
 race, and holds fast what he preaches; who takes upon him the topmost
 place of rule for the office of carrying a burden, not for the desire
 of the glory of transitory dignity.  He also watches wisely over the
 sheep-fold of which he has taken charge, lest either perverse men tear
 the sheep of God by speaking froward things, or malignant spirits
 ravage them by persuading to vicious delights.

 Of a truth we remember how the blessed Jacob, who had served long for
 his wives, said, This twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and
 thy she goats have not been barren.  The rams of thy flock have I not
 eaten, nor shewn unto thee that which had been seized by a beast.  I
 made good every loss; whatever had been lost by theft, from me didst
 thou require it.  By day and night I was consumed by drought and frost;
 sleep fled from mine eyes (Gen. xxxi. 38).  If, then, he who feeds the
 sheep of Laban labours and watches thus, on what labour, on what
 watches, should he be intent who feeds the sheep of God?  But in all
 this let Him instruct us who for our sake became a man, who vouchsafed
 to become what he had made.  May He pour both into my weakness and into
 thy charity the spirit of His own love, and in all carefulness and
 watchfulness of circumspection open the eye of our heart.

 But for men of a right faith being advanced to sacred orders thanks are
 to be paid without cease to the same Almighty God, and prayer ever made
 for the life of our most pious and most Christian lord the Emperor, and
 for his most tranquil spouse, and their most gentle offspring, in whose
 times the mouths of heretics are silent; since, though their hearts
 seethe with the madness of perverse thought, yet in the time of the
 Catholic Emperor they presume not to speak out the bad things which
 they think.

 Furthermore, in speaking of your maintenance of the holy councils, your
 Fraternity declares that you maintain the first holy Ephesine synod.
 But, seeing that from the account given in an heretical document which
 has been sent me from the royal city, I have found that, according to
 it, certain Catholic positions had been censured along with heretical
 ones, because some suppose that to have been the first Ephesine synod
 which was got together at some time or other by the heretics in the
 same city, it is altogether necessary that your Charity should apply to
 the Churches of Alexandria and Antioch for the acts of this synod, and
 find how the matter really stands.  Or, if you please, we will send you
 hence what we have here, preserved from of old in our archives.  For
 that synod which was held under pretence of being the first Ephesine
 asserts that certain positions submitted to it were approved, which are
 the declared tenets of Coelestius and Pelagius.  And, Coelestius and
 Pelagius having been condemned in that synod, how could those positions
 be approved, the authors of which were condemned [36] ?

 Further, since it has come to our ears that in the Churches of the East
 no one attains to a sacred order except by giving of bribes, if your
 Fraternity finds it to be so, offer your first oblation to Almighty God
 by restraining in the Churches subject to you the error of simoniacal
 heresy.  For, to pass over other considerations, what manner of men can
 they be in sacred orders who are raised to them not by merit, but by
 bribes?  May Almighty God guard thy Love with heavenly grace, and grant
 to you to carry with you to eternal joys multiplied fruit and
 overflowing measure from those who are committed to your charge.

 [35] This was the younger Anastasius, who succeeded the patriarch of
 the same name to whom previous epistles are addressed.

 [36] Cf. VI. 14.

 Epistle LV.

 To Fantinus, Guardian (Defensorem), of Panormus (Palermo).

 Gregory to Fantinus, &c.

 A little time ago we wrote to Victor, our brother and fellow-bishop,
 that--inasmuch as certain of the Jews have complained in a petition
 presented to us that synagogues with their guest-chambers, situated in
 the city of Panormus, had by him been unreasonably taken possession
 of--he should keep aloof from their congregation until it could be
 ascertained whether this thing had been justly done, lest perchance
 injury should appear to have been alleged by them of their own mere
 will.  And indeed, having regard to his priestly office, we could not
 easily believe that our aforesaid brother had done anything
 unsuitably.  But, since we find from the report of Salarius, our
 notary, who was afterwards there, that there had been no reasonable
 cause for taking possession of those synagogues, and that they had been
 unadvisedly and rashly consecrated, we therefore enjoin thy Experience,
 since what has been once consecrated cannot any more be restored to the
 Jews, that it be thy care to see that our aforesaid brother and
 fellow-bishop pay the price at which our sons, the glorious Venantius
 the Patrician, and Urbicus the Abbot, may value the synagogues
 themselves with the guest-chambers that are under them or annexed to
 their walls, and the gardens thereto adjoining; that so what he has
 caused to be taken possession of may belong to the Church, and they may
 in no wise be oppressed, or suffer any injustice.  Moreover, let books
 or ornaments that have been abstracted be in like manner sought for.
 And, if any have been manifestly taken away, we desire them also to be
 restored without any ambiguity.  For, as there ought to be no licence
 for them, as we have ourselves already written, to do anything in their
 synagogues beyond what is decreed by law, so neither damage nor any
 cost ought to be brought upon them contrary to justice and equity.

 Epistle LVIII.

 To Martin, Scholasticus [37] .

 Gregory to Martin, &c.

 Seeing that questions arising in civil affairs need, as is known to thy
 Greatness, very full enquiry, let thy wisdom consider with what care
 and vigilance the causes of bishops should be investigated.  But, in
 the letter which thou hast sent us by the bearer of these presents on
 the questions with respect to which thou wert sent to us by our brother
 and fellow-bishop Crementius, thou hast given only a superficial
 account of them, and hast been entirely silent about their root.  But,
 had their origin and intrinsic character been manifest to us, we should
 have known what should be decided about them, and would then settle the
 mind of our aforesaid brother by a plain and suitable reply.  This,
 however, is altogether displeasing to us, that thou givest us to
 understand that some of the bishops have gone to the court [38] without
 letters from their primate, and that they hold unlawful assemblies.
 But since, as we have before said, the origin and nature of the
 questions are entirely unknown to us, we cannot pronounce anything
 definitely, lest, as would be very reprehensible, we should seem to
 pass sentence about things imperfectly known.  Hence it was very
 needful that, for our complete information, thy Greatness should have
 proceeded hither to reply to our questions during the time of thy
 lingering in Sicily.  Nevertheless, now that thou hast seen our brother
 and fellow-bishop John, we believe that in him thou hast seen us also.
 And so since he has been at pains himself also to write to us about the
 same questions, we have written in reply to him what seemed to us
 right.  And, since he is a priest of ripe and cautious judgment, if you
 are willing to treat with him on the questions which he has been
 commissioned to entertain, we are sure that you will find in him what
 is both advantageous and reasonable.

 [37] On the designation Scholasticus, see II. 32, note 2; V. 36, note
 9.  The occasion of this and the following epistle appears to have been
 as follows.  Crementius, who was at that time primate of the province
 of Bizacia in Africa, had been accused by other African bishops.  The
 Emperor, appealed to by them, had desired Gregory to take cognizance of
 the case; but his interference had been objected to in Africa, where,
 as appears elsewhere, there was still jealousy of the claims of the
 Roman See.  Gregory had commissioned John, Bishop of Syracuse, to
 investigate the matter, and to him Crementius (who now
 professed--though Gregory doubted his sincerity--to defer to the Roman
 bishop) had sent the lawyer Martin to state his case.  The latter seems
 to have been directed to go on to Rome too, but had not done so.  Both
 Martin and John had subsequently written to Gregory on the subject, and
 to them he now replies.  Some three years seem to have afterwards
 elapsed without anything more being done:  see XII. 32, where Gregory
 urges the bishops of the province to investigate the old charges
 against their primate in synod:  but with what result does not further
 appear.

 [38] Ad comitatum; referring to the suffragans of Crementius having
 complained to the Emperor against their primate.

 Epistle LIX.

 To John, Bishop of Syracuse [39] .

 Gregory to John, &c.

 I have received your Fraternity's letter, wherein you inform me that
 the most eloquent Martin has come from the African province and
 communicated something to you privately.  And indeed your Fraternity,
 as often as you find occasion, ceases not to shew your love towards the
 blessed apostle Peter.  Wherefore we give thanks to Almighty God, that
 where you are, there we are not found absent.  Nevertheless, your
 Holiness is not yet fully cognizant of the case in hand.  For the
 Byzacene primate [40] had been accused on some charge, and the most
 pious Emperor wished him to be judged by us according to canonical
 ordinance.  But then, on the receipt of ten pounds of gold, Theodorus
 the magister militum opposed this being done.  Yet the most pious
 Emperor admonished us to commission some one, and do whatever was
 canonical.  But, seeing the contrarieties of men, we have been
 unwilling to decide this case.  Now, moreover, this same primate says
 something about his own intention.  And it is exceedingly doubtful
 whether he says such things to us sincerely, or in fact because he is
 being attacked by his fellow-bishops:  for, as to his saying that he is
 subject to the Apostolic See, if any fault is found in bishops, I know
 not what bishop is not subject to it.  But when no fault requires it to
 be otherwise, all according to the principle of humility are equal.
 Nevertheless, do you speak with the aforesaid most eloquent Martin as
 seems good to your Fraternity.  For it is for you to consider what
 should be done; and we have replied to you briefly on the case, because
 we ought not to believe indiscriminately men that are even unknown to
 us.  If, however, you, who see him before you in person, are of opinion
 that anything more definite should be said to him, we commit this to
 your Charity, being sure of your love in the grace of Almighty God.
 And what you do regard without doubt as having been done by us.

 [39] See preceding epistle, note 1.  On this John's election to the See
 of Syracuse on Gregory's strong recommendation after the death of
 Maximianus, see V. 17.

 [40] Viz. Crementius.  See preceding epistle.

 Epistle LX.

 To Romanus and other Guardians (defensores) of the Ecclesiastical
 Patrimony.

 Gregory to Romanus the guardian, Fantinus the guardian, Sabinus the
 sub-deacon, Sergius the guardian, Boniface the guardian (a paribus [41]
 ), and the six patroni.

 Since, even as cautious foresight knows how to block the way against
 faults, and to avoid what is hurtful, so neglect opens the way to
 excesses, and is wont to incur what ought to be guarded against, we
 ought to bestow very careful attention, and see alike to the reputation
 and to the safeguard of our brethren and priests.  Now it has come to
 our ears that certain of the bishops, under pretext, as it were, of
 help, associate themselves in one house with women.  And so, lest
 hereby just occasion of detraction should be given to scoffers, or the
 ancient enemy of the human race should take advantage of an easy matter
 of deceit, we enjoin thee by the tenor of this mandate that thou study
 to shew thyself strenuous and solicitous.  And, if any of the bishops
 included within the limits of the patrimony committed to thee are
 living with women, do thou entirely put a stop to this, and for the
 future by no means suffer any women to reside with them, except such as
 the censorship of the sacred canons allows, that is a mother, an aunt,
 a sister, and others of this sort, concerning whom there can be no ill
 suspicion.  Yet they do better, if they refrain from living together
 even with such as these.  For we read that the blessed Augustine
 refused to live even with his sister, saying, Those who are with my
 sister are not my sisters.

 The caution, then, of a learned man ought to be a great instruction to
 us.  For it is a mark of uncautious presumption for one that is less
 firm not to fear what a strong man is afraid of.  For he wisely
 overcomes what is unlawful who has learnt not to use even what is
 allowed him:  and indeed we bind none in this matter against their
 will, but, as physicians are accustomed to do, we prescribe carefulness
 for health's sake, even though it be for the time distressful.  And
 therefore we impose no necessary obligation; but, if any should choose
 to imitate a learned and holy man, we leave it to their own will.  Let,
 then, thy Experience act with zeal and solicitude for the observance of
 what we have ordered to be prohibited.  For, if hereafter it should
 chance to be found otherwise, know that thou wilt incur no slight risk
 with us.  Furthermore, let it be thy care to exhort these same bishops,
 our brethren, that they admonish those who are subject to them, to wit
 those who are constituted in sacred orders, to observe in all ways
 after their example what they themselves observe; this only being
 added, that these, as canonical authority has decreed, are not to leave
 wives whom they ought to govern chastely.  Given in the month of March,
 Indiction 2.

 [41] See I. 25, note 8.

 Epistle LXI.

 Here begins the epistle of Rechared, King of the Goths, addressed to
 the blessed Gregory, Bishop of Rome [42] .

 Rechared to the holy lord and most blessed pope, the bishop Gregory.

 At the time when the Lord in His compassion caused us to be dissociated
 from the impious Arian heresy, and the holy Catholic Church gathered us
 into her bosom ameliorated in the path of faith, it was then the desire
 of our mind to seek with delight and with the whole bent of our mind so
 very reverend a man; thee who art powerful above all other bishops,
 that he might commend in all ways a thing so worthy and acceptable to
 God for us men.  But, whereas we are engaged in many cares of
 government, being occupied by divers occasions, three years passed
 without the desire of our mind being satisfied.  And after this we
 chose, for the purpose of sending them to thee, some abbots of
 monasteries, who should proceed to thy presence, and offer gifts sent
 by us to Saint Peter, and bring us word more distinctly of thy holy
 reverence's health.  But, as they hastened on their way, and were
 almost in sight of the shores of Italy, it befell them that they struck
 on certain rocks near Marseilles, and were scarcely able to deliver
 their own souls.  And now we have entreated a presbyter whom thy Glory
 had sent as far as the city of Malaca (civitatem Malicitanam) to come
 into our sight.  But he, detained by bodily infirmity, has in no wise
 been able to reach the soil of our kingdom.  But, as we know most
 certainly that he was sent by thy Holiness, we have sent a golden cup
 ornamented on the outside with gems for thy Holiness (as I trust thou
 wilt vouchsafe to do) to offer as worthy of the apostle who shines the
 first in dignity.  For I also beg thy Highness, when an opportunity is
 found, to seek us out by thy sacred golden letters.  For how much I
 truly love thee I believe is not hidden, the Lord inspiring thee, from
 the fecundity of thine own breast.  It is sometimes the case that those
 whom tracts of land or sea divide the grace of Christ glues together as
 if visibly.  For to those who do not see thee at all in person fame
 discloses thy goodness.

 Further, I commend with all veneration to thy Holiness in Christ,
 Leander, the priest of the church of Hispalis, since through him thy
 benevolence has been made clearly manifest to us; and when we talk of
 thy life with this same bishop, we reckon ourselves as your inferiors
 in regard to your good deeds.  I am delighted to hear of thy health,
 most reverend and most holy man; and I beg of thy Christian prudence
 that thou wouldest commend frequently in thy prayers to our common Lord
 us and our people, who are ruled after God under our government, and
 have been acquired by Christ in your times; that hereby true charity to
 God-ward may establish in well-being those whom the breadth of the
 world separates.

 [42] The genuineness of this letter is considered doubtful.  It may
 have been a forgery founded on Epistle CXXII. in this book from Gregory
 to Reccared.  The Latin in the original is in many parts incorrect and
 ungrammatical; being such indeed Reccared's was not unlikely to be.
 Other letters relating to the conversion of Reccared are I. 43; IX.
 121, 122.

 Epistle LXII.

 To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).

 Gregory to Romanus, &c.

 It has come to our ears that the tonsuratores [43] in Sicily, with
 wicked presumption, take to themselves the name of defensores, and that
 they not only are of no utility for the interests of the Church, but
 also take occasion hence to commit many irregularities.  Consequently
 we enjoin thy Experience by this present authority to enquire
 diligently into this.  And, if thou findest any, besides those who have
 letters to empower them in such business [44] , usurping henceforth
 this title, put a stop to this thing by strict correction.  If,
 however, thou shouldest discover any who have proved themselves active
 and faithful in ecclesiastical affairs, thou must send us a full and
 particular report of them, that we may judge whether they are worthy of
 a letter [45] .

 Furthermore, we desire thee to make a thorough examination of the
 accounts of Fortunatus; and, when he has satisfied all the debts that
 appear against him, allow him no longer to have to do with the
 patrimony, or with any action of our Church, seeing that, as we have
 heard, he has conducted himself in such a manner that he ought not
 henceforth to have any communication with our people.

 Furthermore, it has been reported to us that one Martianus, who has
 assumed to himself the name of a defensor, has declined to pay
 obedience to our brother and fellow-bishop John, to whom we had
 committed the charge of our patrimony.  Inquire therefore; and, if it
 is true, let him be sent into exile, that his disobedience to him from
 whose Church he has seized for himself a false title of honour, and who
 is promoting the interests of the same, may not go unpunished.  But, if
 there are also any others disobedient to the orders of our said
 brother, thou wilt by all means visit them with strict punishment.

 [43] "Tonsuratores dici potuere qui erant præpositi colonis seu
 possesseribus prædiorum Ecclesiæ Romanæ, qui erant tonsurati in signum
 subjectionis, more Romanorum."  Alteserra.

 [44] i.e. letters of appointment under the hand of the bishop of Rome.
 See V. 29, XI. 38, for the form of such letters.

 [45] See note above.

 Epistle LXV.

 To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari).

 Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Sardinia.

 It has come to our ears that some of your clerics, inflated with a
 spirit of elation (which is a serious thing to be said), neglect
 obedience to the commands of your Fraternity, and occupying themselves
 rather in the services and labours of others, desert the business of
 their own Church in which they are needed.  For this reason we greatly
 wonder why you do not keep up the rule of discipline, and restrain
 them, when wandering dissolutely at large, with a rein of strict
 control to the requirements of the office they have undertaken.  It is
 said also that some of these contumacious clerks, in order to obtain
 support against you, resort to the patronage of our guardian
 (defensoris) Vitalis.  Wherefore we have sent a letter to him, telling
 him not to dare henceforth to support any one of your clerks against
 you unreasonably; but, if any case of fault should arise which is not a
 serious one but merits pardon, to approach you rather as an intercessor
 than as a supporter of the culprit.  Be on your guard, then, that no
 such report shall hereafter reach us of your subjects despising you.

 We have learnt also that a certain widow left her substance to the
 monastery of St. Julian, and that this substance has been plundered by
 one of your clerks who used to direct the actions of the deceased woman
 while she lived, and that he now evades making restitution.  We
 therefore exhort thee that, if what is said should prove to be true,
 you cause him to be constrained by strict proceedings, to the end that
 he may make haste to restore without diminution the property left to
 the monastery, and be compelled to give up, even with the loss of his
 reputation, that which, preserving the purity of his honour, he ought
 not to have dared to take.  But what a cause for shame it is that we
 should appear as admonishing your Fraternity to restrain your clerk
 under the vigour of discipline, this I believe that you yourself feel
 in your own heart.

 Also against worshippers of idols, and soothsayers, and diviners, we
 very earnestly exhort your Fraternity to be on the watch with pastoral
 vigilance, and publicly among the people hold forth against the men who
 do such things, and recall them by persuasive hortation from the
 contagion of so great sacrilege, and such temptation of divine
 judgment, and peril in the present life.  If, however, thou shouldest
 find them unwilling to amend and correct themselves from such doings,
 we desire thee to lay hold of them with fervent zeal, and, in case of
 their being slaves, to chastise them with blows and torments, whereby
 they may be brought to amendment.  But, if they are freemen, they
 should be directed to penitence by suitable and strict confinement; so
 that they who scorn to listen to salutary words reclaiming them from
 peril of death may at any rate be brought back by bodily torments to
 the desired sanity of mind.  We have also been informed that, you
 having committed the care of your patrimony to certain laymen, they,
 after having been detected in depredations on your peasants and flight
 in consequence, both refuse to restore the property which, as not being
 subject to your control, they indecently retain as though it were in
 their own power, and also scorn to render you an account of their
 doings.  If this be so, it is fitting that the matter be strictly
 investigated by you, and the case between them and the peasants of your
 Church be thoroughly examined.  And whatever fraud may be discovered in
 them let them be compelled to make restitution for with the penalty
 appointed by the laws.  But for the future your Fraternity must take
 care that ecclesiastical property be not committed to secular men not
 living under your rule, but to approved clerics holding office under
 you; in whom if any wrong doing should be found, you may be able to
 correct what has been unlawfully done, as in the case of persons under
 you, whom the obligation of their condition convenes before you rather
 than excuses.

 Epistle LXVII.

 To Constantius, Bishop of Milan [46] .

 Gregory to Constantius, &c.

 Maximus, the prevaricator of the Church of Salona, after he had failed
 to obtain anything through the greater powers of the world, has betaken
 himself to the lesser ones; and by a superfluity of prayers and by
 attestation to his good works he strives to prevail with us.  This
 being so, I have thought it would be inhuman in me, if he who says that
 he fears me much were quite unable to find me in some degree more
 indulgent.  And I have therefore decided that our most reverend brother
 and fellow-bishop Marinianus should take cognizance of his cause in the
 city of Ravenna.  If, however, by any chance his person is suspected,
 we desire that your Fraternity also, if it is not too laborious for
 you, should take the trouble of repairing to the same city, and sit
 together with our aforesaid brother in the same trial.  Whatever, then,
 may seem good to each of your Holinesses, know that it will seem good
 to me; and your judgment I accept as my own; and what things you both
 think should be remitted, be assured that I remit; taking, however,
 careful heed that we may not appear to be either sinfully remiss or
 austere to the injury of Holy Church.  We have enjoined the execution
 of this matter on the Chartulary Castorius, that he may fully report to
 us all that has been done.

 [46] See III. 47, note 2.

 Epistle LXVIII.

 To Eusebius of Thessalonica.

 Gregory to Eusebius of Thessalonica, Urbicus of Dyrrachium, Andrew of
 Nicopolis, John of Corinth, John of Prima Justiniana, John of Crete,
 John of Larissa and Scodra, and many other bishops.

 We are constrained by the care of government which we have undertaken
 to extend vigilantly the solicitude of our office, and to instruct the
 minds of our brethren by addresses of admonition, that no wrongful
 presumption may avail to deceive the ignorant, nor any dissimulation to
 excuse those who know.  Be it known then to your Fraternity that John,
 formerly bishop of the city of Constantinople, against God, against the
 peace of the Church, to the contempt and injury of all priests,
 exceeded the bounds of modesty and of his own measure, and unlawfully
 usurped in synod the proud and pestiferous title of oecumenical, that
 is to say, universal.  When our predecessor Pelagius of blessed memory
 became aware of this, he annulled by a fully valid censure all the
 proceedings of that same synod, except what had therein been done in
 the cause of Gregory, bishop of Antioch, of venerable memory; taking
 him to task with most severe rebuke, and warning him to abstain from
 that new and temerarious name of superstition; even so as to forbid his
 deacon to go in procession [47] with him, unless he should amend so
 great a wickedness.  And we, adhering in all respects to the zeal of
 his rectitude, observe his ordinances, under the protection of God,
 irrefragably, since it is fitting that he should walk without stumbling
 along the straight way of his predecessor, whom the tribunal of the
 eternal Judge awaits for rendering an account of the same place of
 government.  In which matter, lest we should seem to omit anything that
 pertains to the peace of the Church, we once and again addressed the
 same most holy John by letter, bidding him relinquish that name of
 pride, and incline the elation of his heart to the humility which our
 Master and Lord has taught us.  And having found that he paid no
 regard, we have not desisted, in our desire of concord, from addressing
 the like admonitions to our most blessed brother and fellow-priest
 Cyriacus, his successor.  But since it is the case, as we see, now that
 the end of this world is near at hand, that the enemy of the human race
 has already appeared in his harbingers, so as to have as his
 precursors, through this title of pride, the very priests who ought to
 have opposed him by living well and humbly, I exhort and entreat that
 not one of you ever accept this name, that not one consent to it, that
 not one write it, that not one admit it wherever it may have been
 written, or add his subscription to it; but, as becomes ministers of
 Almighty God, that each keep himself from this kind of poisoned
 infection, and give no place to the cunning lier-in-wait, since this
 thing is being done to the injury and rendering asunder of the whole
 Church, and, as we have said, to the contemning of all of you.  For if
 one, as he supposes, is universal bishop, it remains that you are not
 bishops.

 Furthermore, it has come to our knowledge that your Fraternity has been
 convened to Constantinople.  And although our most pious Emperor allows
 nothing unlawful to be done there, yet, lest perverse men, taking
 occasion of your assembly, should seek opportunity of cajoling you in
 favouring this name of superstition, or should think of holding a synod
 about some other matter, with the view of introducing it therein by
 cunning contrivances,--though without the authority and consent of the
 Apostolic See nothing that might be passed would have any force,
 nevertheless, before Almighty God I conjure and warn you, that the
 assent of none of you be obtained by any blandishments, any bribes, any
 threats whatever; but, having regard to the eternal judgment, acquit ye
 yourselves salubriously and unanimously in opposition to wrongful aims;
 and, supported by pastoral constancy and apostolical authority, keep
 out the robber and the wolf that would rush in, and give no way to him
 that rages for the tearing of the Church asunder; nor allow, through
 any cajolery, a synod to be held on this subject, which indeed would
 not be a legitimate one, nor to be called a synod.  We also at the same
 time admonish you, that if haply nothing should be done with mention of
 this preposterous name, but a synod be by any chance assembled on
 another matter, ye be in all respects cautious, circumspect, watchful,
 and careful, lest anything should therein be decreed against any place
 or person prejudicially, or unlawfully, or in opposition to the
 canons.  But, if any question arises to be treated with advantage, let
 the question in hand take such a form that it may not upset any ancient
 ordinances.  Wherefore we once more admonish you before God and His
 Saints, that you observe all these things with the utmost attention,
 and with the entire bent of your minds.  For if any one, as we do not
 believe will be the case, should disregard in any part this present
 writing, let him know that he is segregated from the peace of the
 blessed Peter, the Prince of the Apostles.  Let, then, your Fraternity
 so act that when the Shepherd of shepherds comes in judgment, you may
 not be found guilty with respect to the place of government which you
 have received.

 [47] Procedere; i.e. proceed to the Holy Table for celebration.  Cf.
 VII. 34, note 7.

 Epistle LXXVIII.

 To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

 Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

 I have received at the hands of the bearer of these presents the letter
 of your most sweet Holiness, speaking to me about your cause being
 terminated speedily.  But, as soon as he had come, he learnt how the
 possession which he sought from our Church was held, and soon satisfied
 himself about it.  The business he had with others he settled without
 contention.

 But concerning the matter which ought by all means to have been written
 about to me, your Holiness has written nothing, considering me also to
 be tardy therein.  And indeed, for fear of its breaking out into the
 scandal of division, I have been unwilling to be the author of such
 division.  For I have chosen that whatever may follow should ensue
 through others.  But in time to come, God granting it, you will have
 proof that in a cause wherein I desire to please God I am not afraid of
 men.  Concerning this I took care to write to you before now, even when
 you went to Constantinople.

 As to the timber, I had prepared pieces of a larger size, as your
 Blessedness had requested in your letter; but so small a ship has been
 sent here that it could not carry them, unless they had been cut.  But
 I was unwilling to have them cut, and have reserved for your judgment
 what should be done about them.  If you do not require them, we will
 adapt them for other uses here.  Moreover, I beg of your Holiness to
 pray for me earnestly, since I am incessantly pressed down by pains of
 gout, and swords of barbarians, and distressing cares.  But, if you
 bestow on me the help of your prayer, I believe that you will strongly
 aid me against all adversities.

 Epistle LXXIX.

 To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna [48] .

 Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

 What is to be done in the case of Maximus you have learnt from the
 letters which we have before sent to you.  But, since we have
 ascertained from the report of our Chartulary Castorius, the bearer of
 these presents, what is the wish, or rather the request, of your
 Fraternity in this matter, therefore if the said Maximus, in the
 presence of you and our aforesaid Chartulary, shall purge himself on
 oath from simoniacal heresy, and with respect to other charges shall,
 before the body of Saint Apollinaris, as we have written, reply only,
 when interrogated, that he is guiltless, we commit his cause to the
 judgment of your Fraternity, with regard to his having presumed to
 celebrate the solemnities of mass while excommunicated, as to what
 penance such fault shall be purged by.  And so, whatever according to
 God seems good to you, do you settle without fear, and entertain no
 doubt with regard to us.  For whatsoever may be ordained by you
 concerning this cause we both thankfully accept and willingly allow.
 Yet we exhort you that you should be careful, and so temper what you
 provide for being done as both to deal kindly with him, if so it shall
 seem fit, and by a suitable arrangement to observe, as you ought, the
 genius of ecclesiastical vigour.  We have instructed the above-named
 bearer, while present with us, how he is to act with you; and, having
 learnt all thoroughly from him, do you so acquit yourselves in all
 respects that in your anxious care we may feel that our presence has
 been with you.

 [48] See III. 47, note 2.

 Epistle LXXX.

 To Castorius, Notary [49] .

 Gregory to Castorius, &c.

 The more thou seest thyself to be trusted by us, and charged with the
 conduct of cases when need arises, the more oughtest thou to shew
 thyself energetic and solicitous.  Accordingly, if Maximus of Salona,
 having taken oath, shall affirm that he is not guilty of simoniacal
 heresy, and, as to other matters, when merely questioned before the
 body of Saint Apollinaris, shall reply that he is innocent, and shall
 have done penance, as we have directed, for his disobedience, we desire
 that, to console him, thy Experience should give him the letter which
 we have written to him [50] , wherein we have signified that we have
 restored to him both our favour and communion.  For, as it befits us to
 be severe to those who persist in contumacy, so to those who are again
 humbled and penitent we ought not to deny a place of pardon.

 Furthermore, as to our brother Sabinianus, bishop of Jadera [51] , and
 Honoratus [52] , archdeacon of Salona, or others who have had recourse
 to the Apostolical See, Maximus must be very earnestly dealt with, so
 that he may receive them with becoming charity, and in no way retain in
 his heart any grudge against them, but live with them with pure
 goodwill and sincere affection.

 [49] See below, Ep. LXXIX., and III. 47, note 2.

 [50] See below, Ep. LXXXI.

 [51] See VII. 15, VIII. 10.

 [52] See VI. 25, and note there.

 Epistle LXXXI.

 To Maximus, Bishop of Salona [53] .

 Gregory to Maximus, &c.

 Although to what was faulty in thy ordination at the first thou hast
 added serious evil through the fault of disobedience, yet we, tempering
 with becoming moderation the authority of the Apostolic See, have never
 been incensed against thee to the extent that the case demanded.  But
 our displeasure which thou hadst excited against thyself continued the
 longer in that a sense of the responsibility entrusted to us tormented
 us exceedingly, lest we might seem to be passing over without attention
 certain unlawful doings of thine that we had heard of.  And, if thou
 considerest well, thou wilt see that thou thyself, by deferring to
 satisfy us, didst confirm these reports, and thereby didst exasperate
 us the more against thee.  But now that, following wholesome counsel,
 thou hast submitted thyself humbly to the yoke of obedience, and that
 thy love, in doing penance [54] , has purged itself, as we directed, by
 fitting satisfaction, understand thou that the favour of brotherly
 charity is restored to thee, and give thanks that thou art received
 into our fellowship:  for, as it becomes us to be strict with those who
 persevere in a fault, so does it to be kind in pardoning those who
 return to a better mind.  Now, therefore, that thy Fraternity knows
 that he has recovered the communion of the Apostolic See, let him send
 some one to us, according to custom, to receive and convey to him the
 pallium.  For, whilst we do not suffer unlawful things to be
 perpetrated, we no less refuse not what is customary.  Further, though
 the discharge of the duties of our position might have called upon us
 to concede this, yet we are greatly constrained thereto by the request
 of our most sweet and excellent son, the lord Exarch Callinicus, that
 we would treat thee with moderation.  His most dear wish we cannot
 resist, nor can we cause him sorrow.

 [53] See above, Ep. LXXX. and III. 47, note 2.

 [54] According to a narrative found in some few codices of the
 Registrum Epistolarum, and printed in an appendix by the Benedictine
 Editors, the penance done by Maximus at Ravenna consisted in his
 prostrating himself on the pavement of the city for three hours and
 exclaiming, "Peccavi Deo, et beatissimo papæ Gregorio."

 Epistle LXXXII.

 To Anatolius, Constantinopolitan Deacon [55] .

 Gregory to Anatolius, &c.

 To good and devoted sons it is worth our labour so to respond as to
 double, because we are paying a debt, what it would befit us of our own
 mere motion to bestow upon them.  Seeing, then, that the bearer of
 these presents, our son the magnificent Marcellinus [56] , has demeaned
 himself as he has in the cause of our brother and fellow-bishop Maximus
 and in that of the Istrians, and is anxious to employ himself for the
 advantage of our Church, therefore, that he may be able more and more
 to shew his sincere affection not only in words but also in deeds, we
 hereby exhort thy Love to co-operate with him when he comes to the
 royal city with entire zeal and earnestness, and to be at pains so to
 assist him with all the succour in thy power, that, supported by the
 aid of Almighty God and thine, he may have the less difficulty to
 contend with there.  Thou wilt also study so to attend to him as to one
 who is in very truth our own, and so to bestow on him the efficiency of
 thy charity, that he may both recognise a return made to him for the
 past, and also be able to entertain a great hope of retribution in the
 future for his devotion which he promises to exhibit in the service of
 the Church.  But inasmuch as, so far as we have learnt, the most serene
 lord the Emperor had commanded our aforesaid magnificent son to hasten
 to wait upon him immediately, it is fitting for thee to seek an
 opportunity of intimating that it was no faulty disobedience, but the
 cause of our brother and fellow-bishop Maximus, that has detained him:
 which cause, though late, has nevertheless through his exertions been
 brought to a conclusion.  But this we desire thy Love to attend to
 carefully; not to allow thyself to be mixed up in any cause whatever
 where there is oppression of the poor; lest haply, under pressure to
 some extent from persons in power, thou shouldest be driven to do what
 could not be of advantage to thy soul.  Dealing, then, with all matters
 in the fear of God, consider especially the eternal reward.

 [55] Gregory's apocrisiarius at Constantinople.

 [56] Supposed to be identical with Marcellus, Proconsul of Dalmatia,
 who, having originally and for some time afterwards supported Maximus
 as bishop of Salona against Gregory, had apparently made overtures for
 reconciliation with the latter.  See IX. 5, and on the whole subject
 III. 47, note 2.  He seems to have now fully satisfied Gregory, whose
 laudation of him in this letter is in marked contrast to the tone of
 IX. 5, addressed to Marcellus himself previously.

 Epistle XCI.

 To Fortunatus, Bishop of Neapolis (Naples).

 Gregory to Fortunatus, &c.

 Inasmuch as the Father of God's servants whom I had sent to the city of
 Naples has, by the ordering of God as it hath pleased Him, departed
 this life, it has seemed good to me to send the bearer of these
 presents, the monk Barbatianus, for the government of the same monks.
 For the present we decide that he shall be Prior, so that, if his life
 should approve itself to thy Fraternity, thou mayest after a little
 time ordain him as their Father.  For he has some good qualities that
 commend him.  But he has this great fault, that he is exceedingly wise
 in his own conceit.  And it is evidently known how many branches of sin
 may spring from this root.  Let thy Holiness, therefore, keep careful
 watch over him; and if you shall find him become wary in government and
 humble in his own mind, then, with the permission of God, advance him
 to the dignity of Abbot.  But, if he makes little progress in humility,
 defer his ordination, and report to me [57] .

 [57] See X. 24.

 Epistle XCIII.

 To Gulfaris, Magister Militum [58] .

 Gregory to Gulfaris, &c.

 The bearers of these presents, who come to us from the Istrian parts,
 have reported such good things of your Glory as to inflame us ardently
 to return you thanks.  For we learn that, among the cares of the
 government of those parts which has been committed to you, you are
 especially anxious to win souls, and that you so take pains to recall
 the hearts of wanderers to the unity of the Church that, as far as your
 desire goes, you would have no one there separated from the Apostolic
 Church; and that so great love of Peter, the Prince of the Apostles,
 inflames you that you long with all your heart to restore the sheepfold
 of him to whom the keys were delivered by the Lord the Creator of all.
 Have, glorious son, from such and so great a work, a confident
 anticipation of divine retribution, wherein not only our admonition but
 also the words of the apostle confirm thee, since he who shall have
 caused a sinner to be converted from the error of his way shall save
 his soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins (James v.).  For,
 however great be temporal affluence, or at any rate prosperity, it has
 its end,--the limit of death.  But this pursuit of winning souls, which
 you have taken up, retains the certainty of its hope fixed; to wit, the
 retribution of eternal life.  Wherefore, greeting you with fatherly
 affection, we exhort your Glory that you the more earnestly give effect
 to the zeal for the unity of our holy faith which the Author of unity
 Himself has given you; and that, recalling whomsoever you can from the
 error of their schism into the bosom of Mother Church, you cherish them
 with continual admonition.  And accomplish this also,--so to protect
 with the succour of your defence those whom the Lord through you may
 grant to be restored to His fold that there may be no quarter to which
 those who are still in error may be able to resort for the accusation
 of such as return to sound counsels.  For, while you uphold the cause
 of God on earth, He Himself will prosperously direct your actions here
 with the aid of His protection, and there will remain for you, in the
 eternal life which you long for, retribution for your so great
 well-doing.

 [58] As to Gregory's renewed efforts, now with better hope after the
 accession of Callinicus as Exarch of Italy to recover the Istrian
 schismatics in the matter of "the Three Chapters," see above, IX. 9,
 10.  Gulfaris, addressed in this epistle, was in military command in
 Istria, and appears to have exerted himself to further the aims of
 Gregory, who ever gladly availed himself of the aid of the secular
 arm.  Other letters on the same subject follow.

 Epistle XCIV.

 To Romanus the Guardian (Defensorem).

 Gregory to Romanus, &c.

 The bearers of these presents, who came hither from the parts of Istria
 to find their bishop who is now living in the parts of Sicily, have
 asked us to speed them in their way, and we have arranged for their
 journey hence.  Let, then, thy Experience receive them, and arrange for
 their reaching their said bishop as soon as possible; lest, as they
 allege may be the case, others of the schismatics in those parts should
 be beforehand to persuade them.  For, so far as they indicate, the
 bishop himself has a desire to come to us in behalf of the unity of the
 faith.  Assistance therefore should be given them, that, with the help
 of the Lord, they may accomplish the good things they desire.  But let
 thy Experience, in person if he is near at hand or otherwise by letter,
 exhort this same bishop to lose no time in hastening, with the Lord's
 good favour, to the threshold of the Apostles, being assured that he
 will be received by us with all affection.  We also desire thee to pay
 him the cost of his journey to enable him to come to us.  But, if he
 finds coming here burdensome, and arranges to live in Sicily, and
 consents, with his security given, to remain in the unity of the Church
 among the perverters of Scripture, this also do not thou delay to
 inform us of, that we may arrange, with the help of the Lord, how
 provision may be made for his expenses there.  But lend also thy
 concurrence and succour for the bearers of these letters to come to
 their said bishop, so that after leaving us they may experience no less
 attention.

 Epistle XCVIII.

 To Theodore, Curator [59] of Ravenna.

 Gregory to Theodore, &c.

 Although from the report of our responsalis we have long heard many
 things of you to rejoice our heart, yet now our son the abbot Probus,
 who has returned to us, has reported still further such things of the
 charity of your Glory as it is becoming should be told of a really good
 and most Christian son.  And, since he has told us of such kind feeling
 on your part, and such earnestness in arranging the peace as has not
 appeared even in our own citizens who have previously been in your
 parts, we beg the mercy of heavenly protection to recompense you for
 this in body and in soul both here and in the world to come, seeing
 that you have not ceased to act advantageously for the weal of many.

 We inform you therefore that Ariulf [60] has sworn to the observance of
 the peace, not as his King swore [61] , but under the condition that no
 excess should in any way be committed against himself, and that no one
 should march against the army of Aroges [62] .  This being altogether
 unfair and crafty, we take it as if he had not sworn,--since to some
 extent he will easily find for himself an occasion of exceeding, and
 will deceive us the more if we are not on our guard against him.

 But Warnilfrid, according to whose advice this same Ariulf acts in all
 respects, has scorned to swear at all.  And so it has come to pass that
 from the peace which we so much desired, we in these parts can have
 hardly any remedy, since we must still, and for the future, be on our
 guard against the same enemies that we have been on our guard against
 so far.

 Furthermore, be it known to your Glory that the King's men who have
 been sent hither press us to subscribe to the compact.  But remembering
 the insults which, to the injury through us of the blessed Peter,
 Agilulph is said to have addressed to the most illustrious Basilius,
 though Agilulph himself has entirely denied this, we have still thought
 it prudent to abstain from subscription, lest we, who are petitioners
 and mediators between him and our most excellent son the lord Exarch,
 should find ourselves deceived in any respect, in case of anything
 being perchance secretly withdrawn (i.e. from the compact), and he
 should find an occasion of not assenting to our petition.  And so we
 beg, as we have requested also of our aforesaid most excellent son,
 that your Glory, with the charity whereby you are united to us, would
 take measures to the end that, before these men return from Arogis, the
 king may send them letters posthaste, to be, however, handed on to us,
 ordering them not to call on us to subscribe.  But, if it serves the
 purpose, we will cause our glorious brother, or one of the bishops, or
 at any rate an archdeacon, to subscribe.

 With regard to Augustus we thank you, and are giving attention to his
 settling his cause with his adversary in accordance with equity; having
 been unwilling that the trouble of putting in an appearance with you
 should be imposed upon him, yet so as not to deny justice to his
 adversary.

 With regard to other matters since it has not been so far in our power
 to thank you adequately, we will for the future send to you our
 responsalis, through whom, by the mercy of God, we may be the more
 bound together in the charity wherein we are knit to each other.
 Moreover, the sorrow of your Glory affects us exceedingly; but since a
 wise man knows all that can be said in the way of comfort, we omit
 comforting you with words; but we attend you with our prayers,
 beseeching Almighty God to guard the life and health of yourself and
 all yours under the protection of His loving-kindness, and to console
 your heart while in a state of affliction.

 [59] "Erat forte magistratus municipalis, qui annonæ civitatis curam
 gerit."  Note to Benedictine Edition.

 [60] The Lombard duke of Spoletum, who had besieged Rome, a.d. 592,
 previously to the invasion of King Agilulph in person.  Cf. II. 3, 29,
 30, 46, and Prolegom., p. xix.

 [61] For notice of the peace concluded with the Lombard King Agilulph,
 cf. IX. 4, 42, 43; and Prolegom., p. xx.

 [62] Arogis (or Arigis) was the Lombard duke of Beneventum.  Cf. II.
 46.

 Epistle CV.

 To Serenus Bishop of Massilia (Marseilles).

 Gregory to Serenus, &c.

 That we have been so long in sending a letter to your Fraternity
 attribute not to sluggishness, but to press of business.  We now
 commend to you in all respects the bearer of these presents, our most
 beloved son Cyriacus, the Father of our Monastery, that no delay may
 detain him in the city of Massilia, but that he may proceed under God's
 protection to our brother and fellow-bishop Syagrius [63] with the
 succour of your Holiness.

 Furthermore we notify to you that it has come to our ears that your
 Fraternity, seeing certain adorers of images, broke and threw down
 these same images in Churches.  And we commend you indeed for your zeal
 against anything made with hands being an object of adoration; but we
 signify to you that you ought not to have broken these images.  For
 pictorial representation is made use of in Churches for this reason;
 that such as are ignorant of letters may at least read by looking at
 the walls what they cannot read in books.  Your Fraternity therefore
 should have both preserved the images and prohibited the people from
 adoration of them, to the end that both those who are ignorant of
 letters might have wherewith to gather a knowledge of the history, and
 that the people might by no means sin by adoration of a pictorial
 representation [64] .

 [63] It appears from Epistle CIX. below that Cyriacus was being now
 sent to the bishop of Autun with the special view of getting a synod
 called by queen Brunechild for restraining the simony and other
 ecclesiastical irregularities which were prevalent in Gaul.  Cf. also
 above, IX. II, to Brunechild.

 [64] Cf. XI. 13.

 Epistle CVI.

 To Syagrius, Ætherius, Virgilius, and Desiderius, Bishops [65] .

 Gregory to Syagrius of Augustodunum (Autun), Etherius of Lugdunum
 (Lyons), Virgilius of Aretale (Arles), and Desiderius of Vienna
 (Vienne), bishops of Gaul.  A paribus.

 Our Head, which is Christ, has to this end willed us to be His members,
 that through the bond of charity and faith He might make us one body in
 Himself.  And to Him it befits us so to adhere in heart, that, since
 without Him we can be nothing, through Him we may be able to be what we
 are called.  Let nothing divide us from the citadel of our Head, lest,
 if we refuse to be His members, we be left apart from Him, and wither
 like branches cast off from the vine.  Wherefore, that we may be
 counted worthy to be the dwelling-place of our Redeemer, let us abide
 in His love with entire earnestness of mind.  For He Himself says, He
 that loveth me will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we
 will come unto him, and make our abode with him (Joh. xiv. 23).  But,
 since we cannot keep close to the author of all good, unless we cut
 away from us covetousness, which is the root of all evil, we therefore
 by these present writings (which associate us together mutually as in
 the alternate discourse of a wished for visitation) approach your
 Fraternity in accordance with apostolic institutes, that, leaning on
 the rules of the Fathers and the Lord's commands, we may banish from
 the temple of faith avarice, which is the service of idols, so as to
 suffer nothing hurtful, and nothing disorderly, to be in the house of
 the Lord.

 I apprize you to wit, that we have long heard it currently reported how
 that in the regions of Gaul sacred orders are conferred through
 simoniacal heresy.  And we are affected with sorrowful disgust, if
 money has any place in ecclesiastical offices, and that which is sacred
 is made secular.  Whosoever, then, sets himself to buy this thing by
 the giving of a price, having regard not to the office but to the
 title, covets not to be a priest, but only to be called one.  What
 forsooth?  What comes of this but that there is no trial of a man's
 conduct, no carefulness about his moral character, no enquiry into his
 life, but that he only is counted worthy who has the means to give a
 price?  Hence it ensues, if the matter be weighed in a true balance,
 that, while one wickedly makes haste to snatch a place of utility with
 a view to vain glory, he is all the more unworthy from the very fact of
 his seeking dignity.  Moreover, as one who refuses when invited and
 flies when sought should be brought up to the sacred altar, so one that
 sues of his own accord and pushes himself forward importunately should
 without doubt be repelled.  For whoever thus strives to climb to higher
 places, what does he but decrease in increasing, and in rising
 outwardly sink low inwardly?  Wherefore, dearest brethren, in ordaining
 priests let sincerity prevail, let there be simple consent without
 venality, let a pure election be preferred, so that advancement to the
 highest place of the priesthood may be believed to be due, not to the
 suffrage of sellers, but to the judgment of God.  For that it is a
 grievous crime to wish to procure or to sell the gift of God for a
 price evangelical authority is witness (Matth. xxi.).

 For, when our Lord and Redeemer went into the temple, He overthrew the
 seats of them that sold doves.  What else is it to sell doves but to
 receive a price for the laying on of hands, and to put to sale the Holy
 Spirit whom Almighty God gives to men?  And that the priesthood of such
 as do so falls before the eyes of God is plainly signified by the
 overthrowing of the seats.  And yet the perverseness of this iniquity
 still puts forth its strength.  For it drives those to sell whom it
 deceives into buying.  And, while attention is not paid to what is
 enjoined by the divine voice, Freely ye have received, freely give
 (Matth. x. 8), it is brought to pass that it increases, and becomes
 doubled in one and the same contagion of sin, to wit of the buyer and
 of the seller.  And, it being well known that this heresy crept into
 the Church with a pestiferous root before all others, and was condemned
 in its very origin by apostolic detestation, why is it not guarded
 against?  Why is it not considered that blessing is turned into a curse
 to him who is promoted to the end that he may become a heretic?

 For the most part, then, the adversary of souls, when unable to
 insinuate into them what is wrong on the face of it, endeavours to
 supplant them by throwing over it as it were a show of piety, and
 persuades them, perhaps, that money ought to be received from those who
 have it, so that there may be wherewith to give to those who have it
 not, if only he may even so infuse mortal poisons concealed under the
 appearance of almsgiving.  For neither would the hunter deceive the
 wild beast, nor the fowler the bird, nor the fisherman catch the fish,
 if the former were to set their snares in open view, or if the latter
 had not his hook hidden by the bait.  By all means, then, the cunning
 of the enemy is to be feared and guarded against, lest those whom he
 cannot subvert by open temptation he should succeed in slaying more
 cruelly by a hidden weapon.  For indeed it is not to be accounted
 almsgiving if that be dispensed to the poor which is got by unlawful
 dealings, since he who with this intention receives amiss as though
 with the view of dispensing well is the worse for it rather than the
 better.  The alms that please the eyes of our Redeemer are not those
 that are gathered together in unlawful ways and from iniquity, but such
 as are bestowed out of what has been granted to us and well acquired.
 Hence this also is certain, that, though monasteries or hospitals or
 aught else be built with the money given for sacred orders, it profits
 not for reward; since, when one that is perverse and a buyer of dignity
 is transferred to a holy place, and constitutes others after the
 likeness of himself for a consideration given, he destroys more by his
 evil administration than he who has received money from him for
 ordination can build up.  That we should not, then, try to get anything
 with sin under pretence of almsgiving we are plainly warned by Holy
 Scripture, which says, The sacrifices of the impious are abominable
 which are offered of wickedness (Prov. xxi. 27).  For whatever in God's
 sacrifice is offered of wickedness appeases not, but provokes, the
 anger of Almighty God.  Hence again it is written, Honour the Lord from
 thy just labours (Prov. iii. 9).  Whoso, then, takes evilly that he
 may, as he supposes, give well, it is evident without doubt that he
 honours not the Lord.  Hence also it is said through Solomon, Whoso
 offers a sacrifice of the substance of the poor is as though he slew a
 son in his father's sight (Ecclus. xxxiv. 24).  Now let us consider how
 great is a father's grief if his son be killed in his sight:  and hence
 we easily understand how much God is grieved when a sacrifice is given
 Him out of pillage.  Exceedingly to be shunned then, most beloved
 brethren, is the perpetration of the sins of simoniacal heresy under
 pretence of almsgiving.  For it is one thing to do alms on account of
 sins, but another to commit sins on account of alms.

 This also, which has reached our ears, we include as worthy of no
 dissimilar detestation; that some persons, inflated with desire of
 dignity, are tonsured on the death of bishops, and from being laymen
 are suddenly made priests, and shamelessly snatch at the leadership of
 religious life, not having as yet even learnt to be soldiers.  What
 good do we suppose these will do their subjects, who, before touching
 the threshold of discipleship, fear not to occupy the place of
 mastership?  In such a case it is needful that, even though any one
 were of unquestioned merit, he should be exercised in ecclesiastical
 offices by passing through distinct orders.  He should see what he is
 to imitate, he should be formed into the shape he is to retain, so that
 afterwards he may not err, when chosen for shewing the way of life to
 the erring.  He should, then, be polished long by religious meditation,
 that he may be well-pleasing, and so shine as a candle placed on a
 candlestick that the adverse force of winds driving against the kindled
 flame of erudition may not extinguish it, but increase it.  For, since
 it is written, That one should first be proved, and so minister (1 Tim.
 iii. 10), much more ought he first to be proved who is taken as an
 intercessor for the people, lest bad priests should become the cause of
 the people's ruin.  There can therefore be no excuse, no defence
 against this, since it is clearly known to all how solicitous about
 diligent attention to this matter is the holy and excellent teacher,
 who forbids that a novice should accede to sacred orders (1 Tim.
 iii.).  But, as then one was called a novice who had been newly planted
 in the conversation of the holy faith, so one is now to be held to be a
 novice who, having been suddenly planted in the habit of religion,
 creeps on to canvass for sacred dignities.  Orders, then, should be
 risen to in an orderly way:  for he courts a fall who seeks to rise to
 the topmost heights of a place by steep ascents, disregarding the steps
 that lead to it.  And, seeing that the same apostle teaches his
 disciple, among other directions with regard to sacred orders, that
 hands are to be laid hastily on no man (1 Tim. v.), what can be more
 hasty or what more headlong than to begin at the top, and that a man
 should commence by being a bishop before he has been a minister?
 Whosoever, then, desires to obtain priesthood, not for the pomp of
 elation but for doing good, let him first measure his own strength with
 the burden he is to undergo, that, if unequal to it, he may abstain,
 and also approach it with fear, even if he thinks himself sufficient
 for it.

 Further, it will not be beside the mark, if, in addition to the
 argument from rational beings we draw one from our use of irrational
 things.  For timber suitable for buildings is cut from forests, and yet
 the weight of the building is not imposed on them while they are yet
 green, or till a delay of many days has dried their greenness, and
 rendered them fit for necessary use.  And, if by any chance this
 precaution is neglected, they are soon broken by the mass imposed upon
 them, and the material provided for support begets ruin.

 For hence also medical men, whose care is for the body, do not offer
 certain remedies to him that needs them while recently concocted, but
 leave them to be macerated for some time.  For, should any one give
 them immaturely, there is no doubt that the means of health become a
 cause of danger.  Let them learn, therefore, let priests in their
 office learn, those namely to whom the cure of souls is entrusted, to
 observe what men of various arts under the teaching of reason attend
 to, and restrain themselves from ambition, if not of fear, yet at any
 rate of very shame.

 But, lest perchance any one should still wish to defend himself on the
 pretext of an evil custom, let the discretion of your Fraternity
 restrain them with the rein of reason, and not allow them to lapse into
 unlawful doings, since whatever is deserving of punishment ought not to
 be adduced as an example for imitation, but for correction.

 Nor, further, can we suffer you to pass over neglectfully this other
 matter, which alike requires correction.  For of what profit is it to
 have guarded all besides if through one place pernicious access be
 afforded to the enemy?  Therefore let women be prohibited from living
 with those who are constituted in any sacred order.  With regard to
 them, lest the old enemy of the human race should exult, it must be
 laid down by the consent of all that they may have no other women with
 them but those whom the sacred canons include.  And, though this
 interdiction is perhaps bitter for the time to some, there is no doubt
 that it will afterwards grow sweet from its very benefit to their
 souls, if the enemy be overcome in that whereby he might have overcome
 them.

 In this part of our solicitude also we must not leave unnoticed what
 has been ordained by the provision of the Fathers, for the sake of
 advantage, concerning the holding of councils throughout dioceses.
 Wherefore, lest there should be any dissension among brethren, or any
 fomentation of discord between superiors and subordinates, it is
 necessary that priests should assemble together, so that there may be
 discussion about cases that arise, and salutary conference about
 ecclesiastical observances; to the end that, while things past are
 corrected and things future regulated, the Almighty Lord may be praised
 on all sides in one accord by brethren.  Know ye whose presence will be
 with you, seeing that it is written, Where two or three are gathered
 together in My name, there am I in the midst of them (Matth. xviii.
 20).  If, then, He will vouchsafe to be present where there are two or
 three, how much more will He not be wanting where many priests have
 come together?  And indeed it is not unknown what is appointed by the
 rules of the Fathers as to the holding of a council twice in the year.
 But, lest haply any necessity should not allow this rule to be carried
 out, we decree that still one shall meet, without any excuse allowed,
 once; so that nothing wrong, nothing unlawful, may be ventured on while
 a council is being expected.  For commonly, though not from love of
 justice, yet from fear of enquiry, people abstain from that which it is
 known may displease the judgment of all.  Let us, most beloved
 brethren, keep this observance to be left to our posterity; and let us
 meditate on all that is written in the sacred writings for our
 instruction, and incite all we can to follow it.  For it is certain
 that, if with all our heart we attend to these salutary precepts, we
 escape all taint of vices, since, while we lean on these whereby we are
 built up, we shut out, no doubt, all place for deception.

 Therefore for the purposes mentioned above, we desire your Fraternity,
 God willing, to assemble a synod, and in it, through the mediation of
 our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Aregius [66] , and our most
 beloved son Cyriacus, let all things that are, as we have before said,
 opposed to the sacred canons, be strictly condemned under the ban of
 anathema; that is, that any one should presume to give any
 consideration for acquiring ecclesiastical orders, or receive any for
 conferring them; or that any one should all at once from a lay
 condition dare to enter on a place of rule; or that any other women
 should live with priests but such as are allowed, as aforesaid, by the
 sacred canons.  Concerning all these things let our most reverend
 brother the bishop Syagrius, with the whole synod, when our most
 beloved brother Cyriacus returns to us, take care to send us word of
 what has been done; in order that, knowing accurately what has been
 decreed, and with what safeguards and in what manner, we may render
 thanks without ceasing to Almighty God for your life and manners.

 [65] This is a circular letter to the metropolitan bishops to prepare
 them for the general synod which Gregory was anxious should be held in
 Gaul for checking the simony, and other abuses, continually referred to
 by him as prevalent there.  Cf. in this book, Epistles XI., CVII.,
 CVIII., CIX., CX.  On a paribus, see I. 25, note 8.

 [66] Perhaps an error for Syagrius, bishop of Augustodunum (Autun), to
 whom the use of the pallium had been recently conceded on certain
 conditions, and to whom the assembling of the synod was committed,
 though he was not thus authorized to take precedence of his
 metropolitan, the bishop of Lyons.  See Ep. CVIII. and Ep. XI. note 2.
 Cyriacus, mentioned below, had been sent specially from Rome to forward
 and regulate the proceedings (see Ep. CIX., note 2), Aregius of
 Vapincum being also directed to send Gregory a full report of the
 proceedings (see Ep. CVII.).  If the intended synod was held at all, it
 appears to have failed to put a stop to the abuses complained of.  For
 a year or two later we find Gregory still referring to them, and
 pressing for a synod to suppress them.  See XI. 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 63.

 Epistle CVII.

 To Aregius, Bishop of Vapincum [67] .

 Gregory to Aregius, Bishop in Gaul.

 The affliction of your Fraternity, which we have learnt that you have
 had for the loss of your people, has given us such cause of grief that,
 since charity makes us two one, we feel our heart to be especially in
 your tribulations.  But in the midst of this we have been much consoled
 by your having brought your mind to discern how it becomes you to bear
 sorrow patiently, and, in the hope of another life, not to have long
 continued grief for death.  Still, lest some tribulation should still
 maintain itself in your soul, I exhort you to rest from sorrow, to
 cease to be sad.  For it is unseemly to addict oneself to wearisomeness
 of affliction for those of whom it is to be believed that they have
 attained to true life by dying.  Those have perhaps just excuse for
 long continued grief who know not of another life, and have no trust
 that there is a passing from this world to a better.  We, however, who
 know this, who believe it and teach it, ought not to be too much
 distressed for them that depart, lest what in others has a show of
 affection, be to us rather a matter of blame.  For it is, as it were, a
 kind of distrust to be tormented by sadness in opposition to what
 everyone preaches, as the Apostle says, But we would not have you to be
 ignorant, brethren, concerning them that are asleep, that ye sorrow not
 even as others which have no hope (1 Thess. iv. 12).

 Having, therefore, this reason before us, dearest brother, we should
 try, as we have said, not to afflict ourselves about the dead, but
 bestow affection on the living, to whom pity may be of advantage and
 love bear fruit.  Let us henceforth hasten, by reproving, exhorting,
 persuading, soothing, comforting, to profit all we can.  Let our tongue
 be an encouragement to the good, a goad to the bad; let it beat down
 the puffed up, appease the angry, stir up the slow, kindle the idle by
 exhortation, persuade the shrinkers back, soothe the rough, comfort the
 despairing; that, as we are called leaders, we may shew the way of
 salvation to them that are advancing forward.  Let us be vigilant in
 keeping guard, let us defend all approaches against the snares of the
 enemy.  And, if ever error should have drawn aside a sheep of the
 flocks committed to us through devious ways, let us strive with all our
 endeavours to recall it to the Lord's sheepfolds, so that from the name
 of shepherd which we bear we may reap not punishment, but a reward.
 Seeing, then, that in all this there is need of the help of divine
 grace, let us implore the clemency of Almighty God with continual
 prayers, to the end that for doing these things He may give us the will
 and grant us the power, and, with the fruit of good work, direct us in
 that way in which He has declared Himself to be the Shepherd of
 shepherds; that so, through Him, without whom we cannot rise to the
 doing of anything, we may be able to accomplish all

 Furthermore, our common son, Peter the deacon, has given us to
 understand that your Fraternity at the time when you were here
 requested that we would grant to yourself and your archdeacon license
 to use dalmatics [68] .  But, because compelled by the sickness of your
 people, you departed in such haste that the very grief that weighed
 upon you did not suffer you to press the matter any longer, as was fit
 and as the nature of your request required; and because we had many
 engagements, and consideration of ecclesiastical propriety did not
 allow us to concede a new thing inconsiderately and suddenly; for these
 reasons the carrying into effect of the thing demanded has been long
 postponed.  Now, however, recalling to mind your Charity's good
 deservings, by the tenor of this our authority we grant you your
 request, and have granted to thee or to thy archdeacon to be decorated
 by the use of dalmatics; and we have sent the same dalmatics by the
 hands of our most beloved son, the abbot Cyriacus.

 Furthermore, at the synod which we have decreed should be assembled
 through our brother and fellow-bishop Syagrius against simoniacal
 heresy, we desire thee to be present; and we have ordered the pallium
 which we have sent for our said brother to be accordingly given him, on
 condition of his promising to remove from holy Church, by a definition
 of the synod, the unlawful things which we have prohibited.  Concerning
 which synod we desire thy Fraternity to report to us fully by letter
 all its proceedings, that thou thyself, whose holiness we are well
 acquainted with, mayest inform us about everything.

 [67] A see in Narbonensis Secunda under the Metropolis of Aquæ (Aix);
 the modern Gap.

 [68] For the use of Dalmatics, see Dict. of Christ. Ant. (Smith and
 Cheetham, 1875), under Dalmatic.

 Epistle CVIII.

 To Syagrius, Bishop.

 Gregory to Syagrius, Bishop of Augustodunum (Autun).

 Mistress of all good things is charity, which savours of nothing
 extraneous, nothing rough, nothing confused; which so exercises and
 strengthens hearts that nothing is heavy, nothing difficult, but all
 that is done becomes sweet.  Since, then, it is its peculiar quality to
 foster things that are concordant, to preserve things that are united,
 to join together things that are dissociated, to set right things that
 are wrong, and to consolidate all other virtues by the bulwark of its
 own perfection, whosoever grafts himself into its roots neither falls
 away from greenness, nor becomes empty of fruits, because effective
 work loses not the moisture of fecundity.  And so I am much delighted
 with thee, and rejoice with thee in the Lord, most beloved brother, for
 that I find thee, by the testimony of many, so endowed with this same
 charity that thou both thyself becomingly exhibitest what befits a
 priest, and laudably shewest an example for imitation to others.

 Inasmuch, then, as in the work of preaching (which after long thought I
 have taken care to supply to the nation of the Angli through Augustine,
 then provost (præpositum) of my monastery, and now our brother and
 fellow-bishop), I have found thee to be, as was right, so solicitous,
 devoted, and in all ways helpful, as to lay me under a great debt to
 thee in this matter, therefore moved by the consideration of so great
 an obligation, I cannot bear to put aside thy Fraternity's petition,
 lest I should appear towards thee unprofitable.  Consequently,
 according to the tenor of thy request, we have provided under God for
 thy being dignified by the use of the pallium [69] , to be worn within
 thy church, in the celebration of mass only.  Nevertheless we have
 decided that it should be given thee only on condition of thy first
 promising to amend by the definition of a synod the things that we have
 ordered to be corrected; for we certainly deem it fit that, with the
 gravity of mind in which by the mercy of God we have learnt that thou
 excellest, a more distinguished adornment of outward apparel should
 accrue to thee; especially as we think that thou hast asked for it, not
 with a view to the pomp of needless elation but with regard to the
 character and dignity of thy Church.  And, lest in this vestment we
 should seem to be bestowing as it were a bare bounty, we have taken
 thought at the same time for the granting of this also;--that, while
 the Metropolitan has in all respects his place and dignity preserved to
 him, the Church of Augustodunum should be next after the Church of
 Lugdunum (Lyons), and should claim to itself this place and rank by the
 indulgence of our authority.  But as to the other bishops, we decree
 that they shall take their places according to the date of their
 ordination, whether for sitting in council, or for subscribing, or in
 any other matter, and shall claim to themselves the prerogative of
 their several ranks:  for it seems to us consonant to reason that with
 the use of the pallium we should together with it, as we have said,
 bestow some privileges.

 But, since with augmentation of dignity the sense of responsibility
 ought also to increase, that the adornments of action may agree with
 the decoration of vestments, your Fraternity should exercise yourself
 the more earnestly in all your pursuits.  Be vigilant with regard to
 the doings of those who are under you; let your example be their
 instruction, and your life their teacher.  By the exhortation of your
 tongue let them learn what to fear, and be taught what to love; that,
 when thou givest up the talents entrusted to thee with multiplied gain,
 in the day of retribution thou mayest be counted worthy to hear, Well
 done, good and faithful servant:  enter thou into the joy of thy lord
 (Matth. xxv. 23).

 [69] Cf. IX. 11, 109.

 Epistle CIX.

 To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.

 Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

 Now that your Excellency's royal solicitude is in all matters of
 government praiseworthy, you ought, for the increase of your glory, to
 show yourself more watchful, and careful not to allow those whom you
 rule with counsel outwardly to perish inwardly among themselves.  So
 may you, through the fruit of your pious solicitude, after occupying
 this topmost height of a temporal kingdom, attain under God to kingdoms
 and joys that are eternal.  And this we trust you will be able after
 the following manner to succeed in; if, among other good deeds, you pay
 attention to the ordination of priests [70] ; whose office, as we have
 learnt, has come in your parts to be such an object of ambition that
 priests are ordained all at once from being laymen.  This is a very
 serious matter.  For what can they effect, what good can they do the
 people, who covet being made bishops, not for doing good, but for
 distinction?  These, then, who have not yet learnt what they have to
 teach--what do they effect, but that the unlawful advancement of a few
 becomes the ruin of many, and that the observance of ecclesiastical
 government is brought into confusion, seeing that no regular order is
 observed?  For whoso comes to the control thereof inconsiderately and
 hurriedly, with what admonition can he edify those who are put under
 him, his example having taught them, not reason, but error?  It is a
 shame in truth, it is a shame, for one to command others what he knows
 not how to observe himself.

 Nor do we pass over that other thing which in like manner requires
 amendment, but detest it as utterly execrable and a most serious
 matter; that in your parts sacred orders are conferred through
 simoniacal heresy, which was the first to arise against the Church, and
 was condemned with a rigorous malediction.  Hence, therefore, it is
 brought about that the dignity of the priesthood comes into contempt,
 and holy honour under condemnation.  And so reverence perishes,
 discipline is destroyed, since he who ought to have corrected faults
 committed them; and by nefarious ambition the honourable priesthood is
 brought under censure and disparagement.  For who will any more
 venerate what is sold, or not think worthless what is bought?  Hence I
 am greatly distressed, and condole with that land; since, while they
 scorn to have as a divine gift, but compass by bribes, the Holy Spirit
 which Almighty God deigns to bestow on men through the imposition of
 hands, I do not think that the priesthood can long subsist there.  For
 where the gifts of heavenly grace are sold, the life is not sought for
 God's service, but rather money is venerated in opposition to God.
 Seeing then that so great a wickedness is not only a danger to them,
 but also in no small degree injurious to your kingdom, greeting your
 Excellency with fatherly affection we beseech you to make God
 propitious to you by the correction of this enormity.  And, that there
 may be henceforth no opportunity of committing it, let a synod be held
 by your order, at which, in the presence of our most beloved son, the
 abbot Cyriacus [71] , it shall be interdicted strictly under pain of
 anathema that any one should dare to pass suddenly from a lay condition
 to the degree of the Episcopate, or any one whatever dare to give or
 receive anything for ecclesiastical orders; that so our Lord and
 Redeemer may so deal with the things that are yours as He shall see you
 to be solicitous with pious devotion in the things that are His.  But
 we have taken special care to delegate the charge and management of
 this synod, which we have decided should be held, to our brother and
 fellow-bishop Syagrius, whom we know to be peculiarly your own; and we
 beg you to deign both to lend a willing ear to his supplication, and to
 support him by your aid; to the end that what may redound to your
 reward, namely a pious and God-pleasing ordination of priests, the
 contagion of this evil being removed, may take effect within all the
 limits of your jurisdiction.

 To this our brother, in that he has shewn himself exceedingly devoted
 with regard to the mission which has been sent, under God, to the
 nation of the Angli, we have sent a pallium to be used in the
 solemnities of mass, so that, having given aid in things spiritual, he
 may find himself advanced by the favour of the Prince of the apostles
 in the spiritual order itself.

 Furthermore, we have altogether wondered why in your kingdom you allow
 Jews to possess Christian slaves.  For what are all Christians but
 members of Christ?  And we all know that you sincerely honour the Head
 of these members.  But let your Excellency consider how inconsistent it
 is to honour the Head and to allow the members to be trampled on by his
 enemies.  And so we beg that your Excellency's ordinance may remove the
 mischief of this iniquity from your kingdom; so that you may prove
 yourself the more to be a worthy worshipper of Almighty God, in that
 you set his faithful ones free from His enemies.

 [70] Sacerdotibus, in the usual sense of bishops.

 [71] Cyriacus, abbot of St. Andrew's monastery at Rome, had been sent,
 for the purpose indicated, to Syagrius, bishop of Autun.  Cf. IX. 105.

 Epistle CX.

 To Theoderic and Theodebert, Kings of the Franks [72] .

 Gregory to Theoderic, &c.

 Since the renown of your kingdom has been resplendent of old among all
 others by the grace of the Christian religion, great pains should be
 taken that, wherein you stand out more glorious than other nations, you
 should therein please more perfectly the Almighty Lord who gives health
 and wealth to kings, and have the faith which you observe in all ways
 helpful to you.  We had wished indeed, most excellent sons, to address
 to you a discourse of friendly greeting only, so as to shew our
 fatherly affection in offices of charity.  But, seeing that an unlawful
 proceeding distresses us exceedingly, it befits us so to exhibit one
 thing as by no means to pass over in silence the other which needs
 amendment.  If you give diligent attention, you will find that we speak
 entirely for the security of your well-being.

 Now it is said that simoniacal heresy (which was the first to creep in
 by the devil's planting against the Church of God, and was at its very
 rise smitten and condemned by the weapon of apostolical vengeance)
 prevails within the limits of your kingdom, though faith together with
 good life ought to be chosen in priests.

 If good life is wanting, faith has no merit, as the blessed James
 attests, who says, Faith without works is dead (Jam. ii. 18).  But what
 can be the works of a priest who is convicted of obtaining the dignity
 of so great a sacrament by a bribe?  Thus it is brought about that even
 the very persons who are desiring sacred orders take no pains to amend
 their lives or order their conduct, but busy themselves in amassing
 wealth wherewith to buy sacred dignity.  Hence also it comes to pass
 that the innocent and poor recoil from sacred orders, being debarred
 and looked down upon.  And while the innocence of the poor man
 displeases, there is no doubt that the bribe in the other case commends
 delinquencies; for, where gold pleases, so does vice.  Hence,
 therefore, not only is a deadly wound inflicted on the souls of the
 ordainer and of the ordained, but also the Kingdom of your Excellence
 is weighed down by the fault of your bishops, by whose intercessions it
 ought rather to have been aided.  For, if he is thought worthy of the
 priesthood who is supported, not by the merits of his doings, but by
 the abundance of his bribes, it remains that neither gravity nor
 industry can put in any claim for ecclesiastical dignities, but that
 the profane love of gold obtains all.  And, while vices are remunerated
 with dignity, he is promoted to the place of the avenger who perhaps
 ought to have vengeance executed on himself; and hence priests are
 shewn not to profit others, but rather themselves to perish.  For, when
 the shepherd is wounded, who may apply medicine for healing the sheep?
 Or how shall he protect the people with the shield of prayer who
 exposes himself to be stricken by hostile darts?  Or what kind of fruit
 shall he produce out of himself, whose root is infected by sore
 disease?  Greater calamity, then, is to be apprehended in those places
 where such intercessors are promoted to places of rule, being such as
 to provoke the more the anger of God against themselves which they
 ought, through themselves, to have appeased in behalf of the people.

 Moreover, we have heard that the farms of the Churches do not pay
 tribute; and we are consequently lost in great surprise, if unlawful
 payments be sought from those to whom even lawful ones are remitted
 [73] .

 Nor does our solicitude allow us to pass over this evil also; that
 some, lured by the instigation of vain glory, snatch all at once, from
 a lay condition of life, at the dignity of priesthood, and (what it
 shames one to say, though it is too serious a matter to pass over in
 silence) those who require to be ruled neither blush nor fear to appear
 as rulers, and those that require to be taught as teachers.  Persons
 assume shamelessly the leadership of souls to whom the whole way to be
 taken by the leader is unknown, and who know not whither even they
 themselves are walking.  How bad and how venturesome this is, is shewn
 even by secular order and discipline.  For, seeing that a leader of an
 army is not chosen unless he has been tried in labour and carefulness,
 let those who desire with immature haste to mount to the height of
 episcopacy consider, at any rate by the aid of this comparison, of what
 sort leaders of souls should be; and let them abstain from attempting
 suddenly untried labours, lest a blind ambition for dignity both be to
 their own penalty and also sow seeds of pestiferous error to others,
 they themselves not having learnt what they have to teach.
 Accordingly, greeting you with fatherly affection, we beg, most
 excellent sons, that you would be at pains to banish this so detestable
 an evil from the limits of your kingdom, and that no excuse, no
 suggestion against your soul, find place with you; since he who
 neglects to amend what he is able to correct, undoubtedly has the guilt
 of the doer.  Wherefore, that you may be able to offer a great gift to
 Almighty God, order a synod to be assembled, in which (as we have
 enjoined our brethren and fellow-bishops), in the presence of our most
 beloved son the abbot Cyriacus, it may be ordained under the obligation
 of anathema that no one may ever give and no one ever receive anything
 for an ecclesiastical order, nor any one of the laity pass all at once
 to the priesthood; that so our Redeemer, whose priests you suffer not
 to be ruined among themselves by the enemy, may recompense you for this
 service both here and in the life to come.

 Furthermore, we are altogether astonished that in your kingdom you
 allow Jews to possess Christian slaves.  For what are all Christians
 but members of Christ?  The Head of these members we all know that you
 honour faithfully:  but let your Excellency consider how inconsistent
 it is to honour the Head and to allow His members to be trodden on by
 His enemies.  And so, we beg that an ordinance of your Excellency may
 remove the evil of this wrong-doing from your kingdom, that you may
 thus shew yourselves the more to be worthy worshippers of Almighty God,
 in that you set free His faithful servants from His enemies.

 [72] See VI. 58, note 1.

 [73] The majority of mss. have been nunc præbeantinstead of non
 tribuant:  but the reading adopted in the text has good support, and
 seems to give more intelligible meaning.  The drift seems to be that,
 while it was the custom in Gaul to relieve Church property even from
 tribute that might have been exacted lawfully, it was monstrously
 inconsistent to burden it unlawfully by the exaction of bribes for
 promotion.

 Epistle CXI.

 To Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate (Arles).

 Gregory to Virgilius, &c.

 Inasmuch as the desire of a pious purpose and the bent of a laudable
 devotion ought always to be aided by the earnest endeavours of priests,
 anxious care should be taken that neither remissness, neglect nor
 presumption disturb whatever has been ordained for the quiet of monks
 and of religious conversation.  But, as it was right that what reason
 required should be profitably prescribed, so what has been prescribed
 ought not to be violated.  Now Childebert of glorious memory, King of
 the Franks, inflamed by love of the Catholic religion, in founding for
 his own reward a monastery for men within the walls of the city of
 Arelate, as we find set down in writing, granted certain things there
 for the sustentation of its inmates.  And, lest his purpose should ever
 be frustrated, and what had been arranged for the quiet of the monks be
 disturbed, he prayed in his letters that whatever rights he conceded to
 the said monastery might be confirmed by apostolical authority; adding
 this also to his petition, that certain privileges might at the same
 time be accorded to the same monastery, as well in the management of
 its affairs as in the ordination of its abbot.  This he did as knowing
 such reverence to be paid by the faithful to the Apostolic See that
 what had been settled by its decree no molestation of unlawful
 usurpation would thereafter shake.  Hence, since the royal purpose as
 well as the thing desired, urgently demanded effect to be given to it,
 letters were sent by our predecessor Vigilius, bishop of the Roman See,
 to your predecessor Aurelius, wherein all things that a desire to
 embrace that purpose demanded were willingly confirmed by the support
 of apostolical authority, inasmuch as a thing of this kind, when
 requested, could not be allowed to encounter difficulty.  But, that
 your Fraternity may know what was decreed at that time, we have seen to
 the written orders of our aforesaid predecessor being added to this
 letter.  These having been perused, we exhort thee to keep them all
 inviolate with priestly earnestness, as becomes thee, and to allow
 nothing undue or unlawful to be imposed on that monastery, or the said
 orders to be infringed by any usurpation.  For, though what has once
 been sanctioned by the authority of the Apostolic See has no lack of
 validity, yet we do, over and above, once more corroborate by our
 authority in all respects all things that were ordained by our
 predecessor for quiet in this matter.  Let your Fraternity, then, so
 acquit yourself in observing them as both to shut out all occasion of
 disturbance, and also to persuade others to carry these things out,
 while you shew yourself careful and devoted, as becomes you, in
 observing the most pious will of the departed one.

 Epistle CXIV.

 To Virgilius and Syagrius, Bishops.

 Gregory to Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate (Arles), and Syagrius, Bishop
 of Augustodunum (Autun).

 The nature of the office committed to me, dearest brethren, drives me
 to break out into a cry of grief, and to sharpen your love with the
 anxiety of charity, for that it is said that you in your parts have
 been too negligent and remiss, where the rectitude of justice and zeal
 for chastity ought to have inflamed your earnestness.  Now it has come
 to our ears that a certain Syagria had entered on a religious life,
 having even changed her dress, and was afterwards united by force to a
 husband (a thing iniquitous to be told), and that you have been moved
 by no sorrow to interfere in her defence.  If this is so, I groan for
 it the more heavily for fear lest with the Almighty Lord (which God
 forbid) you should have the office of hirelings, and not the merit of
 shepherds, as having left without a struggle a sheep in the mouth of
 the wolf to be torn.  For what will ye say, or what account will ye
 give of yourselves to the future judge; you whom the lewdness of
 ravishment has not moved, whom regard to the religious habit has in no
 wise excited to stand up in defence, whom priestly consideration has
 not roused to protect the purity of virgin modesty?  Even now, then,
 let your neglect return to your memory; let remembrance of this fault
 stir you, and consideration of your office impel you to exhortation of
 the aforesaid woman.  And, lest haply in course of time constraint
 should have passed into willing consent, let your tongue be her cure,
 and through your exhortations let her give herself diligently to
 prayer; let not the lamentations of penitence depart from her memory;
 let her exhibit a penitent heart to our Redeemer; and let her make
 amends with weeping for the loss of chastity, which in her body it was
 not allowed her to preserve.

 Wherefore, inasmuch as the aforesaid woman desires, as it is said, even
 now to devote her property to pious uses, we exhort you that she
 experience the favour and enjoy the support of your Fraternity in this
 thing, and that it be lawful for her, a competent portion being
 reserved for her children, to decide as she will about her substance.
 For without doubt you do good yourselves, if you render aid to those
 who wish to do good.  Consider, therefore, most beloved brethren, from
 how great love these things which we speak proceed, and take them all
 in the same spirit of charity that inspires them.  For, we being one
 body in Christ, I burn with you in this which I feel to be to your
 hurt.  And with what earnestness, and what affection I send you this
 epistle, may the Author of truth disclose to your hearts.  And so let
 not this brotherly admonition distress you, since even a bitter cup is
 taken gladly, when offered with a view to health.  Finally, dearest
 brethren, let us with united prayers implore the mercy of our God, that
 He would favourably order our life in His fear, to the end that we may
 both serve Him here as priests should do, and be able to stand in His
 sight hereafter secure and without fear.

 Epistle CXV.

 To Syagrius, Bishop of Augustodunum (Autun).

 Gregory to Syagrius, &c.

 If in secular affairs every man should have his right and his proper
 rank preserved to him, how much more in ecclesiastical arrangements
 ought no confusion to be let in; lest discord should find place there,
 whence the blessings of peace should proceed.  And this will in this
 way be secured, if nothing is yielded to power but all to equity.

 Now it has been reported to us that our most beloved brother Ursicinus,
 bishop of the city of Taurini [74] , after the captivity and plunder
 which he endured, has suffered serious prejudice in his parishes [75] ,
 which are said to be situated within the boundaries of the Franks, even
 to the extent of another person being constituted bishop there in
 contravention of ecclesiastical ordinances, no crime of his demanding
 it.  And, lest this prejudicial proceeding should perchance seem to be
 a light matter, there has been also some hardship added in the taking
 from him of the property of his Church which he might have held.  Now,
 if these things are really so, seeing that it is a very cruel thing and
 opposed to the sacred canons, that the ambition of any should remove
 from his own altar an innocent priest who does not deserve to be
 superseded on account of crime, let all regard his cause as their own,
 and strive against the imposition on others of what they would be
 unwilling to endure themselves.  For if the entrance for an evil thing
 is not closed before it has been long open, it grows wider by use; and
 what is evidently forbidden by reason will be allowed by custom.  But,
 beyond all others, let the solicitude of your Fraternity, in
 consideration of our commendation and your own sense of what you owe to
 God, devote itself earnestly to his defence, and not allow him to be
 any longer removed against reason from his parishes.  But, as well in
 your own person as by making supplication to the most excellent kings
 [76] , whom we believe to cause you no sadness in any respect, do you
 bring it about that this thing which has been done amiss may be
 corrected, and that what has been taken away by force may under the
 patronage of truth be restored; for, seeing that it is written, A
 brother helping a brother shall be exalted (Prov. xviii. 19), your
 Charity may know that it will receive by so much the more from Almighty
 God as His precepts shall have been gladly and constantly executed in
 helping a brother.

 [74] Augusta Taurinarum, the modern Turin.

 [75] In parochiis suis Though the term paroikia meant originally what
 we should now call a bishop's whole diocese, it came after the third
 century to be applied to parishes within such diocese.  Hence here
 parochiis in the plural.  Cf. Bingham, Bk. IX., ch. ii., sect. 1; Ch.
 viii., Sect. 1.

 [76] Viz. Theoderic and Theodebert (see VI. 58, note 1), to whom a
 letter on the same subject was sent at the same time, viz., Ep. CXVI.,
 which follows.  The former would be in this year (a.d. 598-9) about
 ten, and the latter about thirteen years of age.

 Epistle CXVI.

 To Theoderic and Theodebert, Kings of the Franks.

 Gregory to Theoderic, &c.

 It is the chief good in kings to cultivate justice, and to preserve to
 every man his rights, and not to suffer subjects to have done to them
 what there is power to do, but what is equitable.  Our trust that you
 both love and altogether aim at this invites us to indicate to your
 Excellency things that call for amendment, that so we may be able by
 our letters both to succour the oppressed and to acquire reward for
 you.

 Now they say that our brother and fellow-bishop Ursicinus, bishop of
 the city of Taurini (Turin), suffers very serious prejudice in his
 parishes that are within the limits of your kingdom, in such sort that,
 contrary to ecclesiastical observance, contrary to priestly gravity,
 and contrary to the definitions of the sacred canons, no crime of his
 requiring it, another has not feared to be ordained bishop there.  And,
 it being thought not enough unless unlawfulness were added to
 unlawfulness, even the property of his church, as is said, has been
 taken away.  If the truth is so, it being exceedingly intolerable that
 one should be oppressed by force whom guilt has not harmed, we beg of
 you, addressing you in the first place with a greeting of paternal
 charity, that what out of reverence for the Church and regard to equity
 your Excellency might of your own accord bestow, you would study to
 grant all the more kindly on our intercession, and would cause justice
 to be observed towards him in all respects according to the trust we
 have in the goodness of your equity; and that, having ascertained the
 truth, you would order what has been unlawfully done to be corrected,
 and the property that has been wrongfully taken from him to be
 equitably restored to him.  Nor should the fact of his church being
 detained for the present by his enemies be at all to his disadvantage:
 but this ought to move more and more the disposition of your
 Christianity to succour him, that, being consoled by the gifts of your
 bounty, he may not feel the loss arising from the captivity which he
 has endured.  For the good, then, of your soul let this our exhortation
 find place with you, that to your own reward you may lift up again his
 dejection with the outstretched hand of justice, to the end that from
 your observance of equity towards priests you may ever flourish through
 their prayers before the eyes of God.

 Epistle CXVII.

 To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.

 Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

 Whereas for the government of a kingdom valour stands in need of
 justice, and power of equity, nor for this purpose can one suffice
 without the other, with what great love your care for these things is
 resplendent is shewn plainly enough by the fact of your governing
 crowds of nations so laudably.  Who then, considering this, can
 distrust the goodness of your Excellency, or be doubtful of obtaining
 his request, when he thinks it right to ask for what he knows you would
 willingly bestow upon your subjects?  The bearer, then, of these
 presents, Hilarius [77] , a servant of your Excellency, supposing that
 our intervention with your power will aid him, has requested to be
 supported by letters of commendation from us; holding it as certain
 that he will more abundantly obtain such favours as you grant to others
 if our intercession should speak for him.  Accordingly, paying you our
 address of greeting with the affection of paternal charity, we beg
 that, as he states that he is labouring under adversities from the
 iniquity of certain persons, the protection of your Excellence may
 defend him; and, lest he should possibly be oppressed against reason,
 that by your command you would order him to be kept safe; that so,
 while no one's opposition shall have place unjustly and of mere will,
 both we may return thanks for having obtained what rather for your own
 reward we request, and that the blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles,
 whom you will venerate in us with Christian devotion by granting what
 we ask, may recompense your Excellency.

 [77] Who this Hilarius was, and what were his grievances, does not
 appear.

 Epistle CXX.

 To Claudius in Spain [78] .

 Gregory to Claudius, &c.

 The renown of good deeds being fragrant after the manner of ointment,
 the odour of your glory has extended from the Western parts as far as
 here.  Besprinkled by the sweetness of which breath of air, I declare
 that I greatly loved one whom I knew not, and within the bosom of my
 heart seized thee with the hand of love; nor did I love without already
 knowing him to be one whose good qualities I had learnt.  For of him
 who is known to me by great intenseness of feeling, but remains unknown
 by bodily vision, I undoubtedly can say truly that I know his person,
 though I know not his home.  Now herein is a great assertion of your
 good repute, that your Glory is said to cleave sedulously to the
 excellent king of the Goths; since, while good men always displease bad
 ones, it is certain that you are good, who have pleased one that is
 good.  For this reason, addressing you with the greeting that is due to
 you, I hope that you are being exercised in these things which you have
 begun, so that that true sentence of Solomon may be fulfilled in
 you--The path of the just is as a shining light, and groweth unto the
 perfect day (Prov. iv. 18).  For, now that the light of truth shines
 upon us, and the sweetness of the heavenly kingdom discloses itself to
 our minds, it is indeed already day, but not yet perfect day.  But it
 will then be perfect day, when there shall be no longer anything of the
 night of sin in our souls.  But do you grow unto the perfect day, that,
 until such time as the heavenly country shall appear, there may be
 spreading increase of good works here; to the end that in the
 retribution hereafter the fruit of reward may be by so much the greater
 as earnestness in labour has been increasing now.  Wherefore we commend
 to your Glory our most beloved son Cyriacus, the Father of our
 monastery, that, after he has accomplished what has been enjoined him,
 there be no hindrance to delay his return.  May Almighty God guard you
 by the protection of His heavenly arm, and grant unto you to be
 glorious both now among men and after long courses of years among the
 angels.

 [78] This Claudius appears to have been a person of influence in the
 court of King Reccared, and no doubt a good Catholic, of whose virtues
 Gregory may have heard from his friend Leander of Seville.  The object
 of this very complimentary letter to him was to commend to his favour
 the abbot Cyriacus, who, as appears from preceding epistles, had been
 sent into Gaul to bring about the assembling of a synod there, and who
 appears from this epistle to have been sent on into Spain, though for
 what particular purpose does not appear.  Cf. Proleg., p. xi.

 Epistle CXXI.

 To Leander, Bishop of Hispalis (Seville).

 Gregory to Leander, Bishop of Spain.

 I have the epistle of thy Holiness, written with the pen of charity
 alone.  For what the tongue transferred to the paper had got its
 tincture from the heart.  Good and wise men were present when it was
 read, and at once their bowels were stirred with emotion.  Everyone
 began to seize thee in his heart with the hand of love, for that in
 that epistle the sweetness of thy disposition was not to be heard, but
 seen.  All severally were inflamed, and all admired, and the very fire
 of the hearers shewed what had been the ardour of the speaker.  For,
 unless torches burn themselves, they will not kindle others.  We saw,
 then, with how great charity thy mind was aflame, seeing that it so
 kindled others also.  Your life indeed, which I always remember with
 great reverence, they did not know; but the loftiness of your heart was
 manifest to them from the lowliness of your language.  As to my life,
 this your epistle speaks of it as worthy of imitation by all:  but may
 that which is not as it is said to be become so because it is said to
 be so, lest one should lie who is not wont to lie.  In reply to this,
 however, I speak shortly the words of a certain good woman, Call me not
 Noemi, that is, fair; but call me Mara, for I am full of bitterness
 (Ruth i. 20).  For indeed, good man, I am not to-day the man you knew.
 For I confess that in advancing outwardly I have fallen much inwardly,
 and I fear that I am of the number of those of whom it is written, Thou
 didst cast them down while they were lifted up (Ps. lxxii. 18 [79] ).
 For he is cast down when he is lifted up who advances in honours, and
 falls in manners.  For I, following the ways of my Head, had determined
 to be the scorn of men and the outcast of the people, and to run in the
 lot of him of whom again it is said by the Psalmist, The ascents in his
 heart he hath disposed in the valley of tears (Ps. lxxxiii. 7 [80] );
 that is, that I should ascend inwardly all the more truly as I lay
 outwardly the more humbly in the valley of tears.  But now burdensome
 honour much depresses me, innumerable cares din me, and, when my mind
 collects itself for God, they cleave it with their assaults as if with
 a kind of swords.  My heart has no rest.  It lies prostrate in the
 lowest place, depressed by the weight of its cogitation.  Either very
 rarely or not at all does the wing of contemplation raise it aloft.  My
 sluggish soul is torpid, and, with temporal cares barking round it,
 already almost reduced to stupor, is forced now to deal with earthly
 things, and now even to dispense things that are carnal; nay sometimes,
 by force of disgust, is compelled to dispose of some things with
 accompanying guilt.  Why should I say more?  Overcome by its own
 weight, it sweats blood.  For, unless sin were reckoned under the name
 of blood, the Psalmist would not say, Deliver me from blood guiltiness
 (Ps. l. 16 [81] ).  But, when we add sin to sins, we fulfil this also
 which is said by another prophet, Blood hath touched blood (Hos. iv.
 2.)  For blood is said to touch blood when sin is joined to sin, so as
 to multiply the load of iniquity.  But in the midst of all this I
 implore thee by Almighty God to hold me who am fallen into the billows
 of perturbation with the hand of thy prayer.  For I sailed as it were
 with a prosperous breeze when I led a tranquil life in a monastery:
 but a storm, rising suddenly with gusty surges, caught me in its
 commotion, and I lost the prosperity of my voyage; for in loss of rest
 I suffered shipwreck.  Lo, now I am tossed in the waves, and I seek for
 the plank of thy intercession, that, not being counted worthy to reach
 port rich with my ship entire, I may at least after losses be brought
 to shore by the aid of a plank.

 Your Holiness writes of being afflicted with the pains of gout, by
 continual suffering from which I too am grievously worn down.  But
 comfort will be readily at hand, if amid the scourges under which we
 suffer we recall to mind whatever faults we have committed; and then we
 shall see that they are not scourges, but gifts, if by pain of the
 flesh we purge the sins which we did for delight of the flesh.

 Furthermore we have sent you, with the blessing of the blessed Peter,
 Prince of the Apostles, a pallium, to be used only in celebration of
 Mass.  In sending it to you I ought to admonish you much as to how you
 ought to live:  but I suppress speech, since in your manner of life you
 anticipate my words.  May Almighty God keep you under His protection,
 and bring you to the rewards of the heavenly country with multiplied
 fruits of souls.  As to me, with what amount of business and with what
 weakness I am weighed down this short letter bears witness, in which I
 say little to one whom I greatly love.

 [79] In English Bible, lxxiii. 18.

 [80] In English Bible, lxxiv. 5, 6, differently.

 [81] li. 14, in English Bible.

 Epistle CXXII.

 To Rechared, King of the Visigoths [82] .

 Gregory to Rechared, &c.

 I cannot express in words, most excellent son, how much I am delighted
 with thy work and thy life.  For on hearing of the power of a new
 miracle in our days, to wit that the whole nation of the Goths has
 through thy Excellency been brought over from the error of Arian heresy
 to the firmness of a right faith, one is disposed to exclaim with the
 prophet, This is the change wrought by the right hand of the Most High
 (Ps. lxxvi. 11 [83] ).  For whose breast, even though stony, would not,
 on hearing of so great a work, soften in praises of Almighty God and
 love of thy Excellency?  As for me, I declare that it delights me often
 to tell these things that have been done through you to my sons who
 resort to me and often together with them to admire.  These things also
 for the most part stir me up against myself, in that I languish
 sluggish and unprofitable in listless ease, while kings are labouring
 in the gathering together of souls for the gains of the heavenly
 country.  What then shall I say to the coming Judge in that tremendous
 assize, if I shall then come thither empty, where thy Excellency shall
 bring after thee flocks of faithful ones, whom thou hast now drawn to
 the grace of a true faith by assiduous and continual preaching?  But
 this, good man, by the gift of God, affords me great comfort, that the
 holy work which I have not in myself I love in thee.  And, when I
 rejoice with great exultation for thy doings, the results of thy labour
 become mine through charity.  With regard, therefore, to the conversion
 of the Goths, both for your work and for our exultation, we may well
 exclaim with the angels, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
 peace to men of goodwill (Luk. ii. 14).  For we, as I think, owe the
 more thanks to Almighty God for that, although we have done nothing
 with you, we are nevertheless partakers in your work by rejoicing with
 you.  Further, how gladly the blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles,
 has accepted the gifts of your Excellency your very life witnesses
 evidently to all.  For it is written, The vows of the righteous are his
 delight (Prov. xv. 8).  For indeed in the judgment of Almighty God it
 is not what is given, but by whom it is given, that is regarded.

 For hence it is that it is written, The Lord had respect unto Abel and
 to his gifts, but unto Cain and to his gifts he had not respect (Gen.
 iv. 4, 5).  To wit, being about to say that the Lord had respect to the
 gifts, he was careful to premise that He had respect unto Abel.  Thus
 it is plainly shewn that the offerer was not acceptable by reason of
 the gifts, but the gifts were so by reason of the offerer.  You shew,
 therefore, how acceptable your offering is, seeing that, being about to
 give gold, you have first given gifts of souls by the conversion of the
 nation subject to you.

 With regard to your telling us that the abbots who were sent to us to
 bring your offering to the blessed Apostle Peter had been wearied by
 the violence of the sea and returned to Spain without accomplishing
 their voyage [84] , your gifts were not kept back, for they reached us
 afterwards; but the constancy of those who had been sent has been
 tried, as to whether they knew how with holy desire to overcome dangers
 in their way, and, though fatigued in body, by no means to be wearied
 in mind.  For adversity which comes in the way of good purposes is a
 trial of virtue, not a judgment of reprobation.  For who can be
 ignorant how prosperous an event it was that the blessed Apostle Paul
 came to Italy to preach, and yet in coming suffered shipwreck?  But the
 ship of the heart stood unharmed among the billows of the sea.

 Furthermore, I must tell you that I have been led to praise God the
 more for your work by what I have learnt from the report of my most
 beloved son Probinus the presbyter; namely that, your Excellency having
 issued a certain ordinance against the perfidy of the Jews, those to
 whom it related attempted to bend the rectitude of your mind by
 offering a sum of money; which your Excellency scorned, and, seeking to
 satisfy the judgment of Almighty God, preferred innocence to gold.
 With regard to this what was done by King David recurs to my mind, who,
 when the longed for water from the cistern of Bethlehem, which was
 wedged in by the enemy, had been brought him by obedient soldiers,
 said, God forbid that I should drink the blood of righteous men (1
 Chron. xi. 19).  And, because he poured it out and would not drink it,
 it is written, He offered it a libation to the Lord.  If, then, water
 was scorned by the armed king, and turned into a sacrifice to God, we
 may estimate what manner of sacrifice to Almighty God has been offered
 by the king who for His love has scorned to receive, not water, but
 gold.  Wherefore, most excellent son, I will confidently say that thou
 hast offered as a libation to the Lord the gold which thou wouldest not
 have in opposition to Him.  These are great things, and redound to the
 praise of Almighty God.

 But in the midst of all these things we must guard with vigilant
 attention against the snares of the ancient foe, who, the greater gifts
 he sees among men, with the more subtle snares seeks to take them
 away.  For robbers too do not look out for empty travellers to seize
 them on their road, but such as carry vessels of gold and silver.  For
 indeed the present life is a road.  And every one must needs be the
 more on his guard against ambushed spirits in proportion as the gifts
 are greater which he carries.  It is the duty, then, of your
 Excellency, with regard to this so great gift which you have received
 in the conversion of the nation subject to you, to keep with all your
 might, first humility of heart, and secondly cleanness of body.  For
 where it is written, Every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled,
 and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted (Luke xiv. 11; xviii.
 14), it is assuredly evident that he truly loves what is lofty who does
 not cut off his soul from the root of humility.  For often the
 malignant spirit, in order to destroy the good that previously he had
 not power to oppose, comes into the mind of the worker after
 accomplishment of his work, and agitates it with silent thoughts of
 self-praise, so that the deluded mind admires itself for the great
 things that it has done.  And, being exalted in its own sight through
 hidden tumour, it is deprived of the grace of Him Who bestowed the
 gift.  For hence it is that it is said through the voice of the prophet
 to the soul that waxes proud, Having trust in thy beauty thou playedst
 the harlot because of thy renown (Ezek. xvi. 15).  For indeed a soul's
 having trust in its beauty is its presuming within itself on its
 righteous doings.  And it plays the harlot because of its renown, when
 in what it has done aright it desires not the praise of its Maker to be
 spread abroad, but seeks the glory of its own reputation.  Hence again
 it is written through the prophet, In that thou art more beautiful, go
 down (Ezek. xxxii. 19).  For the soul goes down because of being more
 beautiful when, owing to the comeliness of virtue whereby it ought to
 have been exalted before God, it falls from His grace through elation.
 What then is to be done in this case but that, when the malignant
 spirit employs the good things that we have done to exalt the mind, we
 should ever recall to memory our evil deeds, to the end that we may
 acknowledge that what we have done sinfully is our own, but that it is
 of the gift of Almighty God alone when we avoid sins.  Cleanness also
 of body is to be guarded in our strivings after well-doing, since,
 according to the voice of the apostolic preacher, The temple of God is
 holy, which temple ye are (1 Cor. iii. 17).  And again he says, For
 this is the will of God, even your sanctification (1 Thess. iv. 3).  As
 to which sanctification, what he means by it he shews by straightway
 adding, That ye should abstain from fornication, that every one of you
 should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour, not
 in the lusts of concupiscence.

 The very government also of your kingdom in relation to your subjects
 ought to be tempered with moderation, lest power steal upon your mind.
 For a kingdom is ruled well when the glory of reigning does not
 dominate the disposition.  Care also is to be taken that wrath creep
 not in, lest whatever is lawful to be done be done too hastily.  For
 wrath, even when it prosecutes the faults of delinquents, ought not to
 go before the mind as a mistress, but attend as a handmaid behind the
 back of reason, that it may come to the front when bidden.  For, if
 once it begins to have possession of the mind, it accounts as just what
 it does cruelly.  For hence it is written, The wrath of man worketh not
 the righteousness of God (Jam. i. 20).  Hence again it is said, Let
 every man be swift to hear, but slow to speak, and slow to wrath (Ib.
 19).  However I doubt not that under the guidance of God you observe
 all these things.  Still, now that an opportunity of admonition has
 arisen, I join myself furtively to your good deeds, so that what you do
 though not admonished you may not do alone, having an admonisher to
 boot.  Now may Almighty God protect you in all your doings by the
 stretching out of His heavenly arm, and grant you prosperity in the
 present life, and after a course of many years eternal joys.

 We have sent you a small key from the most sacred body of the blessed
 apostle Peter to convey his blessing, containing iron from his chains,
 that what had bound his neck for martyrdom may loose yours from all
 sins.  We have given also to the bearer of these presents, to be
 offered to you, a cross in which there is some of the wood of the
 Lord's cross, and hairs of the blessed John the Baptist, from which you
 may ever have the succour of our Saviour through the intercession of
 His forerunner.

 Moreover we have sent to our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop
 Leander a pallium from the See of the blessed Apostle Peter, which we
 owe both to ancient custom, and to your character, and to his goodness
 and gravity [85] .

 --------------------------

 A long time ago, when a certain Neapolitan youth came hither, your to
 me most sweet Excellency had thought fit to charge me to write to the
 most pious Emperor to the end that he might search in the record office
 for the treaties that had formerly been concluded with the prince
 Justinian of pious memory as to the claims of your kingdom, so as to
 gather from them what he should observe with regard to you.  But there
 were two things seriously in the way of my doing this.  One was that
 the record-office in the time of the aforesaid prince Justinian of
 pious memory had been so burnt by a fire which had crept in suddenly
 that hardly any paper of his times remained.  The other was that, as no
 one need be told, thou oughtest to look in thy own archives for the
 documents that are against thee, and produce these instead of my doing
 so.  Wherefore I exhort your Excellency to arrange matters suitably to
 your character, and carefully to carry out whatever makes for peace,
 that the times of your reign may be memorable with great praise through
 many courses of years.  Furthermore, we have sent you another key from
 the most sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter, which, being laid up
 with due honour, may multiply with blessing whatever it may find you
 enjoying.

 [82] Reccared, the Visigoth king of Spain, previously an Arian, had
 declared himself a Catholic a.d. 587, and had formally adopted
 Catholicism as the creed of the Spanish Church at the council of
 Toledo, a.d. 589.  See I. 43, note 9.  This is the only extant letter
 addressed to the king himself by Gregory, its date, if rightly placed,
 being a.d. 598-9, and thus as much as ten years after the council of
 Toledo.  Gregory had been long informed of what had been done at
 Toledo, as appears in his epistle to Leander (I. 43), written, if
 correctly placed, a.d. 590-1; and it may appear strange that his letter
 to the king himself had been so long delayed.  He may have waited for a
 letter to himself from Reccared; and, if Ep. LXI. in this book (see
 note thereon) be genuine, it would be in reply to it that the letter
 before us was written.  But in Ep. LXI. only three years are said to
 have elapsed since Reccared's conversion, and gifts spoken of sent at
 that time to Rome are acknowledged in the Epistle before us.  Hence the
 dates assigned to the Epistles by the Benedictine Editors are open to
 suspicion.

 [83] In English Bible, lxxvii. 10, differently.

 [84] See IX. 61.

 [85] What follows is preceded by "Item in anagnostico."  (The word is
 thus explained in D'Arnis' Lexicon Manuale; "Græcis id omne est quod
 legitur aut recitatur.  Unde Gregorius Magnus pro epistola aut quovis
 scripto vocem hanc usurpat.")  The whole is absent from many mss., and
 in one of those preserved in Bibliotheca Colbertina it is given,
 without the heading Item in anognostico, as a separate epistle,
 entitled "Secunda ad Recharedum," and concludes thus:  "Furthermore we
 have received the gifts of your Excellency, which have been sent for
 the poor of the blessed apostle Peter, namely three hundred cocullæ
 (cowls):  and, as much as we can, we earnestly pray that you may have
 as your protector in the tremendous day of judgment Him whose poor you
 have protected by abundance of clothes.  Our not sending at once a man
 of ours to your Excellency has been owing to the want of a ship:  for
 none can be found that can proceed from these parts to the shores of
 Spain."  The fact of a second key containing filings of St. Peter's
 chains being referred to as sent to Reccared in this concluding portion
 of the epistle confirms the probability of its having been part of a
 subsequent letter.  For two such keys were not likely to be sent at the
 same time.

 Epistle CXXIII.

 To Venantius and Italica [86] .

 Gregory to the lord Venantius, Patrician, and Italica his wife.

 I have taken care, with due affection, to enquire of certain persons
 who have come from Sicily about your Excellency's health.  But they
 have given me a sad report of the frequency of your ailments.  Now,
 when I say this, neither do I find anything to tell you about myself,
 except that, for my sins, lo it is now eleven months since it has been
 a very rare case with me if I have been able now and then to rise from
 my bed.  For I am afflicted by so great sufferings from gout, and so
 great from troubles, that my life is to me most grievous pain.  For
 every day I faint under my sufferings, and sigh in expectation of the
 relief of death.  Indeed among the clergy and people of this city there
 has been such an invasion of feverous sicknesses that hardly any
 freeman, hardly any slave, remains fit for any office or ministry.
 Moreover, from the neighbouring cities we have news daily of havocs and
 of mortality.  Then, how Africa is being wasted by mortality and
 sickness I believe that you know more accurately than we do, insomuch
 as you are nearer to it.  But of the East those who come from thence
 report still more grievous desolations.  In the midst of all these
 things, therefore, since you perceive that there is a general smiting
 as the end of the world draws near, you ought not to be too much
 afflicted for your own troubles.  But, as becomes wise nobles, bring ye
 back your whole heart to the care of your souls, and fear the strict
 judgment all the more as it is so much nearer at hand.  Devote
 yourselves to piety, of which it is written that It hath promise of the
 life that now is, and of that which is to come (1 Tim. iv. 8).  But
 Almighty God is powerful both to preserve the life of your Excellency
 for a long time here, and to bring you after many courses of years to
 eternal joys.  I beg my most sweet daughters, the lady Barbara and the
 lady Antonina, to be greeted in my name; whom I pray that heavenly
 grace may protect, and grant them to be prospered in all things.

 [86] See I. 34, note 8.

 Epistle CXXV.

 To Maximus, Bishop of Salona [87] .

 Gregory to Maximus, &c.

 Having received the letters of our brother and fellow-bishop
 Marinianus, and Castorius, our chartularius, having also returned, we
 learn that your Fraternity have made most full satisfaction with regard
 to the matters about which there had been uncertainty; and we return
 great thanks to Almighty God that from our inmost heart all rancour of
 sinister suspicion has been eradicated.  On this account I have been
 desirous of dismissing with the utmost speed our common son, your
 deacon Stephen.  But the frequent pains of my sicknesses have compelled
 me to retain him with me for a few days.  As soon, however, as I have
 begun to be even slightly better, I have provided for sending him
 forthwith back to you with joy.

 Accordingly we send to you, according to custom, the pallium for the
 sacred solemnities of mass; the meaning of which we desire you in all
 respects to vindicate.  For the dignity of this vestment is humility
 and justice.  Let, then, your Fraternity make haste with all your heart
 to shew yourself humble in prosperity, and in adversity, if ever it
 should ensue; upright in justice; friendly to the good, and opposed to
 the froward; never discountenancing any one who speaks for the truth;
 instant in works of mercy according to thy means, and yet beyond thy
 means desiring to be instant; sympathizing with the weak; rejoicing
 with men of good will; regarding the woes of others as thine own;
 exulting for the joys of others as if for thine own; in correcting
 vices severe, in cherishing virtues, soothing the minds of hearers; in
 anger, retaining judgment without anger, but in calmness not
 relinquishing the censorship of your severity.  This, dearest brother,
 is the meaning of the pallium which you will receive, which if you act
 up to, you will have inwardly what you are seen to have received
 outwardly.

 Furthermore I commend in all respects to your Fraternity our brother
 and fellow-bishop Sabinianus [88] ; and if there be any matters of
 dispute between you, let them meanwhile be laid aside.  Let charity
 remain fixed between you, that so, in case of contention ever arising
 about external things, they may be examined without charity deserting
 the heart.  We commend also our common son Honoratus:  concerning whom
 if it is the case, as we have learnt through Castorius our
 chartularius; that through him three previous archdeacons have been
 compelled to observe the ecclesiastical custom by retiring at the
 expiration of five years, we desire indeed that he may experience the
 charity of thy Holiness.  For a judgment ought not to be solicited in a
 case which he himself has judged.  If, however, it is not so, then, all
 swelling of heart being repressed, and all grudge set aside, he ought
 to be received, and by no means removed from the place which he now
 occupies.  Messianus also, the cleric who had taken refuge with us, we
 have confidently committed to the charge of our common son Stephen the
 deacon, being assured that in the case of one whom we ourselves send to
 your Fraternity, you will not show any grudge, but lend the countenance
 of your authority.  May Almighty God keep you in His protection, and
 grant us so to act that after the billows of this temporal state we may
 be able to attain with joy to things eternal.

 [87] See III. 47, note 2, and IX. 81.

 [88] See IX. 80, VI. 27, note 6; VII. 17, IX. 80.

 Epistle CXXVII.

 From S. Columbanus to Pope Gregory [89] .

 To the holy lord, and father in Christ, the Roman [pope], most fair
 ornament of the Church, a certain most august flower, as it were, of
 the whole of withering Europe, distinguished speculator, as enjoying a
 divine contemplation of purity (?) [90] .  I, Bargoma [91] , poor dove
 in Christ, send greeting.

 Grace to thee and peace from God the Father [and] our [Lord] Jesus
 Christ.  I am pleased to think, O holy pope, that it will seem to thee
 nothing extravagant to be interrogated about Easter, according to that
 canticle, Ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thine elders and they
 will tell thee (Deut. xxxii. 7).  For, though on me, who am indeed a
 trifler (micrologo) may be branded that excellent expression of a
 certain wise man, who is reported to have said, on seeing a certain
 woman, contupictam [92] , I do not admire the art, but I admire the
 brow, in that I who am vile write to thee that art illustrious; yet,
 relying on my confidence in shy evangelical humility, I presume to
 write to thee, and impose on thee the matter of my grief.  For writing
 is not in vain, when necessity compels one to write, though it be to
 one's betters.

 What, then, dost thou say concerning Easter on the 21st or 22nd day of
 the moon, which (with thy peace be it said) is proved by many
 calculators not to be Easter, but in truth a time of darkness?  For it
 is not unknown, as I believe, to thy Efficiency, how Anatolius [93] (a
 man of wonderful learning, as says Saint Hieronymus, extracts from
 whose writings Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea, inserted in his
 Ecclesiastical History, and Saint Hieronymus praised this same work
 about Easter in his catalogue) disputes with strong disapprobation
 about this age of the moon.  For against the Gallican Rimarii [94] ,
 who erred, as he says, about Easter, he introduced an awful sentence,
 saying, Certainly, if the rising of the moon be delayed till the end of
 two watches, which indicates midnight, light does not overcome
 darkness, but darkness light; which thing is certainly not allowable in
 the Easter Festival, namely, that any part of the darkness should
 dominate over the light, since the solemnity of the Lord's Resurrection
 is light, and there is no communion of light with darkness.  And, if
 the moon has not shone forth till the third watch, there is no doubt
 that the moon has risen on its 21st or 22nd day, in which it is not
 possible for a true Paschal offering to be made.  For those who lay
 down that it is possible for a true Easter to be celebrated at this age
 of the moon, not only are unable to affirm this by authority of divine
 Scripture, but also incur the guilt of sacrilege and contumacy and
 peril of their souls, while affirming that the true Light, which
 dominates over all darkness, can be offered while there is any
 domination of darkness.  Also in the book of holy dogma we read,
 Easter, that is, the solemnity of the Lord's Resurrection, cannot be
 celebrated before the beginning of the vernal equinox is past, to wit,
 that it may not come before the vernal equinox [95] :  which rule
 assuredly Victorius [96] has gone beyond in his cycle, and hereby has
 already introduced error into Gaul, or to speak less boldly, has
 confirmed one of old standing.  For indeed how can either of these
 things stand with reason; either that the Lord's Resurrection should be
 celebrated before His Passion (the thought of which is absurd), or that
 the seven days sanctioned by the Lord's command in the Law, during
 which only it is enjoined that the Lord's Passover could lawfully be
 eaten (which are to be numbered from the 14th day of the moon to the
 20th), should against law and right be exceeded?  For a moon in its
 21st or 22nd day is out of the dominion of light, as having risen at
 that time after midnight; and, when darkness overcomes light, it is
 said to be impious to keep the solemnity of light.  Why then dost thou,
 who art so wise, the brilliant lights indeed of whose sacred genius are
 diffused, as in ancient times, through the world,--why dost thou keep a
 dark Easter?  I wonder, I confess, that this error of Gaul, ac si
 Schynteneum [97] , has not long ago been swept away by thee; unless I
 should perchance suppose, what I can hardly believe, that, as it is
 evident that thou hast not corrected it, it has thy approval.

 In another way, however, may thy Expertness be more honourably excused,
 if, fearing to subject thyself to the mark of Hermagoric [98] novelty,
 thou art content with the authority of thy predecessors, and especially
 of pope Leo.

 Do not, I pray thee, in such a question trust to humility only or to
 gravity, which are often deceived, Better by far is a living dog in
 this problem than a dead lion (Eccles. ix. 4).  For a living saint may
 correct what had not been corrected by another who came before him.
 For know thou that by our masters and the Irish ancients, who were
 philosophers and most wise computists in constructing calculations,
 Victorius was not received, but held rather worthy of ridicule or of
 excuse than as carrying authority.  Wherefore to me, as a timid
 stranger rather than as a sciolist, afford the support of thy judgment,
 and disdain not to send us speedily the suffrage of thy Placability for
 assuaging this tempest which surrounds us; since, after so many authors
 whom I have read, I am not satisfied with that one sentence of those
 bishops who say only, We ought not to keep the Passover with the Jews.
 For this is what the bishop Victor formerly said; but none of the
 Easterns accepted his figment [99] .  But this the benumbing (numb?)
 backbone of Dagon; this the dotage of error drinks in [100] .  Of what
 worth, I ask, is this sentence, so frivolous and so rude and resting,
 as it does, on no testimonies of sacred Scripture; We ought not to keep
 the Passover with the Jews?  What has it to do with the question?  Are
 the reprobate Jews to be supposed to keep the Passover now, seeing that
 they are without a temple, outside Jerusalem, and Christ, who was
 formerly prefigured, having been crucified by them?  Or, can it be
 rightly supposed that the 14th day of the moon for the Passover was of
 their own appointment, and is it not rather to be acknowledged to be of
 God's, who alone knew clearly with what mysterious meaning the 14th day
 of the moon was chosen for the passage [out of Egypt].  Perhaps to wise
 men and the like of thee this may be in some degree clearer than to
 others.  As to those who make this objection, although without
 authority, let them upbraid God for that He did not then beforehand
 guard against the contumacy of the Jews by enjoining on them in the Law
 nine days of unleavened bread, if He would not have us keep the
 Passover with them, so that the beginning of our solemnity should not
 exceed the end of theirs.  For, if Easter is to be celebrated on the
 21st or 22nd day, from the 14th to the 22nd nine days will be reckoned,
 that is, seven ordered by God, and two added by men.  But, if it is
 allowed for men to add anything of their own accord to divine decree, I
 ask whether this may not seem opposed to that sentence of Deuteronomy,
 Lo (he saith), the word which I give unto thee, thou shalt not add unto
 it nor take from it (Deut. iv. 2).

 But in writing all this more forwardly than humbly, I know that I have
 involved myself in an Euripus of presumption attended with great
 difficulty, being perchance unskilled to steer out of it.  Nor does it
 befit our place or rank that anything should be suggested in the way of
 discussion to thy great authority, and that my Western letters should
 ridiculously solicit thee, who sittest legitimately on the seat of the
 apostle and key-bearer Peter, on the subject of Easter.  But thou
 oughtest to consider not so much worthless me in this matter as many
 masters, both departed and now living, who confirm what I have pointed
 out, and suppose thyself to be holding a colloquy with them:  for know
 that I open my thick-lipped month dutifully though it may be
 incoherently and extravagantly.  It is for thee, therefore, either to
 excuse or to condemn Victorius, knowing that, if thou approvest him, it
 will be a question of faith between thee and the aforesaid Hieronymus,
 seeing that he approved Anatolius, who is opposed to Victorius; so that
 whoso follows the one cannot receive the other.  Let, then, thy
 Vigilance take thought that, in approving the faith of one of the two
 authors aforesaid who are mutually opposed to each other, there be no
 dissonance, when thou pronouncest thy opinion, between thee and
 Hieronymus, lest we should be on all sides in a strait, as to whether
 we should agree with thee or with him.  Spare the weak in this matter,
 lest thou exhibit the scandal of diversity.  For I frankly acknowledge
 to thee that any one who goes against the authority of Saint Hieronymus
 will be one to be repudiated as a heretic among the churches of the
 West:  for they accommodate their faith in all respects unhesitatingly
 to him with regard to the Divine Scriptures.  But let this suffice with
 respect to Easter.

 But I ask what thy judgment is about those bishops whom thou hast
 written of as simoniacal, and whom the writer Giltas [101] calls
 pests.  Should communion be had with them?  For there are known to be
 many such in this province, whereby the matter is made more serious.
 Or as to others, who having been polluted in their diaconate, are
 afterwards elected to the rank of bishops?  For there are some whom we
 know to have conscientious scruples on these grounds; and in conferring
 with our littleness about them, they wished to know for certain whether
 they may minister without peril after such transgressions; that is,
 either after having bought their rank for money, or after adultery in
 their diaconate.  I mean, however, concealed adultery with their
 dependents [102] , which with our teachers is accounted as no less
 criminal.

 As to a third head of enquiry, say in reply, I pray thee, if it is not
 troublesome, what should be done in the case of those monks who for a
 closer sight of God, or inflamed by a longing for a more perfect life,
 going against their vows, leave the places of their first conversion,
 and, against the will of their abbots, the fervour of monks compelling
 them, either go free or fly to deserts.  The author Vennianus enquired
 about these of Giltas, who replied to him most elegantly:  yet still to
 one who is anxious to learn there is ever an increase of greater fear.
 These things, and much more which epistolary brevity does not admit of,
 might well have been enquired about more humbly and more clearly in a
 personal interview, but that weakness of body and the care of my
 fellow-pilgrims keeps me bound at home, though desirous of going to
 thee, so as to draw from that spiritual vein of a living well and from
 the living water of knowledge flowing from heaven and springing up unto
 eternal life.  And, if my body were to follow my mind, Rome would once
 more be in danger of being itself despised; seeing that--even as we
 read in the narration of the learned Hieronymus how certain persons
 once came to Rome from the utmost boundaries of the Heuline coast [103]
 ; and then (wonderful to be told) sought something else outside of
 Rome--so I too, saving reverence for the ashes of the saints should
 seek out longingly, not Rome but thee:  for, though I confess myself
 not to be wise, but athirst, I should do this same thing if I had time
 and opportunity.

 I have read thy book containing the Pastoral Rule, short in style,
 lengthy in teaching, full of mysteries; and acknowledge it to be a work
 sweeter than honey to one that is in need.  Wherefore bestow, I pray
 thee, on me who am athirst for what is thine, the works on Ezekiel,
 which, as I have heard, thou hast elaborated with wonderful genius.  I
 have read the six books of Hieronymus on that prophet; but he has not
 expounded the middle part.  But, if thou wilt do me the favour, send
 for me to the city some of thy remaining writings; to wit, the
 concluding expositions of one book, and (? namely) the Song of Songs
 from that place where it is said, I will go to the mountain of myrrh
 and the hill of frankincense, to the end, treated with short comments,
 either of others, or thine own:  and I beg that thou wouldest expound
 the whole obscurity of Zachariah, and make manifest its hidden meaning,
 that Western blindness may give thee thanks for this.  I make
 unreasonable demands, and ask to have great things told me:  who can
 fail to see this?  But it is true also that thou hast great things, and
 knowest well that from a little less, and from much more should be put
 out to use.  Let charity induce thee to write in reply; let not the
 roughness of my letter hinder thee from expounding, seeing that it is
 my mode of expression that has been in fault, and I have it in my heart
 to pay thee due honour.  It was for me to provoke, to interrogate, to
 request:  it is for thee not to refuse what thou hast received freely,
 to put thy talent out to use, to give to him that asks the bread of
 doctrine, as Christ enjoins.  Peace be to thee and thine; pardon my
 forwardness, blessed pope, in that I have written so boldly; and I pray
 thee in thy holy prayers to our common Lord to pray for me, a most vile
 sinner.  I think it quite superfluous to commend to thee my people,
 whom the Saviour judges fit to be received, as walking in His name; and
 if, as I have heard from thy holy Candidus [104] , thou shouldest be
 disposed to say in reply that things confirmed by ancient usage cannot
 be changed, error is manifestly ancient; but truth which reproves it is
 ever more ancient still.

 [89] This epistle of the Irish saint Columbanus to Gregory was added to
 the Registrum Epistolarum by the Benedictine editors, having been first
 published, with other writings of S. Columban, by Patrick Fleming in
 Collectanea sacra; Lovan. a.d. 1667.  (See Galland. Bibliotheca veterum
 patrum.  Sæc. VI. circ. a.d. 589.)  It is assigned by the Benedictines
 to a.d. 598-9, and hence placed at the end of Book IX. of Gregory's
 Epistles. At this time St. Columban was at the monastery founded by him
 at Luxovium (Luxueil) among the Vosges mountains in Burgundy over which
 country Theoderic II. was now king.  He had already given offence in
 Gaul, not only by his protest in life and teaching against prevalent
 laxity, but also by his continuing to observe and uphold the custom of
 his own Celtic Church with regard to the time for keeping Easter, which
 differed from what had now been adopted by Rome and prevailed in the
 West generally.  The main purpose of this epistle is to plead with pope
 Gregory for approval of the Celtic tradition.  Subsequently, a synod
 being held in Gaul for considering the question, he addressed the
 bishops there assembled in a letter which is also extant, defending, as
 in this epistle, the Celtic usage, and pleading for being allowed at
 any rate to follow it himself in peace (S. Columbani, Ep. II. in
 Collectan. sacr.) It may be observed in the epistle before us, as also
 in a subsequent one to pope Boniface IV. with reference to the same
 subject (S. Columbani, Ep. V.; Collectan. sacr), that, though
 addressing the bishop of Rome in language of the utmost deference, and
 recognizing his high position, he shews no disposition to submit to his
 authority; telling him on the contrary that should he declare himself
 so as to contradict the supposed teaching of St. Jerome, he would be
 rejected as heretical by all the Celtic churches.  And throughout the
 letter there runs a vein of sarcasm.  There is no extant reply from
 Gregory to the letter.  Probably none was sent.  Possibly the letter
 never reached its destination:  for in the subsequent letter, above
 referred to, to Boniface IV. Columban says, "Once and again Satan
 hindered the bearers of our letters written formerly to pope Gregory of
 good memory, which are subjoined below." The point at issue, and
 Columban's argument, as it appears in this letter, may be briefly
 stated thus.  Apart from any differences in the cycles for calculating
 the true day of the Paschal full moon in successive years, there was
 this difference between the Celtic and Roman usages.  While all agreed
 in keeping Easter on a Sunday, the Celtic use was to keep it on the day
 of the Paschal full moon itself (i.e. the calculated 14th day of the
 moon falling on, or next after, the Vernal Equinox), in case of such a
 day falling on a Sunday; whereas the Roman was, in such a case, to
 defer their Easter celebration till the following Sunday, so as to
 avoid coincidence with the actual day of the Jewish Passover.  Hence,
 in Bede's account of the controversy on the subject between the British
 and Scottish (i.e. Irish) Churches on the one hand and the Roman on the
 other, he speaks of the former keeping their Easter between the 14th
 and the 20th days of the moon inclusive, but the latter between the
 15th and the 21st (Bede, H. E. II. 2; III. 25).  In Gaul however, as
 appears from the letter before us, it was the rule to defer Easter for
 a week in case of the day of the Paschal full moon (i.e. the 14th)
 falling on a Saturday, so as to avoid coincidence even with the 15th
 day of the moon.  Hence, agreeing with Bede as to the Celtic usage
 being to keep Easter between the 14th and 20th days, he speaks not of
 the 15th and 21st, but of the 16th and the 22nd being the extreme
 limits according to the Gallic usage.  The reason of this difference
 was, that it had once been the Latin use, as against the Alexandrian,
 to keep Easter from the 16th to the 22nd days, thus avoiding the 15th;
 and this rule had been retained in the cycle of Victorius (as to whom
 see below, note 7), which was still received in Gaul. The arguments of
 St. Columban in defence of the Celtic usage may be thus summarized.  1.
 It had been sanctioned by Anatolius (see below, note 5), whose view had
 been approved by St. Jerome.  2. To defer Easter to the 22nd, or even
 the 21st day was incongruous, seeing that the moon then entered her
 last quarter, rising so late as to give darkness preponderance over
 light; and the solemnity of light should not be celebrated under the
 domination of darkness.  He quotes Anatolius as having insisted on this
 principle, of which (we may here observe) we find an intimation in
 Philo with reference to the Jewish Passover:--"That not only by day but
 also by night the world may be full of all-beauteous light, inasmuch as
 sun and moon on that day succeed each other with no interval of
 darkness between."  (De Sept. et Fest. 1191.)  3. The alleged objection
 to keeping Easter on the day of the Jewish Passover was unfounded and
 futile.  4. The Mosaic Law enjoined seven days, beginning with the
 14th, as the duration of the Passover festival; and within the same
 limits should be kept the Easter festival.  [This argument, it may be
 observed, whatever its worth in other respects, appears to be founded
 on an error.  For the Passover, having been killed before sunset on the
 14th of Nisan, is believed to have been eaten after sunset, i.e. after
 the 15th day, reckoned from evening to evening, had begun; and from the
 latter day inclusive the seven days of unleavened bread were reckoned,
 thus ending with the 21st, which was a special day of "holy
 convocation."  Cf . below, note 5.]

 [90] Theoria utpote divina castulitatis potito.  The wordcastulitas may
 possibly have been in use among the Irish monks as an endearing
 diminutive of castitas(i.e. chastity or purity), regarded as the object
 of their affections in the contemplative life.  Their writers appear to
 have been given to the use of such diminutives, not only of the names
 of people, but of other words also.--"In the following pages (sc. in
 Adamnan's Life of St. Columba) the reader will observe the liberal
 employment of diminutives, so characteristic of Irish composition; and
 he will find them, in many cases, used without any grammatical force,
 and commutable, in the same chapters, with their primitives."  (Reeve's
 Adamnan. Appendix to Preface, Ed., 1857, p. lxi.).

 [91] Perhaps an error for Barjona, meaning son of a dove,' in allusion
 to his name, Columba, or Columbanus.  He afterwards calls himself
 "vilis columba."  Cf. "Pauperculus præpotenti (mirum dictu! nova res!)
 rara avis scribere audet Bonifacio patri Palumbus:"  "Sed talia
 suadenti, utpote torpenti actu, ac dicenti potius quam facienti mihi,
 Jonæ Hebraice, Peristeræ Græce, Columbæ Latine, potius tantum [al.
 tamen] vestræ idiomate linguæ nancto [al. nuncupato], (S. Columbani Ep.
 V. ad Bonifacium papam IV. Collectan. sacr. Patr. Fleming. Galland.
 sæc. VI. c. a.d. 598).  Cf. "Vir erat vitæ venerabilis et beatæ
 memoriæ, monasteriorum pater et fundator, cum Jona propheta homonymum
 sortitus nomen; nam licet diverso trium diversarum sono linguarum, unam
 tamen eandemque rem significat hoc quod Hebraice dicitur Jona, Græcitas
 vero PERISTERA vocitat, et Latina lingua Columba nuncupatur."
 (Adamnan's Life of S. Columba; Secunda Præfatio.)  Du Cange suggests a
 corruption of Barginna, said to be a low Latin word, equivalent to
 peregrinus.

 [92] The meaning of this word is obscure.  Patrick Fleming (Collect.
 Sacr.) suggests an error for compte pictam:  Du Cange for comptam, or
 acu comptam, some artificial arrangement of the hair being supposed to
 be referred to.  The intended point of the comparison seems to be, that
 Gregory will still be admirable, though the writer may set him off
 unskilfully.

 [93] Anatolius, an Alexandrian by birth and bishop of Laodicea, a.d.
 269, is referred to by Eusebius (H. E. VII. 32) as distinguished for
 learning, and the writer of a work on the Paschal question, which he
 quotes.  A "Canon Paschalis," purporting to be this work, was published
 by Bucherius in a Latin Version (Doct. Temp. Antv. 1634); but its
 genuineness is doubted.  Anatolius was adduced by Colman at the Synod
 of Whitby (Bede, H. E. III. 25), as an authority for the 14th and 20th
 days of the moon being the limits for Easter.  But Wilfrid replied that
 Anatolius had been misunderstood; for that, having in view the Egyptian
 mode of reckoning days from sunset to sunset, he had meant the day
 which began after sunset on the 14th day, i.e. really the 15th.  And so
 also with regard to the 20th day.  His language, as quoted by Eusebius,
 supports this explanation of his meaning:--"Given that the day of the
 Passover is on the fourteenth of the moon after evening (meth'
 hesperan)."  See above, end of note 1.

 [94] "Forte sic dictos, quod obscura et difficilia rimarentur."
 Benedictine edit. Migne.--"Nostri rimeurs vocant poetastras, sed an ea
 sit hic notio non definio."  Du Cange.

 [95] The original here, being probably an incorrect citation, is
 obscure.  It is "Pascha, ed est solemnitas dominicæ Resurrectionis,
 ante transgressum vernalis æquinoctii 16 initiam non potest celebrari,
 ut scilicet æquinoctium non antecedat."

 [96] Pope Leo I. referred the question between the Roman and
 Alexandrian Churches as to the computation of Easter to his archdeacon
 (afterwards pope) Hilarius for investigation; and he referred it to
 Victorius of Aquitaine, who consequently (a.d. 457) drew up a cycle,
 which was accepted first in the Gallican Churches (Concil. Aurel. IV.,
 an. 541), and continued to be observed there after it had been
 superseded in Italy by that of Dionysius Exiguus (a.d. 527).  See
 above, note 1.

 [97] "Schynteneum Græcam vocem schoinotenes putat Editor, id est,
 tanquam si rectum et legitimum esset."  Du Cange.  This interpretation
 appears probable from the fact that the Irish writers of the period
 were given to air their Greek learning by the rise of such words.--"He
 (Adamnan) occasionally employs Greek or Græco-Latin words" (Reeves's
 Adamnan. p. lxi.  See also p. 158, note, for other evidence of this
 Irish tendency).  The meaning in the text would thus be, "I wonder that
 this error should be tolerated by thee as though it were right and
 legitimate."

 [98] Hermagoricæ novitatis; the epithet being apparently formed from
 the name of Hermagoras of Temnos, a distinguished Greek rhetorician of
 the time of Pompey and Cicero.  He devoted peculiar attention to what
 is called the invention.  Quintilian refers to him and approves his
 system:  Cicero (De Invent. i. 6) was opposed to it.  The use of a word
 like this is again characteristic of the Irish writers.

 [99] i.e. pope Victor in his opposition towards the end of the second
 century to the Asiatic Quarto-decimans who kept their Pasch on the day
 of the Paschal full moon, whatever the day of the week might be.
 Colman at the synod of Whitby had alleged St. John, to whom the
 Asiatics had traced their tradition, as an authority for the Scottish
 usage.  But Wilfrid truly alleged in reply that the question at issue
 between the Scots and Romans at that time was a different one, since
 both parties agreed in keeping Easter on a Sunday only.  Still,
 Columban's argument here is to the point as shewing that the Easterns
 had not objected to keeping Easter on the actual day of the Jewish
 Passover.  It may be noted here how the authority of Victor, as well as
 of other popes, is set at naught by S. Columbanus.

 [100] Sed hoc soporans spina Dagonis, hoc imbibit bubum erroris.  On
 these obscure expressions it may be observed that spina Dagonis
 evidently means what was left to the fish-god (rhachis in LXX.), after
 his head and hands had been severed.  Gregory, in his comment on 1 Sam.
 v., interprets it as denoting heathenism prostrate, and at length
 deprived of even the semblance of rationality, in the presence of the
 Gospel, which was represented by the ark.  Columban may possibly have
 got the idea from Gregory's own interpretation of the incident, and
 been pleased to use it against him.  Bubum,according to Du Cange, is a
 late Latin word denoting senium, or languor, the noun bubulaalso being
 used in the sense of fabula.  The idea seems to be that pope Victor's
 view was a figment, worthy only to be received (or, as we might now
 say, swallowed) by senseless heathenism or wandering dotage.

 [101] Meaning Gildas.

 [102] Cum clientelis:  meaning perhaps living with females of their own
 households as concubines, in distinction from open transgression.  The
 word can hardly denote, as suggested by the Benedictine Editors, wives
 lawfully married before ordination.

 [103] De ultimis Heulini, litoris finibus.-- "Loco Heulini esse
 legendum Hualini, vel Huelini constat ex contextu Hieronymiano.  Est
 vox Græca, a rad. hualos, sive huelos, vitrum, crystallus.  Sic mare
 vocatur (Apocal. iv.) thalassa hualine.  In Hieronymo hic legimus; De
 ultimis Hispaniæ Galliarumque finibus" (note in Benedictine Edition).
 See above, note 8, as to the fondness of the old Irish writers for the
 use of Greek words.

 [104] Candidus had been sent by Gregory to Gaul as rector patrimonii
 there.  See previous Epistles.

 Book X.

 Epistle X.

 To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).

 Gregory to Romanus, our guardian in Sicily.

 It has been reported to us that our most reverend brother the bishop
 Basilius is occupied in legal suits as though he were one of the last
 of the people, and unprofitably attends the courts.  Now, since this
 thing both renders the man himself vile and does away with the
 reverence due to priests, let thy Experience, immediately on receiving
 this order, so compel him by strict execution of it to return to his
 duty that, through thy insistency, a delay of five days be not under
 any excuse allowed him; lest, if thou shouldest in any way permit him
 to make such delay, thou with him shouldest come to be gravely culpable
 before us.  Given in the month of December, Indiction 3.

 Epistle XV.

 To Clementina, Patrician [105] .

 Gregory to Clementina, &c.

 It has reached us by the report of a certain Abbot that your Glory has
 been told by certain evil-speakers that we have a pique against you.
 If this is so, whosoever have made up this story have been double
 towards you under a shew of sincerity, so as to shew themselves off as
 faithful, and wickedly cause you to doubt us.  But I, glorious
 daughter, knowing thy good qualities of old, and especially the
 chastity which has been thy companion from youth, have ever regarded
 thee with great respect and affection.  But, lest even now your Glory
 should suspect that my heart is changed, I declare that there is not in
 me a scruple of ill-feeling or anger towards you; but be assured that I
 evince paternal affection for you.  One thing, however, that has been
 told me I ought not to pass over in silence, lest there should begin to
 be a diminution of charity, if what needs to be said for amendment were
 suppressed.

 For indeed it has been reported to me that, when any one has offended
 you, you retain soreness unremittingly.  Now, if this is true, since
 the more I love you the more grieved I am, I beg that you would nobly
 rid yourself of this fault, and not suffer the seed of the enemy to
 grow to the detriment of your crop of well-doing.  Let the words of the
 Lord's Prayer be brought back to your memory, and let not blame prevail
 with you over pardon.  Let the goodness of your Glory get the better of
 transgressions, and by salubriously pardoning make the offender devoted
 to you more than persistent asperity can make him undevoted.  Let there
 be left to him what may make him ashamed, and not kept up what may
 grieve him.  For usually discreet remission has more effect for
 correction than strictness in executing vengeance; so much so that
 sometimes the one makes a man more faithful and subdued, while the
 other makes him obstinate and spiteful.  And indeed we do not say this
 to you in order that you should abate your zeal for righteousness, but
 lest you should be in the least things such as you ought to be in the
 greatest.  For, if ever the quality of a transgression requires
 severity, it should be so dealt with that both vengeance may correct
 the fault and grace not be denied afterwards to those that have been
 corrected.  Seeing, then, that we warn you under the dictates of
 paternal affection for your soul's good, receive our words with the
 charity wherewith they are spoken, and take them to yourself for the
 advantage of your Glory, so that your good qualities may become clearer
 before men and very pure before Almighty God.  But count on us, dearest
 daughter, confidently in all things, as indeed you may; and, since we
 always desire to hear of your prosperity, refresh us often by your
 letters.

 [105] Clementina was one of the ladies of rank whose acquaintance
 Gregory had made at Constantinople, and with whom he continued to keep
 up affectionate fatherly intercourse.  Cf. I. 11, and the epistle which
 follows this.

 Epistle XVIII.

 To Clementina, Patrician [106] .

 Gregory to Clementina, &c.

 Know, glorious daughter, that the presbyter Amandus has been elected to
 the episcopate by the people of Surrentum.  And, we having written for
 him to be sent hither, you ought not to be saddened for his absence,
 seeing that one who is with you in heart should not even be believed to
 be departing from you.  And, since he who once pleased you is
 acceptable to those who want a bishop, bless Almighty God for this, and
 with Christian devotion rejoice the more; and gladly do your best to
 further his coming to us for the advantage of others speedily, since it
 is the part of sincere charity to exult when one who is loved is called
 that he may grow.

 [106] It is a sign of Gregory's habitual courtesy to ladies of rank, as
 well as of their influential position, that he is moved to send her a
 kind of apology for removing from Constantinople a priest whom she
 valued, and who may have been her spiritual adviser.  See also the
 epistle which follows, in which the subdeacon in charge of the
 proceedings is directed to resort to her in person to solicit her
 consent.  Amandus was after his death venerated as a Saint at
 Surrentum.  In the Church of SS. Felix and Baculus there is this
 epitaph;--"Hic requiescit sacerdos Dei Amandus episcopus sanctæ
 ecclesiæ Surrentinæ, qui sedit annos xvii. dies xxi.  Depositus est die
 13, mense Aprilis, indict. 5, imperante D.N. Heraclio R. Aug. anno 7.
 Orate pro me, sancte Pater," (Migne, Patrilog., in loc.)

 Epistle XIX.

 To Anthemius, Subdeacon.

 Gregory to Anthemius, Subdeacon of Campania.

 After he who had been elected to the episcopate of the city of
 Surrentum had appeared to us to be unfit, they elected Amandus,
 presbyter of the oratory of Saint Severinus, which is in the Lucullan
 camp.  Wherefore we enjoin on thy Experience, laying aside excuses, to
 take care to send the said presbyter to us with all speed, to the end
 that, if there is nothing to hinder him from coming, the desires of the
 petitioners may with the help of Christ be fulfilled.  As to his life
 and deeds, seeing that they can be better known where he has long
 lived, let it be thy care, together with our brother and fellow-bishop,
 Fortunatus [107] , to make diligent enquiry.  And if there is nothing
 in the way of his promotion to the sacred order, he should be sent to
 us without any delay.  But, lest our glorious daughter Clementina
 should take this amiss, let thy Experience go to her, and do this thing
 with her consent.  If, however, she should be disposed to resist, let
 thy Experience still send him hither without delay, since we ought so
 to pacify the minds of our children as still not to obstruct benefit to
 souls.

 [107] Bishop of Naples.

 Epistle XXIII.

 To Adrian, Notary of Sicily [108] .

 Gregory to Adrian, &c.

 A thing to us altogether detestable and infamous has come to our ears,
 and we wonder why, if it is true, thou hast not taken notice of it.
 For Martianus, a monk of the monastery of Saint Vitus, situate on Mount
 Ætna, has come to us, and presented a petition, complaining among other
 things that the monks of this monastery live so perversely and wickedly
 as to dare to have women living with them, which is a thing atrocious
 to be spoken of.  And, seeing that we have written on this matter to
 our brother and fellow-bishop Leo [109] , in order that, having
 enquired into the truth, he may, if he should find it to be so, be at
 pains to correct it with the strictest severity, it is necessary for
 thy Experience also to shew thyself in all respects solicitous for
 investigation of the truth, and punishment of so great a wickedness; so
 that nothing may be found to be done remissly or negligently.  Further,
 for the interests in other respects of the same monastery, lend thy
 assistance so far as equity may require, to the end that if, as is
 said, there has been any invasion of it, it may be redressed according
 to justice, and that for the future nothing prejudicial may in any way
 arise there contrary to the fear of God and the order of law.

 [108] As to the employment of notaries, see Prolegomena, p. viii.

 [109] Bishop of Catana in Sicily, to whom a previous epistle (Ep.
 XXII., not here translated) on the same subject is addressed.  Several
 years previously he had been summoned to Rome to answer certain charges
 against him, but had been honourably acquitted.  Cf. I. 72; II. 33.

 Epistle XXIV.

 To Fortunatus, Bishop of Neapolis (Naples).

 Gregory to Fortunatus, &c.

 When your Fraternity pays too little attention to the monasteries that
 are under you, you both lay yourself open to reproof, and make us sorry
 for your laxity.  Now it has come to our ears that one Mauricius, who
 lately became a monk in the monastery of Barbacianus, has fled from the
 same monastery, taking other monks with him.  In this case the
 hastiness of the aforesaid Barbacianus inculpates him exceedingly in
 our sight, in that he rashly tonsured a secular person without even
 previous probation.  Did we not write to you that you should prove him
 first, and then, if he were fit, should make him abbot?  Even now,
 then, look well after him whom you chose.  For you are delinquent in
 his delinquency, if he has begun so to demean himself as to shew
 himself unfit to have the government of brethren.

 Further, let your Fraternity more strictly interdict all monasteries
 from venturing by any means to tonsure those whom they may have
 received for monastic profession before they have completed two years
 in monastic life.  But in this space of time let their life and manners
 be carefully proved, lest any one of them should either not be content
 with what he had desired or not keep firm to what he had chosen.  For,
 it being a serious matter that untried men should be associated under
 obedience to any master, how much more serious is it that any who have
 not been proved should be attached to the service of God?

 Further, if a soldier should wish to become a monk, let no one for any
 cause whatever presume to receive him [110] without our consent, or
 before it has been reported to us.  If this rule is not diligently
 observed, know that all the guilt of those that are under thee redounds
 on thyself, seeing that thou provest thyself by the very facts of the
 case to be too little anxious about them.

 [110] See III. 65, note 1.

 Epistle XXXI.

 To Libertinus, Ex-Prætor.

 Gregory to Libertinus, &c.

 What straits you are in with regard to the things of this world is not
 unknown to us.  But, since to those who are placed in the utmost
 tribulation the only comfort is the mercy of the Creator, rest your
 hope on Him, and turn to Him with your whole heart, Who both justly
 allows whom He will to be afflicted and will mercifully deliver one who
 trusts in Him.  To Him, then, give thanks, and patiently endure what
 has been brought upon you.  For it is the part of a right mind not only
 to bless God in prosperity, but also in adversities to join in praising
 Him.  In these things therefore that you are suffering let no murmur
 against God creep into your heart, since for what purpose our Creator
 thus works is unknown.  For perchance, magnificent son, thou didst
 offend Him in something when in a state of prosperity, from which He
 would purge thee by kindly bitterness.  And so neither let temporal
 affliction break thee down nor losses of thy goods distract thee, since
 if, returning thanks in adversity, thou make God propitious to thee by
 thy patience, both the things that were lost are multiplied, and in
 addition to this, eternal joys held out to thee.  I beg thee, however,
 not to take it amiss that we have written through Romanus the guardian
 to order twenty suits of clothing to be supplied from us to your
 servants, seeing that things, however small, which are offered from the
 goods of the blessed Apostle Peter are always to be taken for a great
 blessing, since he will have power both to bestow on you greater
 things, and to hold out to you eternal benefits with Almighty God.  The
 month of June, Indiction 3.

 Epistle XXXV.

 To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

 Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

 In the past year I received the letters of your most sweet Holiness;
 but on account of the extreme severity of my sickness have been unable
 to reply to them until now.  For lo, it is now almost full two years
 that I have been confined to my bed, afflicted with such pains of gout
 that I have hardly been able to rise on feast-days for as much as three
 hours space to solemnize mass.  And I am soon compelled by severe pain
 to lie down, that I may be able to bear my torment with intervening
 groans.  This pain of mine is sometimes moderate, and sometimes
 excessive:  but neither so moderate as to depart, nor so excessive as
 to kill me.  Hence it comes to pass that, being daily in death, I am
 daily debarred from death.  Nor it is surprising that, grievous sinner
 as I am, I am long kept confined in the prison of such corruption.
 Whence I am compelled to exclaim, Bring my soul out of prison, that I
 may confess thy name (Ps. cxli. 8).  But, since I am not yet worthy to
 obtain this by my prayers, I beg that the prayer of your Holiness may
 afford me the aid of its intercession, and deliver me from the weight
 of sin and corruption into that liberty, which you know well, of the
 glory of the children of God.

 Your to me most sweet and ever to be honoured Blessedness has informed
 me in your letter that our common son Anatolius, deacon of the city of
 Constantinople, had written to you to say that certain monks from the
 parts about Jerusalem had come to me to make some enquiry concerning
 the error of the Agnoitæ [111] , and you say that he begged your
 Holiness to write to me to express your opinion with respect to this
 enquiry.  But neither have monks come to me from the parts about
 Jerusalem to make any enquiry, nor do I think that the said our common
 son can have told you in his letters what was not the case; but I
 suspect that the interpreter has mistaken the meaning of his letters.
 For the same deacon, now more than two years ago, wrote to me that
 monks had come from the aforesaid parts to the city of Constantinople
 making such enquiries, and he desired to ask me what I thought.  To
 him, long before I received your letters, I made the very same reply
 against that same heresy as I found afterwards in the epistle of your
 Holiness:  and I returned great thanks to Almighty God that concerning
 all questions the Fathers of the Romans and of the Greeks, whose
 followers we are, have spoken with one spirit.  For in many parts I
 found this your epistle to be as though I had been reading the writings
 of the Latin Fathers against the aforesaid heresy.  And consider how
 much I must love and praise the excellence of my most holy brother, in
 whose mouth I recognised the venerable Fathers, whom I love so much.
 Praise therefore be to Him, to Him be glory in the highest, of whose
 gift the voice of Mark still cries aloud in the See of Peter [112] ;
 from the effusion of whose spirit, when the priest enters into the Holy
 of Holies for searching into mysteries, spiritual bells resound in holy
 Church, as in the tabernacle, from the words of preaching.  Right,
 then, and highly to be praised is your preaching.  But we implore the
 Almighty Lord to keep you long even in this life, that from the organ
 of God, which you are, the voice of truth may in this world sound more
 widely.  And for me, I pray you, intercede, that the way of this
 pilgrimage, which has become too rough for me, may with speed be
 finished, to the end that I, who cannot by my own merits, may by yours
 be able to attain to the promises of the eternal country, and to
 rejoice with the citizens of heaven.

 [111] The Agnoetæ or Themistiani arose in connexion with the
 Monophysite controversy in the sixth century, being led by Themistius,
 a deacon of Alexandria, who taught the limitation of the human
 knowledge of Christ, referring especially to Mark xiii. 32, and John
 xi. 34.  The majority of the Monophysites rejected his view, which was
 condemned also by the orthodox.  Eulogius of Alexandria, to whom the
 letter before us is addressed, wrote a treatise against the Agnoetæ,
 from which extracts are given by Photius.  Sophronius, patriarch of
 Jerusalem, pronounced the anathema against Themistius.  On the same
 subject, cf. Ep. XXXIX. below.  Gregory's arguments in Ep. XXXIX.
 against the views of the Agnoetæ are interesting to English readers at
 the present day, when similar views have been lately put forward and
 discussed.

 [112] See Lib. VII. 40.

 Epistle XXXVI.

 To Maximus, Bishop of Salona [113] .

 Gregory to Maximus, &c.

 When our common son the presbyter Veteranus came to the Roman city, he
 found me so weak from the pains of gout as to be quite unable to answer
 thy Fraternity's letters myself.  And indeed with regard to the nation
 of the Sclaves [114] , from which you are in great danger, I am
 exceedingly afflicted and disturbed.  I am afflicted as suffering
 already in your suffering:  I am disturbed, because they have already
 begun to enter Italy by way of Istria.  Further, of Julian the scribo
 [115] , what shall I say, seeing that I see everywhere how our sins
 find us out, so as to cause us to be disturbed by the nations from
 without and by judges from within?  But be not at all saddened by such
 things, since those who shall live after us will see worse times; so
 much so, that they will regard us as having had happy days in
 comparison with their own.  But, so far as thy Fraternity has power,
 thou oughtest to oppose thyself in behalf of the poor, in behalf of the
 oppressed.  And, even if thou shouldest be unable to do any good, the
 very devotion of thy heart, which Almighty God has given, is enough for
 Him.  For it is written, Rescue them that are drawn unto death, and
 forbear not to deliver them that are ready to be slain (Prov. xxiv.
 11).  But if thou shouldest say, My powers are insufficient, He who
 sees into the heart understands.  In all that thou doest, then, desire
 to have Him Who sees into the heart well-pleased with thee.  But
 whatever there is whereby He may be pleased omit not thou to do.  For
 human terrors and favours are like smoke, which is snatched by a light
 breeze and vanishes away.  Know this most assuredly, that no one can
 please God and bad men.  Let, therefore, thy Fraternity esteem thyself
 to have pleased Almighty God in such degree as thou knowest thyself to
 have displeased froward men.  Yet let thy defence of the poor itself be
 moderate and grave, lest, if anything be done too rigidly, men should
 think you actuated by the pride of youth.  But our defence of the poor
 must needs be found of such sort that both the humble may feel
 protection and oppressors may not easily find what out of a malevolent
 disposition they may blame.  Attend, then, to what is said to Ezekiel,
 Son of man, unbelievers and destroyers are with thee, and thou dost
 dwell among scorpions (Ezek. ii. 6).  And the blessed Job says, I have
 been a brother of dragons, and a companion of owls (Job xxx. 29).  And
 Paul says to his disciples, In the midst of a crooked and perverse
 nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world (Philip. ii. 15).
 We ought, then, to walk all the more cautiously as we know that we are
 living among the enemies of God.  Further, with regard to the
 Photinianists, let thy Fraternity pay the utmost attention; and, as
 thou hast begun, study how to recall them to the bosom of holy Church.
 But, if any should wish to come to me, and to receive an explanation,
 let them first make oath that they will not permit their followers to
 persist in their error even after an explanation has been received.
 And then let thy Holiness promise them that they will suffer no wrong
 from me, but that I will give them an explanation.  If they should
 acknowledge the truth, let them accept it; if they should not
 acknowledge it, I will dismiss them unharmed.  But, if any of them
 should wish to come to us against you, let thy Fraternity by no means
 detain them; for, when they come, they shall either accept an
 explanation, or assuredly they will not see that land any more.

 [113] For a summary of previous dealings with Maximus of Salona, and
 his long defiance of the authority of Rome, see III. 47, note 2.  It
 appears from this epistle that all former insubordination, which had
 called forth such fulminations, was now fully condoned.

 [114] Cf. IX. 9.

 [115] As to the designation Scribo, see II. 32, note 7; V. 30, note 8.
 As to this Julian, so described, cf. IX. 41.

 Epistle XXXVII.

 To Innocent, Præfect of Africa.

 Gregory to Innocent, &c.

 The lucid eloquence of your Eminence, seasoned with the honey of the
 heart, has so infused its savour into our inmost soul, and ravished us
 with love of it, that both what you write sounds sweet, and what you do
 has a pleasant savour; nor this without good cause, since one who is
 accomplished in good studies is great in the eye of judgment, and not
 of partiality.  Further, as we understand that you have taken upon you
 the belts [116] of the prefecture, sadness is mingled with our joy.
 For on the one hand we are rejoiced for the promotion of our most sweet
 son, but are saddened on the other, because we feel in fact from our
 own sorrow how heavy a burden it is in times of confusion to be
 advanced to high positions.  Wherefore all pains ought to be taken that
 troublesome circumstances may become an occasion of reward.  For, as
 you know, corn springs from land that is full of thistles, and the rose
 is produced from thorns.  While, then, you have a time given you meet
 for sowing, delay not to sow the seed of good works, that in the day of
 harvest you may carry home the greater armfuls of joy, and from good
 service in a transitory dignity may come to eternal glory.  Knowing,
 then, of the pains you have taken in the preparation of swift-sailing
 vessels [117] , we relieve your anxiety by wished for news, informing
 you that, by the mercy of God, we have come to terms about peace with
 the king of the Lombards until the month of March in the coming fourth
 Indiction.  Whether it will hold or not we know not, since the said
 king is reported to have died since, though the fact so far is held to
 be uncertain [118] .

 We have done what you wrote to ask us to do about Anamundarus, and
 would that the result might answer to our wish; for, as far as we are
 concerned, we do not deny the succour of our intercession to the
 afflicted.

 As to your wishing the book on the exposition of holy Job to be sent to
 you, we altogether rejoice at your earnest desire; since we see that
 your Eminence earnestly desires what may both prevent you from going
 entirely outside yourself, and bring your heart back to itself after
 being distracted by secular cares.  But, if you desire to be satiated
 with delicious food, read the works of the blessed Augustine, your
 countryman, and seek not our chaff in comparison with his fine wheat.

 Furthermore, we have learnt from the testimony of Hilarius our
 Chartularius what patronage and what kindness your Glory has bestowed
 in the interests of the poor of the blessed Peter, Prince of the
 apostles, who loves you.  On this account, returning you abundant
 thanks, we implore the mercy of Almighty God, that He would defend you
 with the protection of His grace, and permit neither bad men to prevail
 against you without, nor malignant spirits within; but that He would of
 His mercy so order your doings in His fear that, as He has made you
 glorious among men, He may also make you so after the course of a long
 life in the number of His saints.

 [116] Cingula.  "Speciatim cingulum adhibetur in re militari.  Est enim
 militiæ insigne; et metonymice pro ipsa militia ponitur."
 (Facciolati.)

 [117] Dromonibus.  "Est etiam hoc nomine genus navis longæ,
 transvectionibus aptæ, a celeritate dictæ (dromos), a brigantine,
 cutter, yacht, carvel:  cujus mentio fit in Cod. lib. 1, tit. 27, leg.
 2, et apud Cassiod. l. 5, Ep. XVII."  (Facciolati.)

 [118] It was not the fact.  The Lombard King Agilulph lived till a.d.
 616.

 Epistle XXXIX.

 To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

 Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

 As cold water to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country
 (Prov. xxv. 25).  But what can be good news to me, so far as concerns
 the behoof of holy Church, but to hear of the health and safety of your
 to me most sweet Holiness, who, from your perception of the light of
 truth, both illuminate the same Church with the word of preaching, and
 mould it to a better way by the example of your manners?  As often,
 too, as I recall in my heart your oneness of mind with me, and feel
 that I remain fixed in your heart, I give thanks to Almighty God that
 charity cannot be divided by distance of place.  For, though in body we
 are far disjoined, yet in soul we are indivisible.

 Our common son Anatolius the deacon [119] has notified to me in his
 letters that in the royal city nothing ecclesiastical has at any time
 been disturbed from earthly causes.  But I believe that he had before
 announced to me how your Blessedness had spoken in the cause of the
 Church and I rejoice to think that, where you chanced to be present, I
 do not consider that there was any want of me.  For I know that you, as
 a minister of the truth, a follower of Peter, and a preacher of Holy
 Church, would speak what ought to have been heard through the mouth of
 a teacher from the Apostle Peter's See [120] .

 Moreover, before these days, when Abramius of Alexandria came to me, I
 had written in reply to your Holiness both what I thought of your
 writings which you issued against the Agnoite heretics [121] , and why
 I had been so late in replying.  But the said Abramius, compelled by
 difficulties of navigation, is reported to have delayed long in the
 city of Naples; and so I write again in the same sense in which I had
 formerly written, since in your teaching against the heretics that are
 called Agnoitæ there was much for us to admire; but to displease us
 there was nothing.  And in the same sense I had already written at
 length to our son Anatolius the deacon.  Moreover, your doctrine so
 agreed in all respects with the Latin Fathers that I find, not to my
 surprise, that in diverse languages the Spirit has not been diverse.

 For, as to what you have said about the fig-tree, Augustine speaks
 aptly in the same sense; for, when the evangelist subjoined, For the
 time of figs was not yet (Mark xi. 13), it is plainly shown that the
 figs which the Lord had sought were fruit in the synagogue, which had
 the leaves of the Law, but not the fruit of works.  For the Creator of
 all things could not be ignorant that the fig-tree had no fruit; which
 was a thing that all might know, since it was not the time of figs.
 But concerning what is written, That the day and hour neither the Son
 nor the angels know (Mark xiii. 32), your Holiness has quite rightly
 perceived that this is most certainly to be referred, not to the said
 Son with respect to His being the Head, but with respect to His body,
 which we are.  With regard to which matter, the same blessed Augustine
 in many places adopts this sense (Quæst. lib. lxxxiii. q. 60; lib. 1 de
 Trinit., c. 12; in psalm vi., init.; in ps. xxxiv. serm. 2).  He
 mentions also another thing that may be understood of the same Son,
 namely that Almighty God sometimes speaks in a human manner, even as He
 says to Abraham, Now I know that thou fearest God (Genes. xxii. 12).
 It was not that God then came to know that He was feared, but that He
 then made Abraham know that he feared God.  For, as we speak of a glad
 day, not meaning that the day itself is glad, but that it makes us
 glad, so also the Almighty Son says that He does not know the day which
 He causes not to be known; not that He Himself does not know it, but
 that He does not allow it to be known.  Whence also the Father alone is
 said to know it, because the Son Who is consubstantial with Him has His
 knowledge of what the angels are ignorant of from His divine nature,
 whereby He is above the angels.  Whence also it may be more nicely
 understood thus; that the Only-begotten, being incarnate and made for
 us a perfect man, knew indeed in the nature of His humanity the day and
 hour of the judgment, but still it was not from the nature of His
 humanity that He knew it.  What then He knew in it He knew not from it,
 because God, made man, knew the day and hour of the judgment through
 the power of His Deity:  as also at the marriage, when the Virgin
 Mother said that wine was wanting, He replied, Woman, what have I to do
 with thee?  Mine hour is not yet come (Joh. ii. 4).  For it was not
 that the Lord of the angels was subject to the hour, having, among all
 things which He had created, made hours and times; but, because the
 Virgin Mother, when wine was wanting, wished a miracle to be done by
 Him, it was at once answered her, Woman, what have I to do with thee?
 As if to say plainly, That I can do a miracle comes to me of my Father,
 not of my Mother.  For He who of the nature of His Father did miracles
 had it of His mother that He could die.  Whence also, when He was on
 the cross, in dying He acknowledged His mother, whom He commended to
 the disciple, saying, Behold thy mother (Joh. xix. 27). He says, then,
 Woman, what have I to do with thee?  Mine hour is not yet come.--That
 is, "In the miracle, which I have not of thy nature, I do not
 acknowledge thee.  When the hour of death shall come, I shall
 acknowledge thee as my mother, since I have it of thee that I can
 die."  And thus the knowledge, which He had not of the nature of
 humanity whereby He was with the angels a creature, this He denied that
 He had with the angels, who are creatures.  The day, then, and the hour
 of the judgment He knows as God and man, but for this reason, that God
 is man.  It is moreover a thing quite manifest, that whoso is not a
 Nestorian cannot in any wise be an Agnoite.  For with what meaning can
 one that confesses that the very Wisdom of God was incarnate say that
 there is anything that the Wisdom of God is ignorant of?  It is
 written, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
 the Word was God.  All things were made by him (Joh. i. 1).  If all
 things, then without doubt the day and hour of the judgment.  Who then
 can be so senseless as to presume to say that the Word of the Father
 made what He is ignorant of?  It is written also, Jesus knowing that
 the Father had given all things into his hands (Job xxii. 3).  If all
 things, certainly both the day and the hour of the judgment.  Who,
 then, is so foolish as to say that the Son received into His hands what
 He knows not?

 But, with respect to the passage in which He says to the women about
 Lazarus, Where have ye laid him (Joh. xi. 34), I felt exactly as you
 felt, that, if they say that the Lord did not know where Lazarus had
 been buried, and for that reason enquired, they will undoubtedly be
 compelled to acknowledge that the Lord did not know in what places Adam
 and Eve had hidden themselves after their sin, when He said in
 Paradise, Adam, where art thou (Gen. iii. 9)? or when He chides Cain
 saying, Where is Abel thy brother (Gen. iv. 9)?  But, if He did not
 know, why did He forthwith add, Thy brother's blood crieth unto me from
 the ground?  However, on this passage Severianus Gabalensis speaks
 differently, saying that the Lord spoke thus to the women as it were in
 the way of rebuke, in that He enquired where they had laid the dead
 Lazarus; as if with plain reference to the sin of Eve He had said, I
 placed the man in Paradise, whom you have placed in the sepulchre.

 But to these things our said common son Anatolius the deacon has
 replied by putting another question:--What if it should be objected to
 me that, even as He who is immortal vouchsafed to die that He might
 deliver us from death, and He who is eternal before all time willed to
 become subject to time, so the Wisdom of God vouchsafed to take upon
 Himself our ignorance that He might deliver us from ignorance?  But I
 have not yet given him any reply to this, having been confined until
 now by grievous sickness.  Now, however, through your prayers I have
 already begun to recover; and, if I should so recover as to be able to
 dictate, with the help of the Lord I will reply to him.  To you it is
 not for me to say anything on this subject, lest I should seem to teach
 you what you know, seeing that even medicines lose their power of
 healing, if applied to sound and strong members.

 Furthermore, we apprize you that in this place we suffer from serious
 difficulty for want of good interpreters.  For there are none who can
 express the sense, while all ever try to translate the words exactly:
 and so they confuse the whole sense of what has been said.  Whence it
 comes to pass that we are by no means able without severe labour to
 understand what has been translated.

 I have received the blessing of Saint Mark the Evangelist and of your
 Blessedness.  And I have been desirous of sending you some timber; but
 the ship which came was too small to carry it.  And yet even that which
 the Alexandrians saw when they came is of small size.  For I had
 prepared some that is much larger for you, which has not yet been
 conveyed to the Roman city:  for I waited for it to be conveyed when
 the Alexandrian ship should arrive; and it has remained in the place
 where it was felled.

 May Almighty God long guard your life for the edification of Holy
 Church, and inspire you to pray earnestly for me; that, being pressed
 down by my own sins, I may be lifted up before Almighty God by your
 prayers.

 [119] At this time Gregory's apocrisiarius at Constantinople.

 [120] Cf. VII. 40.

 [121] See X. 35, note 7.

 Epistle XLII.

 To Eusebius, Archbishop of Thessalonica.

 Gregory to Eusebius, &c.

 If, most dear brother, we consider attentively how great is the
 excellence of peace, we shall recognize with what earnestness it should
 be cultivated by us.  For indeed our Lord and Redeemer vouchsafed to
 leave and give it as a great boon to His disciples, that He might
 thereby make those who were united to Him in firmness of faith His
 associates in loving participation with Himself.  For it is written,
 Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of
 God (Matth. v. 9).  Whosoever, then, desires to be the father's heir,
 let him, by keeping peace, not refuse to be his child.  For he who
 gives place to discord surely makes himself to be without lot in so
 great a gift.  Seeing then that by the mercy of God the purity of thy
 faith has been declared to us, as was meet, with catholic rectitude, we
 are taken up with great surprise that thou shouldest suffer those whom
 thou knowest to believe well and to think aright to be needlessly
 scandalised by the fault of certain persons, so that the reputation of
 thy Fraternity is clouded by the guilt of others.  For how can one
 avoid suspicion of error who extends sufferance to them that are in
 error?  Or what estimate of himself can he expect, if he provides not
 for purging by open satisfaction what fervour of faith requires to be
 purged?

 For indeed it is said that Luke thy presbyter and Peter refuse to
 receive the Chalcedonian synod, and that on this account the hearts of
 thy orthodox children are perturbed with no slight offence [122] .
 And, since their zeal is not only to be praised but also to be
 altogether cherished, we exhort that the care of thy Fraternity
 hesitate not to investigate the matter with all activity and
 solicitude.  And, if those persons should be found innocent of that
 pravity, remove offence from the minds of thy children by giving them
 satisfaction, and among all heresies anathematise especially Severus
 and Nestorius, so that purification may engender charity among those
 with whom a sinister suspicion concerning those heretics has, out of
 love of the faith, produced dissension; and that one feeling of concord
 may salubriously knit together those whom a pure and single confession
 of catholic truth unites.  Nor let the doubters be thought unworthy of
 satisfaction, since we are instructed by the Divine voice, Despise not
 one of these who are the least (Matth. xxviii. 18).  Whoso, then,
 desires not that he who instructs us should be despised, let him not
 reject the words of the instructor; since he also of whom our Redeemer
 testified that he was a vessel of election unto Himself admonishes us
 to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace (Ephes. iv.).
 Hence whosoever refuses not to be held by this bond of salvation, let
 him study the things that make for peace, and afford no place for the
 foe; so that, having been enabled to advance by the fierce dissension
 of brethren, he may be more stoutly trampled on, when unity is
 established.

 If however, as we do not expect, they should be found to be wounded by
 the dart of this error, the cure of ecclesiastical exhortation must be
 applied to them, so that they may either remain among the Lord's sheep
 if healed, or be cut off from the unity of the ecclesiastical body; to
 the end that from a slight loss there may be a great gain, and that the
 removal of a part may make the whole body free.  For it is the care
 also of a provident shepherd not to delay casting out from consort with
 his sound sheep a sickly one that admits not of cure, lest it should
 contaminate others with the taint of its sickness, knowing that he
 cannot preserve the soundness of the rest but by the ejection of this
 one.  Accordingly I once more warn you in brotherly charity to
 investigate this matter with the utmost vigilance, and to observe what
 we have written with the utmost care, lest by consort with others you
 should make the right faith which you hold doubtful.  For he who does
 not correct things that should be cut off commits them.  Wherefore you
 must take thought with great solicitude and with great provision in all
 ways, that the persons of those men be not an offence to others, or
 common opinion injurious to you; that so a shepherd's gains may accrue
 to your Fraternity from the sheep committed to you all the more as both
 sincere love and approved care shall have made you solicitous for their
 custody.

 [122] Those who refused to accept the condemnation of "The Three
 Chapters" by the fifth council alleged that it contravened the Council
 of Chalcedon.  It may be that the persons referred to here, in their
 defence of what had been decreed in the fifth council, had seemed to
 admit that it did contravene the fourth, which they consequently were
 supposed to reject.

 Epistle LXII.

 To the Neapolitans.

 Gregory to the clergy and noble citizens of Naples.

 It is not a new thing, nor is it reprehensible, that in the election of
 a bishop the votes of the people should be divided between two
 parties:  but it is a serious matter when in cases of this kind the
 election goes not by judgment, but by favour only.  For before your
 letter reached us we had learnt from the report of certain persons that
 the deacon John, who has been elected by the other party, has a little
 daughter.  Hence, if they had had a mind to attend to reason, neither
 would others have elected him nor would he have consented.  For what
 presumption must his be who dares to approach the episcopate while
 convicted by the evidence of the little girl, of not having had long
 control over his own body!  Moreover, Peter the deacon, who you say has
 been elected by you, is, according to what is said, quite without
 astuteness.  And you know that at the present time the person to be
 constituted in the highest place of government, should be one who knows
 how to be careful, not only for the salvation of souls, but also with
 regard to the external advantage and safeguard of his subjects.  But
 know ye further that it has come to our ears concerning him, that he
 has given money on usury; which thing you ought to enquire into
 thoroughly, and, if it is so, elect another, and without delay hold
 yourselves aloof from a person of this kind.  For we will on no account
 lay hands on lovers of usury.  If, however, after accurate enquiry
 made, this should prove to be false (since his person is unknown to us,
 and we know not whether what has been reported to us of his simplicity
 be true), he must needs come to us with your decree in his favour,
 that, having made careful enquiry into his life and manners, we may at
 the same time become acquainted with his intelligence; and thus, in
 case of his satisfying this enquiry, we may in him, with the Lord's
 help, fulfil your desires.  Further, let it be your care to look out
 also for another person who may be suitable, so that, if this one
 should by any chance appear unfit for appointment to this order, there
 may be some one else to whom you may transfer your choice.  For it will
 be a serious disgrace to your clergy, in case of this man by any chance
 not being approved, if they should say that they have no one else fit
 to be elected.

 Epistle LXIII.

 To Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage.

 Gregory to Dominicus, &c.

 We have already learnt what great pestilence has invaded the African
 parts; and, inasmuch as neither is Italy free from such affliction,
 doubled are the groans of our sorrows.  But amid these evils and other
 innumerable calamities our heart, dearest brother, would fail from
 desperate distress, had not the Lord's voice fortified our weakness
 beforehand.  For long ago to the faithful the trumpet of the Gospel
 lesson sounded, warning them that at the approach of the end of the
 world wars and many other things, which, as you know, are now feared,
 would come to pass (Matth. xxiv; Luke xxi.).  We ought not, then, to be
 too much afflicted in suffering things that we knew of beforehand, as
 though they had been unknown.  Frequently also, in our consideration of
 another's death, the kind of death may be an alleviation.  For what
 manglings, what cruelties have we seen, where death was the only
 remedy, and life was a torment!  Did not David, when a choice of deaths
 was offered him, refuse famine or the sword, and choose that his people
 should fall under the hand of God?  Gather ye from this how great
 favour is granted to such as perish under Divine smiting, since they
 die by the call that was offered to the holy prophet for a boon.
 Wherefore let us return thanks to our Creator in all adversities, and,
 trusting in His mercy, bear all things patiently, since we suffer much
 less than we deserve.  Since, however, we are so scourged temporally
 that we may not be left without the consolation of life eternal, it is
 needful (since we are not ignorant, through the announcements of these
 signs, that the Judge Who is to come is at hand) that we should so much
 the more, by zeal for good works and the wailing of penitence, make
 secure our accounts which we shall have to submit to His scrutiny; so
 that such great smitings may be to us, by the favour of His grace, not
 the beginning of damnation, but a purgation for our good.

 Since, however, the nature of our infirmity is such that we cannot but
 grieve for those who pass away, let the teaching of your Fraternity be
 a consolation to the afflicted.  Instil into them that the good things
 which are promised will remain with them; so that, strengthened by a
 most sure hope, they may learn not to grieve for the loss of temporal
 things in comparison with the gift to come.  Let your tongue, as indeed
 we believe it does, restrain them more and more from the perpetration
 of evil deeds; let it announce the rewards of the good, the punishments
 of the bad, so that those who have little love for good things may at
 least be greatly afraid of bad things, and keep themselves from the
 things which must be punished.  For to commit things worthy of scourges
 when placed in the midst of scourges is to be peculiarly proud against
 the smiter, and provokes the incensed one to fiercer anger.  And it is
 a prime kind of madness for any one to be unwilling to desist justly
 from his own evil, and to wish God to cease unjustly from His
 vengeance.  But, since in all this there is need of Divine help, let
 us, beloved brother, with united prayers implore the clemency of
 Almighty God, that He would both grant unto us thus to acquit ourselves
 worthily, and mercifully stir the hearts of the people to perform such
 things; to the end that, while we order our actions wholesomely in His
 fear, we may be counted worthy both to be delivered from impending
 evils, and, by the leading of His grace, without which we can do
 nothing, to come to supernal joys.

 The month of August, Indiction 3.

 Book XI.

 Epistle I.

 To John, Abbot.

 Gregory to John, Abbot of Mount Sina [123] .

 The Epistle of thy Humility testifies to the holiness of thy life;
 whence we give great thanks to Almighty God, for that we know that
 there are still some to pray for our sins.  For we, under the colour of
 ecclesiastical government, are tossed in the billows of this world,
 which frequently overwhelm us.  But by the protecting hand of heavenly
 grace we are raised up again from the deep.  Do you, then, who lead a
 tranquil life in the so great serenity of your rest, and stand as it
 were safe on the shore, extend the hand of your prayer to us who are on
 our voyage, or rather who are suffering shipwreck, and with all the
 supplications in your power help us as we strive to reach the land of
 the living, so that not only for your own life, but also for our
 rescue, you may have reward for ever.  May the Holy Trinity protect thy
 Love with the right hand of Its protection, and grant unto thee in Its
 sight, by praying, by admonishing, by shewing example of good work, to
 feed the flock committed to thee, that so thou mayest be able to reach
 the pastures of eternal life with the flock itself which thou feedest.
 For it is written, My sheep shall come and shall find pastures (John x.
 27).  And these pastures in truth we find, when, freed from the winter
 of this life, we are satisfied with the greenness of eternal life, as
 of a new Spring.

 We have learnt from the report of our son Simplicius that there is a
 want of beds and bedding in the Gerontocomium [124] , which has been
 constructed by one Isaurus there.  Wherefore we have sent 15 cloaks, 30
 rachanæ [125] , and 15 beds.  We have also given money for the purchase
 of mattresses and for their transport, which we beg thy Love not to
 disdain, but to supply them to the place for which they have been
 sent.  Given on the day of the Kalends of September, Indiction 4.

 [123] No doubt the John called Climacus, Scholasticus, and Sinaita,
 commemorated as a saint on 30 March.  Having entered the monastery of
 Mount Sinai at the age of 16, he is said to have retired thence to live
 the life of an anchoret, to have been elected abbot at the age of 75,
 to have again after a time retired into solitude, and to have died
 early in the 7th century.  While abbot, he wrote a work called Scala
 (klimax) Paradisi, whence his name of Climacus.  The monastery on Mount
 Sinai was a place to which pilgrimages were made.  Cf. IV. 46.

 [124] Properly a hospital for aged persons.

 [125] The meaning of the word rachana, racana, or racahina, is
 uncertain.  It occurs again in XI. 78, where Barbara and Antonina, two
 young ladies at Constantinople, are thanked for a present of two
 racanæ, which they had alleged to be of their own workmanship.  It is
 usually supposed to mean some wooller article of dress, worn by monks.
 Others understand blankets.

 Epistle XII.

 To Conon, Abbot of Lirinus (Lerins).

 Gregory to Conon, Abbot of the Monastery of Lirinus [126] .

 The carefulness of persons in authority is the safeguard of subjects,
 since one who watches over what is entrusted to him avoids the snares
 of the enemy.  But how skilful thou art in ruling the brethren, and how
 earnestly watchful in keeping guard over them, we have learnt from the
 report of our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Mennas [127] .
 And as our hearing of the unwary remissness of thy predecessor often
 saddened us, so the carefulness of thy foresight gladdens us, since
 there is no doubt that the safeguard of thy earnestness is of profit
 for reward to thee, and for example to do good to others.

 But, since the more our adversary knows himself to be guarded against
 on all sides, the more he seeks to break in by hidden ways, and strives
 with cunning art to overthrow his opponent, let the watchfulness of thy
 Love ever kindle itself to more ardent care; and so, with God's help,
 fortify all beforehand, that the ravening wolf, running about hither
 and thither, may have no place for entering among the Lord's sheep.  Be
 it then thine earnest endeavour, the grace of our Redeemer aiding thee,
 to prohibit and in all ways guard those who are committed to thee from
 gluttony, from pride, from avarice, from idle speaking, and from all
 uncleanness; that by so much the greater reward may accrue to thee from
 the government committed to thee as thy subjects, through thy
 vigilance, shall be conquerors against the iniquities of the adversary.

 Wherefore let the good feel thee sweet, the bad a corrector.  And even
 in correction know thou that this order should be observed, that thou
 shouldest love persons and visit faults; lest, if thou shouldest
 perchance be disposed to act otherwise, correction should pass into
 cruelty, and thou shouldest destroy those whom thou desirest to amend.
 For thou oughtest so to cut away a sore as not to run the risk of
 ulcerating what is sound; lest, if thou press in the steel more than
 the case requires, thou injure him whom thou art in haste to benefit.
 For let thy very sweetness be wary, not remiss; and let thy correction
 be loving, not severe.  But let the one be so seasoned by the other
 that both the good may have, in loving, something to beware of, and the
 bad, in fearing, something to love.

 Attend carefully to these things, most beloved son; earnestly observe
 them; that, when through such management thou shalt have given back
 safe to God those whom thou hast received from Him, thou mayest be
 counted worthy in the day of eternal retribution to hear Him say, Well
 done, thou good and faithful servant:  because thou hast been faithful
 in a few things, I will set thee over many things:  enter into the joy
 of thy Lord (Luke xix. 17).  Further, we desire that our son Columbus
 the presbyter, who is commended to thy Charity by his own merits, may
 advance in thy love from our commendation also.

 [126] See VI. 56, note 7.  The abbot Stephen, addressed in that letter,
 was probably the predecessor of Conon.

 [127] He was bishop of Telona (Toulon).  See XI. 58.

 Epistle XIII.

 To Serenus, Bishop of Massilia (Marseilles) [128] .

 Gregory to Serenus, &c.

 The beginning of thy letter so showed thee to have in thee the good
 will that befits a priest as to cause us increased joy in thy
 Fraternity.  But its conclusion was so at variance with its
 commencement that such an epistle might be attributed, not to one, but
 to different, minds.  Nay, from thy very doubts about the epistle which
 we sent to thee it appears how inconsiderate thou art.  For, hadst thou
 paid diligent attention to the admonition which in brotherly love we
 gave thee, not only wouldest thou not have doubted, but have perceived
 what in priestly seriousness it was thy duty to do.  For Cyriacus [129]
 formerly abbot, who was the bearer of our letter, was not a man of such
 training and erudition as to dare, as thou supposest, to make up
 another, nor for thee to entertain this suspicion of falseness against
 his character.  But, while putting aside consideration of our wholesome
 admonitions, thou hast come to be culpable, not only in thy deeds, but
 in thy questionings also.  For indeed it had been reported to us that,
 inflamed with inconsiderate zeal, thou hadst broken images of saints,
 as though under the plea that they ought not to be adored [130] .  And
 indeed in that thou forbadest them to be adored, we altogether praise
 thee; but we blame thee for having broken them.  Say, brother, what
 priest has ever been heard of as doing what thou hast done?  If nothing
 else, should not even this thought have restrained thee, so as not to
 despise other brethren, supposing thyself only to be holy and wise?
 For to adore a picture is one thing, but to learn through the story of
 a picture what is to be adored is another.  For what writing presents
 to readers, this a picture presents to the unlearned who behold, since
 in it even the ignorant see what they ought to follow; in it the
 illiterate read.  Hence, and chiefly to the nations [131] , a picture
 is instead of reading.  And this ought to have been attended to
 especially by thee who livest among the nations, lest, while inflamed
 inconsiderately by a right zeal, thou shouldest breed offence to savage
 minds.  And, seeing that antiquity has not without reason admitted the
 histories of saints to be painted in venerable places, if thou hadst
 seasoned zeal with discretion, thou mightest undoubtedly have obtained
 what thou wert aiming at, and not scattered the collected flock, but
 rather gathered together a scattered one; that so the deserved renown
 of a shepherd might have distinguished thee, instead of the blame of
 being a scatterer lying upon thee.  But from having acted
 inconsiderately on the impulse of thy feelings thou art said to have so
 offended thy children that the greatest part of them have suspended
 themselves from thy communion.  When, then, wilt thou bring wandering
 sheep to the Lord's fold, not being able to retain those thou hast?
 Henceforth we exhort thee that thou study even now to be careful, and
 restrain thyself from this presumption, and make haste, with fatherly
 sweetness, with all endeavour, with all earnestness, to recall to
 thyself the minds of those whom thou findest to be disjoined from thee.

 For the dispersed children of the Church must be called together, and
 it must be shewn then by testimonies of sacred Scripture that it is not
 lawful for anything made with hands to be adored, since it is written,
 Thou shalt adore the Lord thy God, and him only shalt serve (Luke iv.
 8).  And then, with regard to the pictorial representations which had
 been made for the edification of an unlearned people in order that,
 though ignorant of letters, they might by turning their eyes to the
 story itself learn what had been done, it must be added that, because
 thou hadst seen these come to be adored, thou hadst been so moved as to
 order them to be broken.  And it must be said to them, If for this
 instruction for which images were anciently made you wish to have them
 in the church, I permit them by all means both to be made and to be
 had.  And explain to them that it was not the sight itself of the story
 which the picture was hanging to attest that displeased thee, but the
 adoration which had been improperly paid to the pictures.  And with
 such words appease thou their minds; recall them to agreement with
 thee.  And if any one should wish to make images, by no means prohibit
 him, but by all means forbid the adoration of images.  But let thy
 Fraternity carefully admonish them that from the sight of the event
 portrayed they should catch the ardour of compunction, and bow
 themselves down in adoration of the One Almighty Holy Trinity.

 Now we say all this in our love of Holy Church, and of thy Fraternity.
 Be not then shaken, in consequence of my rebuke, in the zeal of
 uprightness, but rather be helped in the earnestness of thy pious
 administration.

 Furthermore, it has come to our ears that thy Love gladly receives bad
 men into its society; so much so as to have as a familiar friend a
 certain presbyter who, after having fallen, is said to live still in
 the pollution of his iniquity [132] .  This indeed we do not entirely
 believe, since he that receives such a one does not correct wickedness,
 but rather appears to give licence to others to perpetrate the like
 things.  But, lest haply by any subornation or dissimulation he should
 prevail on thee to receive him and keep him still in favour, it becomes
 thee not only to drive him further from thee, but also in all ways to
 cut away his excesses with priestly zeal.  But as to others who are
 reported to be bad, study to restrain them from their badness by
 fatherly exhortation, and to recall them to the way of rectitude.  But,
 if (which God forbid) you seem not to profit them at all by salutary
 admonition, these also thou wilt take care to cast off far from thee,
 lest, from their being received, their evil doings should seem not at
 all to displease thee, and lest not only they themselves should remain
 unamended, but others also should be corrupted in consequence of thy
 reception of them.  And consider how execrable it is before men, and
 how perilous before the eyes of God, if vices should seem to be
 nurtured through him whose duty it is to punish crimes.  Attend
 therefore to these things diligently, most beloved brother; and study
 so to act as both wholesomely to correct the bad and to avoid breeding
 offence in the minds of thy children by associating with evil men.

 [128] Other epistles to Serenus of Marseilles are VI. 52, IX. 105, XI.
 58.  In IX. 105 he had already been reproved for his inconsiderate zeal
 in breaking pictures of saints, which is the main subject of the
 present letter.  His reply to the former letter, of which he had
 affected to suspect the genuineness, seems to have called forth this
 longer and severer admonition.

 [129] Cyriacus, once abbot of Gregory's own monastery of St. Andrew on
 the Coelian at Rome, is named in the former epistle to Serenus (IX.
 105) as its bearer.  As to the cause of his being sent at that time
 into Gaul, see notes to IX. 105, and IX. 109.

 [130] See IX. 105.

 [131] Gentibus.  The term gentes was used not only to denote Gentiles
 as usually understood, and pagan races as distinct from Christians, but
 also nations outside the Roman republic.

 [132] Cf. Ep. LV. in this book to Virgilius of Arles, the metropolitan
 of Serenus, in which this laxity on the part of the latter is alluded
 to.

 Epistle XXV.

 To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari [133] ).

 Gregory to Januarius, &c.

 Know ye that your Fraternity's solicitude has pleased us, in that you
 have evinced, as was right, pastoral vigilance for the guardianship of
 souls.  For indeed it has been reported to us that you have forbidden a
 monastery to be founded in the house of the late Epiphanius, a reader
 of your Church, in accordance with his will, for this reason; lest,
 seeing that this house was adjacent to a monastery of hand-maidens of
 God [134] , deception of souls should thence ensue.  And we praised you
 greatly for guarding, as became you, by suitable foresight against the
 snares of the ancient foe.  But, since we have been informed that the
 religious lady Pompeiana is desirous of taking away the handmaidens of
 God from this same monastery, and restoring them to their own
 monasteries whence they had been taken, and establishing there a
 congregation of monks, it is necessary that if this be accomplished,
 the disposition of the deceased should in all respects be adhered to.
 But, if this should not be done, that the will of the testator may not
 seem to be entirely frustrated, we will that--inasmuch as the monastery
 of the late abbot Urban, situated outside the city of Caralis, is said
 to be left so destitute that not even one monk remains there--we will,
 I say, that John, whom the said Epiphanius appointed to be abbot in the
 monastery which, as has been said, he had determined should be founded
 in his house, be ordained abbot (i.e. of the late Urban's monastery),
 provided only that there be no impediment against him.

 And let the relics which were to have been deposited in the house of
 the aforesaid Epiphanius be deposited there, and let whatever the same
 Epiphanius had contributed for the intended monastery in his own house
 be in all ways applied to the other; that so, even though for
 safeguard, as above written, his will is not carried out with regard to
 the place, the benefit intended may nevertheless be preserved
 inviolate.  And indeed let your Fraternity, together with the guardian
 (defensore) Vitalis, arrange all this, and endeavour to order it so
 advantageously that you may have your reward, as for your praiseworthy
 prohibition, so also for your good settlement of the case.  Lastly,
 though it may be superfluous to commend this monastery to your
 Fraternity, yet we abundantly exhort you that, as becomes you, with due
 regard to justice, you hold it as commended to you [135] .

 [133] See I. 62, and reff.

 [134] See I. 48.

 [135] For further reference to the subject of this letter, see XIV. 2.
 It appears there that Epiphanius, mentioned in this letter, had been a
 son-in-law of Pompeiana.  It appears further that this lady afterwards
 accused both the bishop Januarius and the defensor Vitalis of having
 unjustly withheld her son-in-law's pious bequest, notwithstanding the
 admonition contained in this letter.

 Epistle XXVIII.

 To Augustine, Bishop of the Angli [136] .

 Gregory to Augustine, &c.

 Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of good will
 (Luke ii. 14); because a grain of wheat, falling into the earth, has
 died, that it might not reign in heaven alone; even He by whose death
 we live, by whose weakness we are made strong, by whose suffering we
 are rescued from suffering, through whose love we seek in Britain for
 brethren whom we knew not, by whose gift we find those whom without
 knowing them we sought.  But who can describe what great joy sprung up
 here in the hearts of all the faithful, for that the nation of the
 Angli through the operation of the grace of Almighty God and the labour
 of thy Fraternity has cast away the darkness of error, and been
 suffused with the light of holy faith; that with most sound mind it now
 tramples on the idols which it formerly crouched before in insane fear;
 that it falls down with pure heart before Almighty God; that it is
 restrained by the rules of holy preaching from the lapses of wrong
 doing; that it bows down in heart to divine precepts, that in
 understanding it may be exalted; that it humbles itself even to the
 earth in prayer, lest in mind and soul it should lie upon the earth.
 Whose is this work but His who says, My Father worketh hitherto, and I
 work (John v. 17)? who, to shew that He converts the world, not by
 men's wisdom, but by His own power, chose unlettered men as His
 preachers whom He sent into the world?  And He does the same even now,
 having deigned to work mighty works in the nation of the Angli through
 weak men.  But in this heavenly gift, dearest brother, there is ground,
 along with great joy, for most serious fear.  For I know that Almighty
 God has displayed great miracles through thy Love in the nation which
 He has willed to be chosen.  Wherefore thou must needs rejoice with
 fear for this same heavenly gift, and tremble in rejoicing:--rejoice,
 that is, because the souls of the Angli are drawn by outward miracles
 to inward grace; but tremble, lest among the signs that are done the
 infirm mind lift itself up to presumption about itself, and from being
 exalted in honour outwardly, fall inwardly through vain glory.  For we
 ought to remember how, when the disciples returned with joy from
 preaching, and said to their heavenly Master, Lord, in thy name even
 the devils are subject unto us (Luke x. 17), they straightway heard, In
 this rejoice not; but rather rejoice because your names are written in
 heaven (Ib. v. 20).  For they had set their minds on private and
 temporal gladness, when they rejoiced in the miracles.  But they are
 recalled from private to common, from temporal to eternal gladness,
 when it is said to them, In this rejoice ye, because your names are
 written in heaven.  For not all the elect work miracles; and yet the
 names of all of them are kept enrolled in heaven.  For to the disciples
 of the Truth there should not be joy, save for that good which they
 have in common with all, and in which they have no end to their
 gladness.

 It remains, therefore, dearest brother, that in the midst of the things
 which through the operation of God thou doest outwardly, thou shouldest
 ever nicely judge thyself within, and nicely understand both what thou
 art thyself and how great is the grace in the midst of that same nation
 for the conversion of which thou hast received even the gift of doing
 signs.  And if at any time thou shouldest remember having offended
 against our Creator, whether in tongue or in deed, ever recall these
 things to thy memory, that memory of guilt may keep down the rising
 glory of the heart.  And whatsoever thou mayest receive, or hast
 received, in the way of doing signs, regard these powers as not granted
 to thyself, but to those for whose salvation they have been conferred
 upon thee.  Further, there occurs to my mind, while I think on these
 things, what took place with one servant of God, even one eminently
 chosen.  Certainly Moses, when he led God's people out of Egypt, as thy
 Fraternity knows, wrought wonderful miracles.  Fasting forty days and
 nights in Mount Sina, he received the tables of the law; among
 lightnings and thunders, while all the people trembled, he was attached
 to the service of Almighty God, being alone with Him even in familiar
 colloquy (Exod. xxx., xxxi.); he opened a way through the Red Sea; he
 had a pillar of a cloud to lead him on his journey; to the people when
 an hungered he gave manna from heaven; flesh to those who longed for it
 he supplied in the wilderness by a miracle, even unto overmuch satiety
 (Exod. xiii., xiv., xvi.).  But, when in a time of drought they had
 come to the rock, he was distrustful, and doubted being able to draw
 water from the same, which still at the Lord's command he opened
 without fail in copious streams.  But how many and great miracles after
 these he did during eight and thirty years in the desert who can count
 or search out (Exod. xvii.; Num. xx.)?  As often as a doubtful matter
 had troubled his mind, he resorted to the tabernacle, and enquired of
 the Lord in secret, and was forthwith taught concerning it, God
 speaking to him (Exod. xxxiii. seq.).  When the Lord was wrath with the
 people, he appeased Him by the intervention of his prayer; those who
 rose in pride and dissented in discord he engulphed in the jaws of the
 gaping earth; he bore down his enemies with victories, and shewed signs
 to his own people.  But, when the land of promise had at length been
 reached, he was called into the mountain, and heard of the fault which
 he had committed eight and thirty years before, as I have said, in that
 he had doubted about drawing water from the rock.  And for this reason
 he was told that he might not enter the land of promise (Num. xxvii.).
 Herein it is for us to consider how formidable is the judgment of
 Almighty God, who did so many signs through that servant of His whose
 fault He still bare in remembrance for so long a time.

 Wherefore, dearest brother, if we find that even he whom we know to
 have been especially chosen by Almighty God died for a fault after so
 many signs, with what fear ought we to tremble, who do not yet know
 whether we are chosen?

 But what should I say of the miracles of the reprobate, when thy
 Fraternity well knows what the Truth says in the Gospel; Many shall
 come in that day saying to me, Lord in thy name we have prophesied, and
 in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name have done many
 wonderful works.  But I will say unto them, I know not who ye are:
 depart from me all ye workers of iniquity (Matth. vii. 22; Luke xiii.
 27)?  The mind, then, should be much kept down in the midst of signs
 and miracles, lest haply one seek therein one's own glory, and exult in
 private joy for one's own exaltation.  For through signs gains of souls
 should be sought, and His glory by whose power these very signs are
 done.  But there is one sign that the Lord has given us for which we
 may exceedingly rejoice, and acknowledge the glory of election in
 ourselves, seeing that He says, In this shall it be known that ye are
 my disciples, if ye have love one to another (John xiii. 35).  Which
 sign the prophet demanded, when he said, Make with me, Lord, a sign for
 good, that they which hate me may see it, and be confounded (Ps. lxxxv.
 17).

 These things I say, because I desire to abase the mind of my hearer in
 humility.  But let thy very humility have its confidence.  For I, a
 sinner, maintain a most certain hope that through the grace of our
 Almighty Creator and Redeemer, our God and Lord Jesus Christ, thy sins
 are already remitted, and thou art chosen for this purpose, that those
 of others may be remitted through thee.  Nor will you have sorrow for
 any guilt in the future, while you strive to cause joy in heaven for
 the conversion of many.  Truly the same our Maker and Redeemer,
 speaking of the repentance of men, says, Verily I say unto you there
 will be joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over
 ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance (Luke xv. 7).
 And if for one penitent there is great joy in heaven, of what kind may
 we believe the joy to be for so large a people, converted from its
 error, which, coming to faith, has condemned by penitence the evil
 things it did.  In this joy, then, of heaven and the angels let us
 repeat the very words of the angels with which we began:  let us say
 therefore, let us all say, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
 peace to men of good will.

 [136] For reasons for supposing this letter to Augustine to have been
 written earlier than the 4th Indiction (a.d. 600-1), to which it is
 assigned by the Benedictine Editors, and for a summary of the whole
 series of letters relating to the English mission, see Prolegom., p.
 xxv.

 Epistle XXIX.

 To Bertha, Queen of the Angli [137] .

 Gregory to Bertha, &c.

 They who desire, after earthly dominion, to obtain the glory of a
 heavenly kingdom ought to labour earnestly to bring in gain to their
 Creator, that they may be able to rise by the steps of their operation
 to the things they long for; as we are glad to know you do.  For indeed
 our most beloved son Laurentius the presbyter, and Peter the monk, have
 brought us word on their return to us how your Glory has exhibited
 itself towards our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Augustine,
 and how great succour and what charity you have bestowed upon him.  And
 we bless Almighty God, who has been mercifully pleased to reserve the
 conversion of the nation of the Angli for your reward.  For, as through
 Helena of illustrious memory, the mother of the most pious Emperor
 Constantine, He kindled the hearts of the Romans into Christian faith,
 so we trust that He works in the nation of the Angli through the zeal
 of your Glory.  And indeed you ought before now, as being truly a
 Christian, to have inclined the heart of our glorious son, your
 husband, by the good influence of your prudence, to follow, for the
 weal of his kingdom and of his own soul, the faith which you profess,
 to the end that for him, and for the conversion of the whole nation
 through him, fit retribution might accrue to you in the joys of
 heaven.  For seeing, as we have said, that your Glory is both fortified
 by a right faith and instructed in letters, this should have been to
 you neither slow of accomplishment nor difficult.  And since, by the
 will of God, now is a suitable time, so proceed, with the co-operation
 of divine grace, as to be able to make reparation with increase for
 what has been neglected.  Wherefore strengthen by continual hortation
 the mind of your glorious husband in love of the Christian faith; let
 your solicitude infuse into him increase of love for God, and so kindle
 his heart even for the fullest conversion of the nation subject to him
 that both he may offer, out of the zeal of your devotion, a great
 sacrifice to the Almighty Lord, and that the things related of you may
 both grow and be in all ways proved to be true:  for your good deeds
 are known not only among the Romans, who have prayed earnestly for your
 life, but also through divers places, and have come even to the ears of
 the most serene prince at Constantinople.  Hence, as great joy has been
 caused us by the consolations of your Christianity, so also may there
 be joy in heaven for your perfected work.  So acquit yourselves
 devotedly and with all your might in aid of our above-named most
 reverend brother and fellow-bishop, and of the servants of God whom we
 have sent to you, in the conversion of your nation that you may both
 reign happily here with our glorious son your husband, and after long
 courses of years may also attain the joys of the future life, which
 know no end.  Now we pray Almighty God that He would both kindle the
 heart of your Glory with the fire of His grace to perform what we have
 spoken of, and grant you the fruit of an eternal reward for work
 well-pleasing to Him.

 [137] As to the apparent inference from this letter that King Ethelbert
 of Kent had not been converted when it was written, and as to when it
 may have been sent to queen Bertha, see Prolegom., p. xxvi., note 2.

 Epistle XXX.

 To Venantius, Ex-Monk, Patrician of Syracuse [138] .

 Gregory to Venantius, &c.

 In addressing to you the greeting which is due I was intending to speak
 of what I suffer.  But I think I need not relate to you what you know.
 For I am tormented by pains of gout, which, afflicting not dissimilarly
 both me and you, while they increase upon us exceedingly, have caused
 our life to decrease.  In the midst of them what else should we do but
 recall our faults to mind, and give thanks to Almighty God?  For we who
 have sinned in many things from the pampering of the flesh are purged
 by the affliction of the flesh.  We are to know also that present pain,
 if it converts the mind of the afflicted one, is the end of preceding
 guilt; but, if it does not convert to the fear of the Lord, is the
 beginning of pain to follow.  We must therefore take care, and in
 entire conversion of heart watch to the utmost of our power with tears,
 lest we pass from torment to torments.  We are also to consider by how
 great a dispensation of loving kindness our Maker deals with us, in
 that He continually smites us, who are worthy of death, and still slays
 us not.  For He threatens what He will do, and yet does it not, that
 pains sent in advance may alarm us, and, when we are converted to the
 fear of the strict Judge, may shield us from His animadversion when
 life is over.  For who may tell, who may count, how many, sunk in their
 lechery, running headlong also in blasphemies and pride, continuing in
 robberies and iniquities even to the day of their death, have so lived
 in this world as never to suffer even a headache, but by a sudden
 stroke have been delivered to the fires of hell?  We, then, have a
 token that we are not forsaken, in that we are continually scourged,
 according to the testimony of Scripture, which says, Whom the Lord
 loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth (Heb.
 xii. 6).  Wherefore under the very stripes of God let us recall to mind
 both His gifts and the losses of our guilt.  Let us consider what good
 things He has showered upon our ill-doing, and what ill things we have
 committed under His goodness.  Let us fulfil what the Lord says through
 the prophet, Put me in remembrance, that we may plead together (Isai.
 xliii. 26).  Let us plead now in our thought with God, that we be not
 hereafter strictly judged by God.  For what says Paul?  If we would
 judge ourselves, we should not be judged of the Lord (1 Cor. xi. 31).
 Whosoever, then, would make haste to escape the strictness of the
 sentence of the judgment to come, let him, through the bitterness of
 penitence, cut off for himself all the sweetness of the present life.
 Moreover, whatever gifts of this kind there are, whose gifts are they
 but our Maker's?  But that should not be accounted a gift of God fully
 to us which separates us through delight in itself from the love of
 God; lest we should prefer the things given to the Giver, and while
 receiving good things, though ourselves evil, we should be disjoined
 from His fear by that whereby we ought to have grown in His fear.  Now
 may the Creator of all things, that is Almighty God, pour into your
 heart by the inspiration of His Spirit what we speak to you of by
 letter, and cleanse you from all defilements of sin, and grant you the
 joy of His comfort here, and hereafter eternal rewards with Himself.  I
 beg that my most sweet daughters, the lady Barbara and the lady
 Antonina, be greeted in my name.

 [138] See I. 34, note 8.  It is significant of Gregory's delicate tact,
 that he does not in this letter, when his friend was suffering, allude
 to his past renunciation of monastic life as among the sins to be
 repented of, or urge him to return to it, though that the subject was
 still on his mind appears from his letter about the same time to the
 Bishop of Syracuse (XI. 36).

 Epistle XXXII.

 To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

 Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

 When the bearer of these presents, Candidus the abbot, came hither to
 ask for relics (which have also been granted), as much as I rejoiced in
 thy Fraternity's nursing aid, thy Fraternity's care for me being
 therein apparent, so much was I distressed that I could not enjoy his
 presence as I wished to do, seeing that he found me sick, and, when he
 departed, left me still in a state of weakness.  For it is now a long
 time since I have been able to rise from bed.  For at one time the pain
 of gout torments me, at another a fire, I know not of what kind,
 spreads itself with pain through my whole body; and it is generally the
 case that at one and the same time burning pain racks me, and body and
 mind fail me.  Further, what other great distresses of sickness beside
 what I have mentioned I am affected by, I am unable to recount.  This
 however I may briefly say, that the infection of a noxious humour so
 drinks me up that it is pain to me to live, and I anxiously look for
 death, which alone I can hope for to relieve my groans.  Accordingly,
 most holy brother, implore for me the compassion of divine
 loving-kindness, that it would mercifully mitigate towards me the
 scourges of its smiting, and grant me patience to endure, lest (which
 God forbid) my heart break out into impatience from excessive
 weariness, and the guilt which might have been well cured through
 stripes be increased by murmuring.  Given in the month of February,
 Indiction 4.

 Epistle XXXIII.

 To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

 Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

 On the arrival here of a certain man of Ravenna, I was smitten by most
 grievous sorrow for that he told me of thy Fraternity being sick from
 vomiting of blood.  On this account we have caused enquiry to be made
 carefully and severally of those here whom we know to be well-read
 physicians, and have sent in writing to your Holiness their several
 opinions and prescriptions.  All, however, prescribe before all else
 quiet and silence, which I greatly doubt whether thy Fraternity can
 have in thine own Church.  And accordingly it seems good to me that,
 when the Church there has been provided for--whether with such as may
 accomplish the solemnities of mass, or with such as may take charge of
 the episcopate, and may be able to shew hospitality and hold
 receptions, or such as may superintend the guardianship of
 monasteries--thy Fraternity should come to me before the summer season,
 that I may, as far as I can, take special charge of thy sickness, and
 keep thee from being disturbed, since the physicians say that the
 summer season is exceedingly dangerous for this kind of sickness.  And
 I greatly fear lest, if thou shouldest have any cares together with the
 unfavourableness of the season, there might be further risk to thee
 from this disorder.  I too myself am very weak, and it is in all
 respects advantageous that thou shouldest, with the favour of God,
 return to thy Church in health; or certainly, if thou art to be called,
 that thou shouldest be called in the hands of thy friends; and that I,
 who see myself to be very near death, if Almighty God should be pleased
 to call me before thee, should pass away in thy hands.  But if the
 circumstances of the present time stand in the way of thy coming, Ago
 [139] may be treated with, some small present being given him, that he
 may himself send one of his people with thee as far as Rome.  If, then,
 thou feelest thyself held heavily by this sickness, and arrangest to
 come, thou must come with few attendants, since, while thou stayest
 with me in the episcopal residence (episcopium), thou wilt have daily
 attendance from this Church.

 Furthermore, I neither exhort nor admonish thee, but straitly charge
 thee, that thou by no means presume to fast, since the physicians say
 that the practice is very prejudicial to this disorder; except that, if
 by chance a great solemnity demands it, I concede it five times in the
 year.  Thou must also refrain from vigils; and let the prayers which in
 the city of Ravenna are wont to be said over the wax-taper, and the
 expositions of the Gospel which are given by priests about the time of
 the Paschal solemnity, be delivered by another.  And by no means impose
 on thyself, beloved, any labour beyond thy powers.  I have said this
 that, if thou shouldest feel thyself better, and shouldest put off thy
 coming, thou mayest know what to observe by my command.

 [139] i.e. Agilulph, the Lombard king, referred to as Ago also in IV.
 11.  It was the Lombard occupation of a great part of Italy at that
 time that was apprehended as likely to impede a journey from Ravenna to
 Rome.

 Epistle XXXV.

 To Barbara and Antonina [140] .

 Gregory to Barbara, &c.

 Having received your Glory's letters, which spoke with tears for words,
 we, most beloved daughters, are affected by no less sorrow than
 yourselves for your father's sickness.  For we cannot account that
 sadness as extraneous which is made our own by the law of charity.
 But, since in no state of despair ought there to be distrust in the
 mercy of our Redeemer, raise your spirits for the comforting of your
 father, place your hope in the hand of Almighty God, and by His
 protection we trust that He will guard you from all adversity, and
 cheer your tribulation, and grant you to be favourably disposed of
 according to your father's desires.  But should He pay the debt of our
 human lot, even then let not any despair crush you, nor the words of
 any persons cause you alarm.  For after God, Who is the governor and
 protector of orphans, we will be so solicitous in behalf of your most
 sweet Glory, and will so make haste, with the Lord's help, to provide
 as we can for your advantage, that no rough handling of unjust men may
 perturb you [141] , and that we may repay in all ways the debt we have
 contracted from the goodness of your parents.  And so may heavenly
 grace nurture you with its favour and defend you by its protection from
 all evils, that your safety may become our joy.

 [140] Cf. I. 34, note 8.

 [141] The reason why trouble to the orphans of Venantius was
 apprehended appears further in the letter that follows to the bishop of
 Syracuse.

 Epistle XXXVI.

 To John, Bishop of Syracuse [142] .

 Gregory to John, &c.

 I have received your Fraternity's letters telling me of the sickness of
 my most sweet son the lord Venantius, and relating how all things are
 going on about him.  But when I heard at one and the same time that he
 was desperately and grievously sick, and that unfair men were laying
 claim to the property of the orphans, the sorrow in my heart could
 scarce contain itself.  But in this there was comfort, in that tears
 relieved my groans.  Your Holiness therefore ought not to neglect, what
 should be your first care, to take thought for his soul, by exhorting
 him, beseeching him, putting before him God's terrible judgment, and
 promising His ineffable mercy, so as to induce him to return even at
 his last moments to his former state of life [143] , lest the guilt of
 so great a fault should stand against him in the eternal judgment.  And
 then it is your duty to take thought how his daughters, the ladies
 Barbara and Antonina, may be disposed of, so that no opportunity be
 afforded to bad men.  For after he had conjured me to take anxious care
 for them, adding that I should see to the disposal of them, he went on
 in his letter to mention a thing which, when I consider the matter, I
 have no doubt might stand in the way.  For he says that I should
 repeatedly petition the most pious lord Emperor, that he should himself
 cause provision to be made for the disposal of them.  You observe how
 different this is from his former wish.  And I fear lest an apt
 opportunity might hence be given to men in Sicily who are seeking all
 opportunity for interfering in his affairs.  For, when this is known,
 what will those men do who have already, as report goes, been
 attempting to put a seal on his effects [144] ?  Would not reason seem
 to be on their side, and to afford them as it were a just ground for
 this proceeding?  If they should say, the girls have been commended to
 the lord Emperor; we cannot neglect the matter; it is at our peril if
 we do; we make the property safe till such time as the lord Emperor may
 order them to be taken to Constantinople;--tell me, I pray thee, what I
 could do in such a case, wherein the father's commendation seems to
 support a man that has authority.  For he conjures me to see to their
 being so disposed of that they may either be in the Roman city or not
 be taken away from Sicily; and he so acts as to leave no way of either
 bringing them hither or retaining them there.  But, do you, as far as
 you can, oppose these bad men.  Defend their substance for the sake of
 Almighty God as if it were your own:  and, if it is still possible, see
 to all opportunity for wrong being removed with regard to the will of
 the aforesaid lord Venantius.  But, if it is thought fit that they
 should be commended to the palace, he ought not to impose such a burden
 on me as to wish to charge my soul with the care of the disposal of
 them; as to which be it enough that God Almighty knows how I am taking
 thought.  Hence I have taken care to write at once to my most beloved
 son the deacon Anatolius, bidding him endeavour to speak with the
 glorious patrician lady Rusticiana [145] , and telling him in what
 manner he should enquire and inform me about the persons whose names
 have been transmitted to me; that so he may inform us of all things
 speedily, and what is to be done, may under the ordering of God be
 arranged.

 Furthermore, in the letters that have been sent to us we find that your
 Fraternity has been grieved at our not having wished you to come
 hither, as though it had been on account of some displeasure; whereas
 we acted with a sole view to utility, knowing that on account of
 persons in your locality your presence there was exceedingly
 necessary.  But, lest you should hence suppose that we have any feeling
 or displeasure towards you (which God forbid), if you have the will to
 come to us, present yourself at a suitable time at the threshold of the
 apostles.  For, so far as we are concerned, we so love your Charity
 that we desire to see you often.

 [142] Cf. I. 34, note 8.

 [143] Viz. Monasticism, which Venantius had renounced in spite of the
 earnest remonstrance of Gregory ten years previously.

 [144] It may have been that Venantius had filled some public office, in
 connexion with which it was alleged that his estate was liable to
 seizure by the government officials.  Gregory evidently believes that
 there is not such liability; but, in view of the attempt to assert it,
 he is anxious that no pretext should be afforded to the authorities for
 taking charge of the property of the deceased, such as they might have
 had if the orphans had been made wards of the Emperor.

 [145] See II. 27, note 2.

 Epistle XXXVII.

 To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).

 Gregory to Romanus, Guardian of Sicily [146] .

 It has come to our knowledge that, if any one has a suit against any
 clerics, thou causest these clerics to be brought before thee for
 judgment, setting at nought their bishops.  If this be so, seeing that
 it is evidently very unsuitable, we order thee by this our authority
 that thou presume not to do it any more.  But, if any one should have a
 suit against any cleric, let him go to his bishop, that either he may
 take cognizance himself, or at any rate that judges may be deputed by
 him; or, if it should be a case for arbitration, let the executive
 authority deputed by him compel the parties to choose a judge.  But, if
 any cleric or lay person should have a suit against a bishop, then thou
 oughtest to interpose, so that either thou thyself mayest take
 cognizance of the matter between them or that on thy admonition they
 may choose for themselves judges.  For, if each single bishop has not
 his own jurisdiction reserved to him, what else is done but that
 ecclesiastical order is confounded through us by whom it ought to be
 guarded?

 Further, it has been reported to us that, certain clerics having been
 sent into penance for fault requiring it by our most reverend brother
 bishop John, thou hast on thy own authority, without his knowledge
 removed them from it.  Now, if this is true, know that thou hast done a
 thing altogether unseemly, and calling for no light reproof.  Wherefore
 restore these clerics without delay to their bishop.  And beware of
 committing this fault in future:  for, shouldest thou be inattentive,
 know that thou wilt incur our anger in no slight degree.

 [146] For the appointment of Romanus, cf. IX. 18.

 Epistle XXXVIII.

 To Vitus, Guardian (Defensorem [147] ).

 Gregory to Vitus, &c.

 If thou art held bound by no condition or liability to bodily service,
 and hast not been a cleric of any other city, and if there is no
 canonical objection to thee, it is our will and pleasure, with a view
 to the advantage of the Church, that thou receive the office of
 Guardian of the Church, in order that thou mayest execute incorruptly
 and diligently whatever may be enjoined thee by us for the benefit of
 the poor; using this privilege which after deliberation we have
 conferred on thee, so as to do thy diligence faithfully in
 accomplishing all that may be enjoined thee by us, as having to render
 an account of thy doings before the judgment of our God.  This epistle
 we have dictated for writing to Paterius, secundicerio notario of our
 Church [148] , and have subscribed it.

 [147] Cf. V. 29.

 [148] Primicerius notariarum occ. III. 22.  "Primicerius, Primus
 cujusque ordinis.--Secundicerius, Qui post primicerium est in schola
 qualibet."  D'Arnis' Lexicon.

 Epistle XL.

 To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

 Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

 Great infirmity constrains us, dearest brother, from which if we were
 free, we should seem justly blamable.  But since, while we are in this
 fragile body, we cannot subsist but by subservience to its weaknesses,
 we ought not to blush for what necessity imposes on us.  And so, since
 physicians all say that to those who suffer from eruption of blood
 fasts are injurious, we exhort thy Fraternity by this present address
 that, recalling to mind what thou hast been accustomed to endure from
 sickness, thou by no means impose on thyself the labour of fasting
 [149] .  If, however, by the mercy of God, thou knowest thyself to be
 so far improved in health as to have sufficient strength, we permit
 thee to fast once or twice in the week.  But of this it befits thee
 before all things to take care, that thou in no wise subject thyself to
 any feeling of irritation, lest the sickness, which is believed to be
 now lighter and as it were suspended, should be experienced afterwards
 more heavily through exasperation.

 [149] Cf. Ep. XXXIII., supra.

 Epistle XLIV.

 To Rusticiana, Patrician [150] .

 Gregory to Rusticiana, &c.

 I have received the letters of your Excellency, which altogether
 relieved me, while I was in a state of most grievous sickness, with
 regard to your health, your devotion, and your sweetness.  One thing
 however I took amiss, namely that in the same epistles to me what might
 have been said once was said repeatedly; "Your handmaiden," and "your
 handmaiden."  For, I having been made the servant of all through the
 burdens of episcopacy, with what reason does she call herself my
 handmaid whose own I was before I undertook the episcopate?  And so I
 beseech you by Almighty God, that I may never find this word in what
 you write to me.  Further, the gifts which out of a most pure and
 sincere heart you sent to the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles,
 have been received and hung up there [151] in the presence of all the
 clergy.  But my son, the magnificent lord Symmachus, finding me ill
 from pains of gout and almost despaired of, deferred giving me your
 letters, and gave them long after the veils had been received:  and I
 found afterwards in your Excellence's letters that they were to have
 been borne to the Church of the blessed Peter with a litany.  And so
 this was not done, because, as I have already said, we received the
 veils before the letters.  Nevertheless the aforesaid Symmachus did
 with your whole household what you wished us to do with the clergy.
 But, even if the voices of men were wanting, your offering itself has
 its own voice before Almighty God.  In His loving-kindness I trust that
 the intercession of him whose body you have covered on earth may
 protect you in heaven from all sins, and in his provision rule your
 house, and in his watchfulness guard it.

 With regard to the affliction of gout which you signify to us has come
 upon you, I am both distressed and rejoiced exceedingly:  rejoiced,
 because the noxious humour, attacking the lower parts of your body, has
 entirely left the higher ones; but distressed, because I fear you
 suffer excessive pain in so very slender a body.  For where there is a
 deficiency of flesh, what strength can there be to resist pain?  For as
 to myself, you know what I used to be:  but now bitterness of soul and
 continual exasperation, and besides this the affliction of gout so
 affects me that my body is dried up even as if in burial.  Hence it
 comes to pass that I can rarely now rise from bed.  If, then, the pain
 of gout has reduced the mass of my body to such dryness, what must I
 think of your body, which was too dry before the pains came on?

 As to the alms which you have bestowed on the monastery of the blessed
 Apostle Andrew, there is no need for me to say anything, since it is
 written, Hide thine alms in the bosom of a poor man, and it shall pray
 for thee (Ecclus. xxix. 15).  If then the good deed itself has its
 voice in the secret ears of God, whether we cry aloud or keep silence,
 this very thing which you have well done cries aloud.  Moreover I
 declare that there are so great miracles, there is so great care and
 custody of the monks in this same monastery of the said apostle that it
 is as if he himself were specially the abbot of the monastery.  For, to
 speak of a few things out of many which I have learnt from the
 narration of the abbot and the prior of the monastery, two brethren
 were one day sent out thence to buy something for the use of the
 monastery, one a junior who seemed to be distinguished for prudence,
 the other a senior, sent to be the guardian of the junior.  Both went
 forth, and from the money they received as the price of what they were
 to purchase, he who had been sent as the guardian of the junior
 purloined something without the knowledge of the other.  Having both of
 them presently returned to the monastery, and come to the threshold of
 the oratory, he who had committed the theft fell down seized by a
 demon, and began to be vexed.  And, when the demon had let him go, he
 was asked by the monks who came round him whether perchance he had
 purloined anything from what he had received:  he denied, and was a
 second time vexed.  Eight times he denied, and eight times was vexed.
 But after his eighth denial he confessed how much money he had
 purloined.  And repenting he acknowledged, prostrate on the earth, that
 he had sinned, and when he had undergone penance, the demon came to him
 no more.

 At another time also, on the anniversary of the same apostle, while the
 brethren were resting during the mid-day hours, suddenly a certain
 brother, having become blind with his eyes open, began to tremble, to
 utter loud cries, testifying by these cries that he could not bear what
 he was suffering.  The brethren ran together to him, saw him blind with
 his eyes open, trembling, and crying out, abstracted from the scene
 around him, and having no sense of anything that could be done
 externally.  They lifted him in their hands, and cast him before the
 altar of Saint Andrew the Apostle, prostrating themselves also in
 prayer for him.  And he at once, coming to himself again, declared what
 he had suffered; namely that a certain old man appeared to him, and set
 a black dog at him to tear him, saying, Why wouldest thou flee from
 this monastery?  And, when I could by no means have escaped (said he)
 from the bites of the dog, certain monks came, and besought that old
 man for me, who straightway bade the dog depart, and then I came to
 myself.  And he often afterwards confessed, saying, On the day on which
 I suffered these things I had had a design of flying from this same
 monastery.

 Another monk also secretly desired to depart from the same monastery.
 And, having considered the matter in his mind, he would have entered
 the oratory; but he was immediately delivered to a demon and most
 sorely vexed.  But he used to be left by the demon and if he remained
 outside the oratory, he would suffer no harm; but, if he attempted to
 enter it, he was at once delivered to the evil spirit and vexed.  And,
 when this took place frequently, he confessed his fault, namely that he
 was thinking of going away from the monastery.  Then the brethren,
 assembled in his behalf, bound themselves to continue in prayer for him
 for three days, and he was so cured that the evil spirit never came to
 him afterwards.  He used to say also that he had seen the same blessed
 apostle while he was being vexed, and had been reproached by him for
 wishing to depart from the monastery.

 Two other brethren also fled from the same monastery, and gave some
 intimations previously to the brethren in conversation that they were
 going down by the Appian way, to make for Jerusalem; but, when they had
 gone out, they turned aside from the road.  And, that there might be no
 possibility of their being found by any that might follow them, finding
 some retired crypts near the Flaminian gate, they hid themselves
 therein.  But when they had been looked for in the evening, and not
 found in the monastery, certain brethren followed them on horseback,
 going out by the gate of Metronus, to follow them along the Latin or
 Appian way.  But suddenly they conceived the design of looking further
 for them on the Salarian way:  and so, in proceeding outside the city,
 they turned their course into the Salarian way.  But, failing to find
 them, they decided to return through the Flaminian gate.  And, as they
 were returning, presently when their horses came in front of the crypts
 in which the men were hidden, they stood still, and, though beaten and
 urged, refused to move.  The monks considered that such a thing could
 not be without some mystery.  They observed the crypts, and saw the
 entrance to them to be blocked by a piled heap of stones, but, as their
 horses would not go in any direction, they dismounted.  They displaced
 the stones which were placed at the mouth of the crypts, entered, and
 found the men in a state of consternation within these dark
 subterranean hiding-places.  They were taken back to the monastery, and
 were so improved by this miracle that it was of great advantage to them
 to have fled for a short time from the monastery.

 I have told you these things that it may be known to your Excellency
 whose oratory it is on which you have bestowed your alms.  Now may
 Almighty God keep you under His heavenly protection both in soul and in
 body and all your house, and grant you to live long for our
 consolation.  I beg that my most beloved son the Lord Strategius [152]
 with his glorious parents your children may be greeted in my name.

 [150] See II. 27, note 2.

 [151] The gifts that had been sent were, as appears below, veils or
 hangings (vela) for the shrine of St. Peter in the Vatican basilica.

 [152] Strategius (as appears from other letters) was the young grandson
 of Rusticiana, being the child of Appio and Eusebia.  See II. 27, note
 2.

 Epistle XLV.

 To Theoctista, Patrician [153] .

 Gregory to Theoctista, &c.

 We ought to give great thanks to Almighty God, that our most pious and
 most benignant Emperors have near them kinsfolk of their race, whose
 life and conversation is such as to give us all great joy.  Hence too
 we should continually pray for these our lords, that their life, with
 that of all who belong to them, may by the protection of heavenly grace
 be preserved through long and tranquil times.

 I have to inform you, however, that I have learnt from the report of
 certain persons how that, owing to the levity of the people, a tumult
 of detraction has arisen against you.  And I hear that your Excellency
 has consequently been distressed with no slight vexation.  If this is
 so, I wonder much why the words of men on earth should agitate you, who
 have fixed your heart on heaven.  For the blessed Job, when his friends
 who had come to console him had broken out into rebuke, said, For
 behold my witness is in heaven, and he that knows me is on high (Job
 xvi. 20).  For one who has the witness of his life in heaven ought not
 to be afraid of the judgments of men on earth.  Paul also, a leader of
 good men, says, Our glory is this, the testimony of our conscience (2
 Cor. i. 12).  And he says again, Let every man prove his own work, and
 so shall he have glory in himself, and not in another (Gal. vi. 4).
 For, if we are rejoiced by praises and broken down by detractions, we
 have set our glory not in ourselves, but in the mouth of others.  And
 indeed the foolish virgins took no oil in their vessels, but the wise
 ones took oil in their vessels with their lamps (Matth. xxv.).  Now our
 lamps are good works; of which it is written, Let your light shine
 before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
 which is in heaven (Matth. v. 16).  And we then take oil in our vessels
 with our lamps, when we seek not the splendour of glory for our good
 deeds from the adulation of our neighbours, but preserve it in the
 testimony of our conscience.  And in regard to all that is said of us
 outwardly we ought to recur to the secrets of our soul.  Although all
 should revile us, yet he is free whom conscience accuses not, while,
 even though all should praise, one cannot be free, if conscience
 accuses him.  Whence the Truth says concerning John, What went ye out
 into the wilderness to see?  A reed shaken with the wind? (Matth. xi.
 7).  And this in truth is said in the way of negation, not of
 assertion, since it is added, But what went ye out for to see?  A man
 clothed in soft raiment?  Behold, they that wear soft clothing  are in
 kings' houses (Ibid. 8).  For although, according to the truth of the
 Gospel, John was clothed in rough raiment, yet the signification is
 that they wear soft clothing who are delighted by adulations and
 praises.  And it is denied that John was a reed shaken with the wind,
 inasmuch as no breath from any human mouth bent the fortitude of his
 mind.  For we, if we are lifted up by praises, or cast down by
 revilings, are a reed shaken with the wind.  But far be this, far be it
 from the heart of your Excellency.  I know that you read studiously the
 teacher of the Gentiles, who says, I, if I yet pleased men, should not
 be the servant of Christ (Gal. i. 10).

 If, however, any even slight sadness has arisen in your mind from this
 cause, I believe that Almighty God has kindly allowed this to be the
 case.  For not even to His elect in this life has He promised the joys
 of delight, but the bitternesses of tribulation; so that, after the
 manner of medicine, they may be restored through a bitter cup to the
 sweetness of eternal salvation.  For what says He?  The world shall
 rejoice and ye shall lament (Joh. xvi. 20).  With what hope?  With what
 promise?  A little afterwards it is added, I will see you again, and
 your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man shall take from you
 (Ibid. 22).  Hence again He says to His disciples, In your patience
 shall ye possess your souls (Luke xxi. 19).

 Consider, I pray you, where patience would be, if there were nothing to
 be endured.  I suspect that there is no Abel without having a Cain for
 his brother.  For if the good were without the bad, they could not be
 perfectly good, since they would not be purged:  and the very society
 of the bad is the purgation of the good.  There were three sons of Noe
 in the ark, one of whom was a derider of his father, who, though in
 himself he was blessed, still received a sentence of condemnation in
 his son.  Abraham had two sons before he took Cethura to wife; and yet
 his carnal son persecuted the son of promise (Genes. ix.).  This the
 great teacher expounds, saying, As he who is after the flesh persecuted
 him that is after the Spirit, even so it is now (Gal. iv. 29).  Isaac
 had two sons; but one, who was spiritual, fled before the threats of
 his carnal brother.  Jacob had twelve sons, but one, who lived
 uprightly, was sold by ten into Egypt.  In the case of the prophet
 David, because there was in him what should have been purged, it was
 brought to pass that he suffered under a son's persecution.  The
 blessed Job says of the society of the reprobate, I have been a brother
 to dragons, and a companion to owls (Job xxx. 29).  To Ezekiel the Lord
 says, Son of man, unbelievers and destroyers are with thee, and thou
 dost dwell among scorpions (Ezek. ii. 6).  Among the twelve apostles
 there was one reprobate, that there might be one by whose persecution
 the eleven might be tried.  The Prince of the apostles speaks thus to
 his disciples, He delivered just Lot, oppressed by the injury and
 conversation of the wicked.  For in seeing and hearing he was just,
 dwelling among those who from day to day vexed the soul of the just one
 with their unrighteous deeds (2 Pet. ii. 7, 8).  Paul also the apostle
 writes to his disciples, saying, In the midst of a crooked and perverse
 nation, among whom ye shine as luminaries in the world, holding fast
 the word of life (Philip. ii. 15).

 Seeing then that we know from the witness of Scripture that in this
 life the good cannot be without the bad, your Excellency ought by no
 means to be disturbed by the voices of fools, especially as there is
 then sure confidence in Almighty God, when for well-doing any adversity
 is given us in this world in order that a full reward may be reserved
 for us in the eternal retribution.  Whence also in the holy Gospel the
 Truth says, Blessed shall ye be when men shall say all manner of evil
 against you falsely for my name's sake (Matth. v. 11).  And for our
 consolation He deigned to adduce as an example His own reproaches,
 saying, If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much
 more them of his household (Ibid. x. 25).

 But there are many who perhaps praise the life of the good more than
 they ought; and, lest any elation should creep in from praise, Almighty
 God allows bad men to break out into slander and objurgation, in order
 that, if any sin springs up in the heart from the mouth of them that
 praise, it may be choked by the mouth of them that revile.  Hence it
 is, then, that the teacher of the Gentiles testifies that he continues
 in his preaching through evil report and good report (2 Cor. vi. 8);
 saying also, As deceivers and yet true.  If then there were such as
 laid an evil report on Paul, and called him a deceiver, what Christian
 now should account it a hard thing in behalf of Christ to hear
 injurious words?  Moreover we know of how great virtue was the
 precursor of our Redeemer, who in Holy Writ is called not only more
 than a prophet, but even an angel:  and yet, as the history of his
 death testifies, after his death his body was burnt by his persecutors
 [154] .  But why say we these things of holy men?  Let us speak of the
 Holy of holies Himself, that is of God Who was made man for us, Who
 before His death heard the injurious charge that He had a devil, and
 after His death was called a deceiver by His persecutors, when one
 said, We know that that deceiver said, After three days I will rise
 again (Matth. xxvii. 63).  How much, then, must we sinners needs bear
 from the tongues and hands of wicked men, we who are to be judged at
 the coming of the eternal Judge, if He Who will even come as Judge
 endured so much both before and after His death?

 These things, most sweet and excellent daughter, I have briefly said,
 lest, as often as thou hearest of foolish men speaking in derogation of
 thee, thou shouldest be touched by even the least sadness of heart.
 But, seeing that this very murmuring of foolish men cannot be allayed
 by quiet reason, I hold it to be sin if the doing of what can be done
 is neglected.  For, when we appease insane minds, and bring them back
 to a healthy state, we ought by no means to cause them offence.  For
 there are some offences that are to be altogether despised; but there
 are some which, when they can be avoided without guilt, are not to be
 despised, lest there be guilt in keeping them alive.  We learn this
 from the preaching of the sacred Gospel; since, when the Truth said,
 Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which
 cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man (Matth. xv. 11), and the
 disciples replied saying, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended
 after they heard this saying? (Ibid. 12), straightway He replied, Every
 plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up.
 Let them alone; they be blind, and leaders of the blind (Ibid. 13).
 And yet, when tribute was demanded, He first gave a reason why tribute
 should not be paid, and forthwith subjoined, Notwithstanding, lest we
 should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up
 the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth,
 thou shalt find a stater.  That take, and give unto them for me and for
 thee (Matth. xvii. 26).  Why is it that of some who were offended it is
 said, Let them alone; they are blind, and leaders of the blind; and
 that to others, lest they should be offended, tribute is paid by the
 Lord, even though not due?  Why is it that He allowed one offence to
 remain, but forbade another to be caused to others?  Why, but that He
 might teach us on the one hand to despise offences which implicate us
 in sin, but on the other to mitigate in all ways those which we can
 appease without sin?

 Wherefore your Excellency, God protecting you, may, with great
 quietness, turn aside the offences of bad men.  For the chief of them
 you should of your own accord call to you privately and give them
 reasons, and anathematize certain wrong points which they suppose to be
 held by you.  And if too, as it is said may be the case, they suspect
 such anathema to be insincere, you should confirm it even by an oath,
 averring that you do not hold, and never have held, those points.  Nor
 let it seem beneath you to satisfy them in such a way; nor let there be
 in your mind any feeling of disdain against them on account of your
 imperial race.  For we are all brethren created by the power of one
 Emperor, and redeemed by His blood.  And so we ought not in anything to
 despise our brethren, however poor and abject.

 For certainly Peter had received power in the heavenly kingdom, so that
 whatever he should bind or loose on earth should be bound or loosed in
 heaven; he walked on the sea, he healed the sick with his shadow, he
 slew sinners with his word, he raised the dead by his prayer.  And
 because by the admonition of the Spirit he had gone in to Cornelius the
 Gentile, a question was raised against him by the believers as to why
 he had gone in among Gentiles and eaten with them, and why he had
 received them in baptism.  And yet this first of the apostles, filled
 with such gifts of grace, supported by such power of miracles, replied
 to the complaint of the believers, not by power but by reason, and
 explained the case to them in order; how he saw a certain vessel, as it
 had been a sheet, in which were four-footed beasts of the earth, and
 wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air, let down from
 heaven, and heard a voice saying, Arise, Peter; kill and eat (Acts xi.
 5 seq.); how three men came to him calling him to Cornelius; how the
 Holy Spirit bade him go with them; how the same Holy Spirit who had
 been wont to come on those baptized in Judea after baptism, came on the
 Gentiles before baptism.  For if, when he was blamed by the believers,
 he had paid regard to the authority which he had received in Holy
 Church, he might have replied that the sheep should not dare to find
 fault with the shepherd to whom they had been committed.  But, had he
 said anything of his own power in answer to the complaint of the
 believers, he would not have been truly a teacher of gentleness.  He
 pacified them, therefore, by giving a reason humbly, and even produced
 witnesses to defend him from blame, saying, Moreover these six brethren
 accompanied me (Acts xi. 12).  If, then, the pastor of the Church, the
 Prince of the Apostles, who singularly did signs and miracles,
 disdained not, in defending himself from blame, humbly to give a
 reason, how much more ought we sinners, when we are blamed for
 anything, to pacify those who blame us by giving a reason humbly!

 For to me, as you know, when I was resident at the footsteps of my
 lords in the royal city, many used to come of those who were accused
 with respect to the aforesaid points.  But I declare, my conscience
 bearing me witness, that I never found in them any error, any pravity,
 or anything of what was said against them.  Whence also I took care,
 despising report, to receive them familiarly, and rather to defend them
 from their accusers.  For it used to be said against them that under
 pretext of religion they dissolved marriages; and that they said that
 baptism did not entirely take away sins; and that, if any one did
 penance for three years for his iniquities, he might afterwards live
 perversely; and that, if they said under compulsion that they
 anathematized anything for which they were blamed, they were by no
 means holden by the bond of anathema.  Now if there are any who
 undoubtedly hold and maintain such views, there is no doubt that they
 are not Christians.  And such both I, and all catholic bishops, and the
 universal Church, anathematize, because they think what is contrary to
 the truth, and speak what is contrary.  For, if they say that marriages
 should be dissolved for the sake of religion [155] , be it known that,
 though human law has conceded this, yet divine law has forbidden it.
 For the Truth in person says, What God hath joined together let not man
 put asunder (Matth. xix. 6).  He says also, It is not lawful for a man
 to put away his wife saving for the cause of fornication (Ibid. 9).
 Who then may contradict this heavenly legislator?  We know how it is
 written, Two shall be one flesh (Matth. xix. 5; 1 Cor. vi. 16; Gen. ii.
 24).  If, then, a man and wife are one flesh, and a man puts away his
 wife for the sake of religion, or a woman her husband while he remains
 in this world, even though perchance he turns aside to unlawful deeds,
 what is this conversion [156] , in which one and the same flesh on the
 one part passes to continence and on the other part remains in
 pollution?  If, however, it should suit both to lead a continent life,
 who may dare to accuse them, since it is certain that Almighty God, who
 has granted what is less, has not forbidden what is greater?  And
 indeed we know of many holy persons who have both previously led
 continent lives with their consorts, and have afterwards passed over to
 the rules of holy Church.  For in two ways holy men are accustomed to
 abstain even from lawful things.  Sometimes that they may increase
 their merits before Almighty God; but sometimes that they may wipe away
 the sins of their former life.  For when the three children who were
 brought under obedience to the Babylonian King, asked for pulse for
 food, being unwilling to make use of the king's meat, it was not
 because it would have been sin in them to eat what God had created.
 They were unwilling, then, to take what it was lawful for them to take,
 that their virtue might increase through continence.  But David, who
 had taken to himself another man's wife, and had been sorely scourged
 for his fault, desired long afterwards to drink water from the cistern
 of Bethlehem; which when his bravest soldiers had brought to him, he
 refused to drink it, and poured it out as a libation to the Lord.  For
 it was lawful for him to drink it, had he been so minded; but, because
 he remembered having done what was unlawful, he laudably abstained even
 from what was lawful.  And he, who to his guilt previously feared not
 that the blood of dying soldiers should be shed, afterwards considered
 that, were he to drink the water, he would have shed the blood of
 living soldiers, saying, Shall I drink the blood of these men who have
 put their lives in jeopardy (1 Chron. xi. 19)?  Accordingly, when good
 husbands and wives desire either to increase merit or to do away with
 the faults of previous life, it is lawful for them to bind themselves
 to continence and to aspire to a better life.  But, if the wife does
 not follow after the continence which the husband aspires to, or the
 husband refuses that which the wife aspires to, it is not lawful for
 wedlock to be cut asunder, seeing that it is written, The wife hath not
 power of her own body, but the husband; and the husband hath not power
 of his own body, but the wife (1 Cor. vii. 4).

 But, if there are any who say that sins are only superficially put away
 in baptism, what can be more against the faith than such preaching,
 whereby they would fain undo the very sacrament of faith, wherein
 principally the soul is bound to the mystery of heavenly cleanness,
 that, being completely absolved from all sins, it may cleave to Him
 alone of Whom the Prophet says, But it is good for me to cleave to God
 (Ps. lxxii. 28 [157] )?  For certainly the passage of the Red Sea was a
 figure of holy baptism, in which the enemies behind died, but others
 were found in front in the wilderness.  And so to all who are bathed in
 holy baptism all their past sins are remitted, since their sins die
 behind them even as did the Egyptian enemies.  But in the wilderness we
 find other enemies, since, while we live in this life, before reaching
 the country of promise, many temptations harass us, and hasten to bar
 our way as we are wending to the land of the living.  Whosoever says,
 then, that sins are not entirely put away in baptism, let him say that
 the Egyptians did not really die in the Red Sea.  But, if he
 acknowledges that the Egyptians really died, he must needs acknowledge
 that sins die entirely in baptism, since surely the truth avails more
 in our absolution than the shadow of the truth.  In the Gospel the Lord
 says, He that is washed needeth not to wash, but is clean every whit
 (Joh. xiii. 10).  If, therefore, sins are not entirely put away in
 baptism, how is he that is washed clean every whit?  For he cannot be
 said to be clean every whit, if he has any sin remaining.  But no one
 can resist the voice of the Truth, He that is washed is clean every
 whit.  Nothing, then, of the contagion of sin remains to him whom He
 Himself who redeemed him declares to be clean every whit.

 But, if there are any who say that penance is to be done for sin during
 any three years, and that after the three years one may live in
 pleasures, these know neither the preaching of the true faith nor the
 precepts of sacred Scripture.  Against these the excellent preacher
 says, He that soweth in his flesh shall of the flesh also reap
 corruption (Galat. vi. 8).  Against these he says again, They that are
 in the flesh cannot please God (Rom. viii. 8); where he subjoins to his
 disciples, But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit.

 Now they are in the flesh who live in carnal pleasures.  Against them
 it is said, Neither shall corruption possess incorruption (1 Cor. xv.
 50).  But, if they say that a short season of penitence may suffice
 against sin, so that one may be allowed to return again to sin, rightly
 does the sentence of the first pastor hit them, when he says, It is
 happened unto them according to the true proverb; The dog is turned to
 his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in
 the mire (2 Pet. ii. 22).  For great is the efficacy of penitence
 against sin; but only if one persevere in this penitence.  For it is
 written, He that shall persevere unto the end, the same shall be saved
 (Matth. x. 22: xxiv. 13).  Hence again it is written, He that is
 baptized from a dead body, and toucheth it again, what availeth his
 washing? (Ecclus. xxxiv. 30 [158] ).  Now a dead body is every perverse
 work, which draws a man to death, because he lives not in the life of
 righteousness.  He, then, is baptized from a dead body, and again
 touches it, who deplores the bad works which he remembers having done,
 but after his tears entangles himself in the same again.  Washing,
 therefore, from such dead body avails not any soul that does again what
 it has bemoaned, and rises not through the lamentations of penitence to
 the rectitude of righteousness.  For to do penance truly is not only to
 bemoan what has been committed, but also to decline from what has been
 bemoaned.

 But, if there are any who say that, if any one shall have anathematised
 anything under compulsion of necessity, he is not held by the bond of
 the anathema, these are themselves witnesses that they are no
 Christians.  For they think by vain attempts to loose the binding of
 holy Church, and hereby neither do they account as real the absolution
 of holy Church which she offers to the faithful, if they think that her
 binding is of no avail.  Against such as these dispute should be no
 longer held, since they ought to be altogether scorned and
 anathematised; and whence they think to elude the truth, thence let
 them in reality be bound in their sins.

 If, then, there are any who under the Christian name dare either to
 preach, or to hold silently in their own minds, the points of error
 which we have spoken of above, these undoubtedly we both have
 anathematised and do anathematise.  Yet, as I have said before, in
 those who used to come to me in the royal city I observed no error at
 all as to any one of the aforesaid points, nor do I think there was
 any.  For, if there had been, I should have observed it.  However,
 since there are many of the faithful who are inflamed with unwise zeal,
 and often, while they attack certain persons as though they were
 heretics, themselves make heresies, consideration should be had for
 their infirmity, and, as I have said before, they should be appeased
 with reason and gentleness.  For indeed they are like unto those of
 whom it is written, I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God,
 but not according to knowledge (Rom. x. 2).  Wherefore your Excellency,
 who live incessantly in reading, in tears, and in alms, should, as I
 have requested, appease their unwisdom by gentle exhortations and
 replies, that not only in yourself, but also in them, you may find the
 glory of eternal retribution.  All this my exceeding love has induced
 me to say to you, since I think that your joy is my gain, and your
 sadness my loss.  May Almighty God guard you with heavenly grace, and,
 keeping safe the Piety of our lord and the Tranquillity of our most
 pious lady, prolong your life for the education of the little lords.

 [153] Sister of the emperor Mauricius, and governess of the imperial
 children.  See also I. 5, VII. 26.  This long letter to her was called
 forth by her having complained to Gregory of erroneous views in matters
 of religion being imputed to her at Constantinople, for which she seems
 to have been maligned in certain quarters.  In his reply, with his
 habitual courtesy, he takes for granted that such imputations were
 unfounded, though the pains he takes to combat the errors with which
 she was charged may perhaps suggest the idea of his not being in his
 heart quite assured of her soundness.  The whole letter, both for its
 tone and for its style of argumentation, is very characteristic of the
 writer.

 [154] Cf. Theodoret, Eccles. Hist. lib. ii. c. 6, where this is told:
 "asseruerunt arcam Joannis Baptistæ, et ossibus combustis dissiparunt
 cinerem."

 [155] Religionis, in the sense of monastic life.

 [156] Conversio, in the usual sense of embracing monastic life.

 [157] In English Bible, lxxiii. 28.

 [158] In English Bible, xxxiv. 25.

 Epistle XLVI.

 To Isacius, Bishop of Jerusalem [159] .

 Gregory to Isacius, &c.

 In keeping with the truth of history, what means the fact that at the
 time of the flood the human race outside the ark dies, but within the
 ark is preserved unto life, but what we see plainly now, namely that
 all the unfaithful perish under the wave of their sin, while the unity
 of holy Church, like the compactness of the ark, keeps her faithful
 ones in faith and in charity?  And this ark in truth is compacted of
 incorruptible timber, since it is built of strong souls, and such as
 persevere in good.  And, when any single person is converted from a
 secular life, timber is, as it were, still cut down from the
 mountains.  But when, according to the order of holy Church, one is
 assigned to have custody of others, it is as though the ark were built
 of timber sawn and put together for preserving the life of men.  And in
 truth that ark, when the flood was over, rested on a mountain, because
 when the corruption of this life is over, when the billows of evil
 works have passed away, holy Church will rest in the heavenly country,
 as on a high mountain.  To the building, therefore, of this ark we
 rejoice to find, after reading your Fraternity's epistle, that in the
 compactness of a right faith you lend your aid; and we render great
 thanks to Almighty God, who, though the pastors of His flock are
 changed, keeps the faith which He once delivered to the holy Fathers,
 even after them unchangeable.  Now the excellent preacher says, Other
 foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus (1
 Cor. iii. 11).  Whosoever, then, with love of God and his neighbour,
 holds firmly the faith which is in Christ, he has laid the same Jesus
 Christ, Son of God and man, as a foundation for himself from the
 Father.  It is to be hoped, then, that, where Christ is the foundation,
 the building also of good works may follow.  The Truth itself also in
 person says, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but
 climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.  But he
 that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep (Joh. x. 1).
 And a little afterwards He adds, I am the door.  He, then, enters into
 the sheepfold by the door who enters by Christ.  And he enters by
 Christ who thinks and preaches what is true concerning the same Creator
 and Redeemer of the human race, keeps what he preaches, and undertakes
 the topmost place of government with a view to a burdensome office, not
 in desire of the glory of transitory dignity.  He watches also wisely
 over the charge of the sheepfold which he has taken in hand, lest
 either perverse men speaking forwardly tear the sheep of God, or
 malignant spirits waste them by persuading them to vicious delights.

 But in all these things may He instruct us Who for our sake was made
 man.  May He Who vouchsafed to become what He made Himself infuse the
 spirit of His love both into my infirmity and thy charity, and open the
 eye of our heart in all carefulness and watchful circumspection.

 But that men of a right faith are advanced to sacred orders, thanks
 should be given without cease to the same Almighty God, and prayer
 should ever be made for the life of our most pious and Christian lord
 the Emperor, and for his most tranquil spouse, and his most gentle
 offspring, in whose times the mouths of heretics are silent, since,
 though their hearts seethe in the madness of perverse opinion, yet in
 the time of the orthodox Emperor they presume not to speak out the
 wrong opinions which they hold; so that we plainly see fulfilled what
 is written, Gathering the waters of the sea together as in a bottle
 (Ps. xxxii. 7 [160] ).  For the water of the sea is gathered together
 as in a bottle, because whatever wrong opinions the bitter science of
 heretics entertains at the present day it keeps within the breast, and
 presumes not to express them openly.  But thy Fraternity, spiritually
 taught, has set forth in all respects the right faith, and has
 thoroughly declared the things that should be sought after.  Your
 faith, therefore, is ours.  We hold what you say, and say what you
 hold.

 But, inasmuch as it has come to our ears that in the Churches of the
 East no one attains to sacred orders but by giving of bribes, if your
 Fraternity finds that this is the case, you should offer as your first
 oblation to Almighty God the restraining of the error of simoniacal
 heresy in the Churches subject to you.  For, not to speak of other
 things, what sort of men can they be when in sacred orders who are
 advanced to them not by merit but by bribes?  Now we know with what
 animadversion the Prince of the apostles attacked this heresy, having
 pronounced the first sentence of condemnation against Simon, when he
 said, Thy money be with thee unto perdition, because thou hast thought
 that the gift of God may be purchased with money (Acts viii. 20).  Our
 Lord God Himself also, the Creator and Redeemer of the human race,
 having made a scourge of small cords, overthrew and cast out of the
 temple the seats of them that sold doves (Matth. xxi.).  For to sell
 doves in the temple, what else is it but to give for a price in holy
 Church that imposition of hands whereby the Holy Spirit is given?  But
 the seats of them that sold doves were overthrown, because the
 priesthood of such is not accounted as priesthood.

 Moreover, I have been informed that in the Church which is called Neas,
 strifes often arise with your Church in the city of Jerusalem.
 Wherefore your Holiness ought carefully to consider all things, and to
 correct some things gently, but bear others that cannot be corrected
 with equanimity.  For we see plainly what is said by holy Church
 through the voice of the Psalmist, Sinners have built upon my back (Ps.
 cxxviii. 3) [161] .  For on the back burdens are borne.  Sinners, then,
 build upon our back, when we bear with sufferance those whom we cannot
 correct.  For the steersman of a ship, when he considers that the wind
 is against him, surmounts some billows by steering right over them, but
 some which he foresees cannot be surmounted he prudently avoids by
 turning his course aside.  So, therefore, let your Holiness mitigate
 some evils by repressing them, and others by bearing them, so as in all
 respects to conserve the peace of them that dwell together in the holy
 Church of Jerusalem.  For it is written, Follow peace with all men, and
 holiness, without which no man shall see God (Hebr. xii. 14).  For in
 quarrels the very light of the soul, the light of good intent, is
 blocked.  Whence the Psalmist says, Mine eye is troubled because of
 anger (Ps. vi. 8).  And what remains in us of well-doing, if we lose
 peace from the heart, without which we cannot see the Lord?  Do you
 therefore so act as to gather the gain of your reward even from those
 who through strife might have caused it to perish.  May Almighty God
 guard your Love with heavenly grace, and grant you to carry with you
 from those who are committed to you manifold fruit and measure running
 over to eternal joys.

 [159] Written in reply to a letter received from the new patriarch of
 Jerusalem, announcing, as was usual, his election, and containing his
 confession of faith.

 [160] In A.V. xxxiii. 7.

 [161] In A.V. cxxix. 3.

 Epistle XLVII.

 To Anatolius, Deacon at Constantinople.

 Gregory to Anatolius, &c.

 Thy Love has written to me that our most pious lord orders a successor
 to be appointed to my most reverend brother John, bishop of Prima
 Justiniana, on account of the ailment of the head from which he
 suffers, lest perchance that city, while without the jurisdiction of a
 bishop, should be ruined by its enemies, which God forbid.  And yet the
 canons nowhere enjoin that a bishop should be superseded on account of
 sickness.  And it is altogether unjust that, if bodily ailments come
 on, the sick person should be deprived of his dignity [162] .
 Accordingly this thing can by no means be done through us, lest sin
 should come upon my soul from his deposition.  But it is to be
 suggested that, if he who bears rule is sick, an administrator may be
 found, to undertake all his charge, and maintain and fill his place,
 without his being deposed, in the government of the Church and custody
 of the city; so that neither may Almighty God be offended nor the city
 be found to be neglected.  If, however, the same most reverend John
 should haply on account of his ailments request to be relieved from the
 dignity of the episcopate, it should be conceded on his presenting a
 petition in writing.  But otherwise we are altogether unable, with due
 regard to the fear of Almighty God, to do this thing.  But, if he
 should be unwilling thus to make petition, what pleases the most pious
 Emperor, whatever he commands to be done, is in his power.  As he
 determines, so let him provide.  Only let him not cause us to be mixed
 up in the deposition of one so situated.  Still, what he does, if it is
 canonical, we will follow.  But, if it is not canonical, we will bear
 it, so far as we can without sin of our own.

 [162] Cf. XIII. 5 for a similar assertion of the unlawfulness of
 superseding a bishop, except at his own request, when incapacitated by
 illness.  See also VII. 19.  In this epistle may be observed Gregory's
 habitual deference to the Emperors, whose subject he ever declared
 himself to be, even in matters of ecclesiastical import, together with
 his avoidance of giving his own sanction to anything he regarded as
 irreligious or uncanonical.  Similarly in the case of an imperial
 prohibition of soldiers becoming monks.  See III. 65; VIII. 5; X. 24.
 Cf. also IV. 47, in the case of Maximus of Salona.  We find him,
 however, in a letter to the empress, in which this case of Maximus is
 referred to (V. 21), making a respectful protest against imperial
 interference in matters of ecclesiastical cognizance.

 Epistle L.

 To Adrian, Notary.

 Gregory to Adrian, Notary of Panormus.

 Agathosa, the bearer of these presents, complains that her husband has,
 against her will, been converted [163] in the monastery of the abbot
 Urbicus.  And, since this undoubtedly touches the credit and reputation
 of the said abbot, we enjoin thy Experience to investigate the matter
 by diligent enquiry, so as to see whether it may not be the case that
 the man's conversion was with her consent, or that she herself had
 promised to change her state.  And should it be found to be so, see to
 his remaining in the monastery, and compel her to change her state, as
 she had promised.  If however neither of these things is the case, and
 you do not find that the aforesaid woman has committed any crime of
 fornication on account of which it is lawful for a man to leave his
 wife, then, lest his conversion should possibly be an occasion of
 perdition to the wife left behind in the world, we desire thee, without
 any excuse allowed, to restore her husband to her, even though he
 should be already tonsured.  For, although mundane law declares that
 marriage may be dissolved for the sake of conversion against the will
 of either party, yet divine law does not permit this to be done.  For,
 save for the cause of fornication, a man is on no account allowed to
 put away his wife, seeing that after the husband and wife have been
 made one body by the copulation of wedlock, it cannot be in part
 converted, and in part remain in the world [164] .

 [163] Conversum, in the usual sense of adopting monastic life.

 [164] Cf. VI. 48, and XI. 45.

 Epistle LIV.

 To Desiderius, Bishop of Gaul [165] .

 Gregory to Desiderius, &c.

 Many good things having been reported to us with regard to your
 pursuits, such joy arose in our heart that we could not bear to refuse
 what your Fraternity had requested to have granted to you.  But it
 afterwards came to our ears, what we cannot mention without shame, that
 thy Fraternity is in the habit of expounding grammar to certain
 persons.  This thing we took so much amiss, and so strongly disapproved
 it, that we changed what had been said before into groaning and
 sadness, since the praises of Christ cannot find room in one mouth with
 the praises of Jupiter.  And consider thyself what a grave and heinous
 offence it is for bishops to sing what is not becoming even for a
 religious layman.  And, though our most beloved son Candidus the
 presbyter, having been, when he came to us, strictly examined on this
 matter, denied it, and endeavoured to excuse you, yet still the thought
 has not departed from our mind, that in proportion as it is execrable
 for such a thing to be related of a priest, it ought to be ascertained
 by strict and veracious evidence whether or not it be so.  Whence, if
 hereafter what has been reported to us should prove evidently to be
 false, and it should be clear that you do not apply yourself to trifles
 and secular literature, we shall give thanks to our God, who has not
 permitted your heart to be stained with the blasphemous praises of the
 abominable; and we will treat without misgiving or hesitation
 concerning the granting of what you request.

 We commend to you in all respects the monks whom together with our most
 beloved son Laurentius the presbyter and Mellitus the abbot we have
 sent to our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Augustine, that,
 through the succour of your Fraternity, no delay may stop their onward
 progress.

 [165] Desiderius was bishop of Vienne, cf. VI. 54.  This letter, with
 others that follow (Epp. LV., LVI., LVII., LVIII, LIX., LX., LXI.,
 LXII., LXIV., LXV., LXVI., and possibly also the preceding Epistle,
 XXIX.) were carried, as appears from its conclusion, by Mellitus and
 his companions, who, in answer to Augustine's request, were sent by
 Gregory from Rome to reinforce the mission to Britain (Bede, H. E. I.
 27, 29).  See Prolegomena, p. xxvi.  It is notable as shewing Gregory's
 views with regard to the study of secular literature.

 Epistle LV.

 To Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate (Arles) [166] .

 Gregory to Virgilius, &c.

 Since by the testimony of Holy Writ avarice is called the service of
 idols, with what earnestness it ought to be banished from the temple of
 God is acknowledged; and yet (we say it with groaning) by some priests
 this is not regarded.  For fierce cupidity holds the heart captive, and
 persuades one that what it commands is lawful, and so proceeds as to
 slay with the same sword both the giver and the receiver.  What safe
 place, then, can hereafter be of avail against avarice, if the Church
 of God is opened to it by bad priests?  How can he keep the sheepfolds
 inviolate who invites the wolf to enter?  Alas for shame!  He pollutes
 his hands by an unlawful bribe, and thinks to lift up others by his
 benediction, while himself prostrate under his own iniquity, and
 captive notwithstanding to his own ambition.  Since then this evil of
 rapacity has never entered the citadel of your mind, and you say that
 you have your hands unpolluted in the matter of ordinations, give
 thanks to Almighty God, and acknowledge yourselves to be His debtors in
 that under His protection you have remained unharmed by the contagion
 of this disease.  But this good in you will profit you less than it
 might have done if you have not carefully forbidden this thing in
 others also.  As in thyself this evil had displeased thee, thou
 oughtest to have been zealous against it in thy brother also.  For,
 seeing that the divine precepts admonish us to love our neighbours as
 ourselves, it is no small fault to disregard them, and not to fear for
 others what for ourselves we shrink from.  Even now, therefore, most
 beloved brother, give thy mind to repairing what thou hast lost in
 others through thy negligence in correction, and restrain whomsoever
 thou canst from this wickedness, and insist on a synod being assembled
 for rooting out this same heresy, to the end that, with reward to thy
 Love, what shall have been condemned, God granting it, by the ordinance
 of all may be better guarded against by all.

 Furthermore, it has come to our ears that our brother and
 fellow-bishop, Serenus of Massilia (Marseilles), receives bad men into
 his intimate society, so as to have, in fine, as his familiar friend a
 certain presbyter. who, after lapse, is said to wallow still in his
 iniquities.  This you ought to enquire into closely.  And, if it should
 prove to be so, let it be your care so to correct this matter in our
 stead that both he who has received such a one may learn not to
 encourage him by familiarity, but rather to constrain him by
 punishment, and he who has been received may learn to wash away his
 sins with tears, and not to pile up iniquity by unclean living.  Let
 your Fraternity hold as commended to you in all respects the monks whom
 we have sent to our brother and fellow-bishop Augustine, and take pains
 so to succour them for proceeding on their way, and so to concur with
 them, that through your assistance they may be able, under the
 protection of God, to arrive speedily at their destination.

 [166] The bishop of Arles had vicariate jurisdiction committed to him
 under Rome.  Cf. V. 53.

 Epistle LVI.

 To Ætherius, Bishop of Lugdunum (Lyons.)

 Gregory to Ætherius, Bishop of Gaul.

 The language of your epistles, full of venerable gravity, has so
 engaged our heart's affection that it would please us to be ever
 mingling mutual discourse, to the end that, if we cannot enjoy your
 bodily presence, absence may make no difference with us while this
 intercourse goes on between us.  For how great love of ecclesiastical
 order shines forth in you, and how great is your regard for discipline,
 and how great your earnestness in the observance of wholesome
 ordinances you shew in that you receive our exhortation submissively
 and altogether willingly, and declare that you will inviolably observe
 it.  Since then you bear a heart prompt for the amendment of others,
 and condemn with a free voice, as becomes you, an evil of old standing,
 and seeing that our other brethren and fellow-bishops also are
 similarly disposed, it is your duty to rise unanimously against the
 Lord's enemies, and cast avarice out of the house of God by a synodical
 definition.  In the giving of ecclesiastical orders let not fierce
 hunger for gold find any satisfaction; let not flatteries filch any
 advantage; let not favour confer anything:  let a man's life have the
 reward of honour, his modesty promote his advancement; that, while this
 kind of observance obtains, both he that seeks to rise by bribes may be
 judged unworthy, and he to whom his conduct bears good testimony may be
 worthily honoured.  Let this be your care, most beloved brother, let
 this anxiety ever keep guard over your thoughts, so that you may prove
 by action that the zeal which you shew in your letters is the witness
 of your heart.  Wherefore continually and instantly press for the
 assembling of a synod; and so earnestly acquit yourself as to act up to
 the dignity of your title in the administration of your office.

 With regard to what you request to have granted to your Church on the
 ground of ancient custom, we have caused search to be made in our
 archives, and nothing has been found.  Wherefore send to us the letters
 which you say you have, that from them we may gather what ought to be
 granted you.

 As to the acts or writings of the blessed Irenæus, we have now long
 been searching for them, but have not succeeded so far in finding any
 of them.

 Furthermore, let your Fraternity take care to hold as in all respects
 commended to you the monks whom we despatched to our brother and
 fellow-bishop Augustine, and for the sake of God display your charity
 towards them; and so earnestly concur with them in priestly zeal, and
 so hasten to help them with your succour for proceeding on their
 journey, that, while there shall be no cause of delay in your parts to
 detain them, both they may go on their way more speedily, and you may
 find a reward for what you have done in their behalf.  Given this 10th
 day of July, Indiction 4 [167] .

 [167] In two mss. (Teller.) "die decimo Kalendas Julii, indict. 4,"
 i.e. 22 June, a.d. 601.  This may be taken as correct, agreeing with
 other dated epistles sent through Mellitus and his companions.

 Epistle LVII.

 To Aregius, Bishop of Vapincum [168] .

 Gregory to Aregius, Bishop of Gaul.

 There being in brotherly love one heart and one soul, as the mind
 rejoices in the prosperity of another, so is it afflicted in his
 adversity, since in both it is bound to be partaker by the law of
 charity.  And so the greater sorrow had come upon us for your sadness,
 lest perchance the affliction of a prolonged grief might batter your
 heart with continual pain, and burden your life with groans.  But,
 having received the letters of your Charity, we have been consoled with
 the joy we hoped for, and we give thanks to Almighty God, for that we
 now know that your equanimity is unimpaired, and that your mind has
 been restored to comfort.  Nor indeed was it otherwise to be expected
 of you than that you would undoubtedly overcome with priestly patience
 whatever adversity there might be.

 Further, we well recollect how the zeal of your Fraternity flamed up of
 old in uprooting simoniacal heresy.  Wherefore we exhort that you give
 your earnest attention to this, and that, among other things that we
 wrote of, it be condemned by the strict definition of a council; that
 so, the bent of our desire being fulfilled by the help of your
 solicitude, you may both offer to Almighty God a most acceptable
 oblation in the correction of vices, and also shew, for the edification
 of others, how the care of the pastoral office shines forth in you.
 Moreover our experience of your life, which we have known to be much
 superior to that of many, moves us to presume on great assistance from
 you in this matter.  And so complete ye your kindness as under God you
 have begun, that the good which with a right aim has been begun in you
 may, by the help of God the Creator of all, be brought to completion.

 Furthermore, let your Fraternity bestow your accustomed charity on the
 monks whom we have sent to our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop
 Augustine; and so endeavour to succour them for proceeding on their
 way, as well personally as through others as you can, that, while
 through your provision they have no difficulties or delays in your
 parts, both we may feel that our confidence in you was not in vain, and
 Almighty God may give you the recompense of His grace for the
 conversion of the souls on whose behalf they have been sent.

 [168] Cf. IX. 107, to the same Aregius.

 Epistle LVIII.

 To Divers Bishops of Gaul.

 Gregory to Mennas of Telona (Toulon), Serenus of Massilia (Marseilles),
 Lupus of Cabillonum (Châlons-sur-Saône), Aigulfus of Mettæ (Metz),
 Simplicius of Parisii (Paris), Melantius of Rotonius (Rouen), and
 Licinius [169] , bishops of the Franks.  A paribus.

 Though the care of the office you have undertaken reminds your
 Fraternity how you ought to assist with all your endeavours religious
 men, and especially those who labour in behalf of souls, yet it is not
 beside the purpose that an address by letter from us should stimulate
 your assiduity, since, as a fire becomes larger from a blast of air, so
 the purposes of a good disposition are advanced by commendation.
 Inasmuch, then, as through the co-operating, grace of our Redeemer so
 great a multitude of the nation of the Angli is being converted to the
 grace of Christian faith that our most reverend common brother and
 fellow-bishop Augustine asserts that those who are with him cannot
 suffice for carrying out this work in divers places, we have made
 provision by sending to him a few monks with our most beloved common
 sons Laurentius the presbyter and Mellitus the abbot.  And so let your
 Fraternity shew them the charity that becomes you, and so make haste to
 aid them wherever there may be need, that through your assistance they
 may have no cause for delay in your parts, and that both they
 themselves may rejoice with you in being relieved by your consolation,
 and you, by affording them your succour, may be found partakers in the
 cause in furtherance of which they have been sent.

 [169] Licinius (afterwards canonized) was bishop of Andegavum (Angers).

 Epistle LIX.

 To Theoderic, King of the Franks [170] .

 Gregory to Theoderic, &c.

 The letter of your Excellency, which is the index of your heart, has so
 shewn, in its flow of lucid language, what great prudence is
 conspicuous in you, along with royal power, that there can be no doubt
 of the truth of whatever fame has reported in your praise.  And
 inasmuch as you signify, by what you say in praise of it, that our
 exhortation has so pleased your royal mind that you wish whatever you
 know to pertain to the worship of our God, to the veneration of
 Churches, or to the honour of priests, to be both carefully established
 and in all ways guarded, we appeal to you with a renewed exhortation,
 with a view to your greater reward, that you would order a synod to be
 assembled, and, as we have before written, cause corporal vices in
 priests and the pravity of simoniacal heresy to be condemned by the
 definition of all the bishops, and to be cut off within the limits of
 your kingdom, and allow not any longer money to have more effect than
 the precepts of the Lord.  For, since all avarice is the service of
 idols, whosoever does not watchfully guard against it, and especially
 in the bestowal of ecclesiastical honours, is subjected to the
 perdition of infidelity, even though he may seem to hold the faith
 which he disregards.  As, then, against external enemies, so also
 against adversaries of souls among yourselves, take ye earnest heed,
 that on account of this your faithful opposition to God's enemies you
 may both reign prosperously here under His protection, and also come
 hereafter by the leading of His grace to eternal joys.

 Furthermore, what benefits your Excellence bestowed on our most
 reverend brother and fellow-bishop Augustine on his progress to the
 nation of the Angli we have been told by certain monks who have
 returned to us from him.  Wherefore, returning abundant thanks, we beg
 that you will deign to afford your support in full measure to these
 monks also who have been sent to him, and to aid them on their onward
 journey, so that the more amply you shew your kindness to them, the
 greater return you may expect from Almighty God, whom they serve.

 [170] Cf. VI. 58, note 1.

 Epistle LX.

 To Theodebert, King of the Franks [171] .

 Gregory to Theodebert, &c.

 One who receives with willing mind and embraces in the bosom of his
 heart words of fatherly admonition declares himself without doubt to be
 one who would be an amender of faults.  On which account the absolute
 promise of your Excellence assures us sufficiently.  For we hold in
 place of a pledge the words of one who is good for payment.  Therefore
 let your Excellency vouchsafe, adhering to the commands of our God, to
 give zealous attention to the assembling of a synod, that every
 corporal vice in priests, and simoniacal heresy, which was the first to
 arise in Churches from iniquitous ambition, may under threat of the
 censure of your power be removed by the definition of a council, and be
 cut off by the roots; lest, if gold is loved in your parts more than
 God, He who now remains tranquil while His precepts are despised be
 felt hereafter to be wrathful in vengeance.  And indeed, because we say
 all this for your own behoof, we therefore cease not to press you again
 and again, that we may be able, even by importunity, to do good to our
 most excellent and most sweet sons.  For it will be in all respects of
 advantage to your kingdom, if what is done in those parts against God
 be corrected by the emendation of your Excellency.

 Furthermore, what good service your Excellency did to our most reverend
 brother and fellow-bishop Augustine on his progress to the nation of
 the Angli we have learnt from the report of certain monks who returned
 to us from him.  Rendering you the greatest thanks for this, we beg you
 to bestow your benefits abundantly on the monks, the bearers of these
 presents, whom we have sent to our said brother, to the end that, while
 under your patronage, they find no difficulties in your parts, but
 accomplish easily with the help of Christ the journey they have
 undertaken, you may reap your richer fruit of reward before the eyes of
 our God.

 [171] Cf. VI. 58, note 1.

 Epistle LXI.

 To Clotaire, King of the Franks [172] .

 Gregory to Clotaire, &c.

 Among so many cares and anxieties which you sustain for the government
 of the peoples under your sway, it is to your exceeding praise and
 great reward that you are helpers of those who labour in the cause of
 God.  And, since you have shewn yourselves by the good things you have
 already done to be such that we may presume still better things of you,
 we are moved most gladly to request of you what will be to your own
 reward.  Now certain monks, who had proceeded with our most reverend
 brother and fellow-bishop Augustine to the nation of the Angli, have
 returned and told us with what great charity your Excellence refreshed
 this our brother when he was present with you, and with what supports
 you aided him on his departure.  But, since the works of those who do
 not recede from the good they have begun are acceptable to our God, we
 beg of you, greeting you with fatherly affection, to hold as peculiarly
 commended to you the monks, bearers of these presents, whom we have
 sent to our aforesaid brother together with our most beloved sons, the
 presbyter Laurentius and the abbot Mellitus.  And whatever kindness you
 before shewed to him bestow ye on them also to the richer increase of
 your praise, to the end that, when through your provision they shall
 have accomplished without delay the journey they have begun, Almighty
 God may be the recompenser of your good deeds, and both your guardian
 in prosperity and your helper in adversity.

 Furthermore, it has come to our ears that in your parts sacred orders
 are conferred with payment of money.  And we are exceedingly distressed
 if the gifts of God are not attained by merit, but pounced upon by
 bribes.  And, because this simoniacal heresy, which was the first to
 arise in the Church, was condemned by the authority of the apostles, we
 beg of you for your own reward to cause a synod to be assembled; to the
 end that, having been put down and eradicated by the definition of all
 the priests, it may in future find no power in your parts to endanger
 souls, nor be allowed henceforth to arise under any pretext whatever,
 that so our Almighty God may exalt you against your adversaries in
 proportion as He sees that you have zeal in fulfilling His commands,
 and as you take thought for the salvation of souls which had been in
 danger of perishing by the sword of this atrocity.

 [172] Clotaire II., at this time king of Neustria, his capital being
 Soissons.  There is no letter to him among those which had been carried
 by Augustine.  But it appears from this epistle that the missionaries
 had passed through his dominions and had been well received.

 Epistle LXII.

 To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks [173] .

 Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

 We render thanks to Almighty God, Who, among all the other gifts of His
 loving-kindness that He has bestowed upon your Excellency, has so
 filled you with a love of the Christian religion that whatever you know
 to pertain to the gain of souls, whatever to the propagation of the
 faith, you cease not to carry into effect with devout mind and pious
 zeal.  As to the great favour and assistance wherewith your Excellence
 aided our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Augustine on his
 progress to the nation of the Angli, fame had already not been silent;
 and afterwards certain monks, returning to us from him, gave us a
 particular account thereof.

 And indeed, let others to whom your benefactions are less known wonder
 at these evidences of your Christianity; for to us who know them by
 experience they are not a subject of wonder, but of rejoicing, because
 through what you bestow upon others you delight yourself.  Now of what
 sort and how great are the miracles which our Redeemer has wrought in
 the conversion of the above-written nation is already known to your
 Excellency.  On which account you ought to have great joy, since the
 succours afforded by you claim to themselves the larger share herein,
 it having been through your aid, after God, that the word of preaching
 became widely known in those parts.  For one who aids the good work of
 another makes it his own.  But, that the fruit of your reward may be
 richer more and more, we beg of you kindly to afford the support of
 your patronage to the monks, the bearers of these presents, whom we
 have sent with our most beloved sons, the presbyter Laurentius and the
 abbot Mellitus, to our aforesaid most reverend brother and
 fellow-bishop, because of his telling us that those who are with him
 are not sufficient; and to vouchsafe to stand by them in all things, to
 the end that, when by the good auspices of your Excellency they shall
 have had the better success, and shall have found no delays or
 difficulties in your parts, you may call down the mercy of our God
 towards you and your most sweet nephews in proportion as you have
 demeaned yourselves compassionately for the love of Him in causes of
 this kind.

 [(In Collect. Pauli Diac.)  Given the tenth day of the Kalends of July,
 Indiction 4.]

 [173] Brunechild was at this time with her grandson Theoderic in the
 kingdom of Burgundy, having been expelled from Austrasia, according to
 Greg. Turon, a.d. 599.

 Epistle LXIII.

 To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.

 Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

 What good gifts have been conferred on you from above, and with what
 piety heavenly grace has filled you, this, among all the other proofs
 of your merits, intimates evidently to all that you both govern the
 savage hearts of barbarians with the skill of prudent counsel, and
 (what is still more to your praise), adorn your royal power with
 wisdom.  And since, as you are above many nations in both these
 respects, so also you excel them in the purity of your faith, we have
 great confidence in your amending what is unlawful.  For the contents
 of the letters you have already sent us are witness how your Excellency
 has embraced our exhortation, and with what devotion you long to fulfil
 the same.  But, since He Who is the giver of good dispositions is wont
 to be their helper also, we trust that He may direct your causes in His
 loving-kindness all the more favourably as He sees you to be assiduous
 in His cause.  Do you God's work, and God will do yours.  Wherefore
 order a synod to be assembled, and, among other things, as we have
 before written, studiously prohibit by the definition of a council the
 sin of simoniacal heresy in your kingdom.  Offer a sacrifice to God by
 conquering the enemy that is within, that by His help you may conquer
 the enemies that are without; and that, according to the zeal you
 evince against His foes, such you may feel Him to be in aiding you.
 Believe me, moreover, that, as we have learnt from the experience of
 many, whatever is gathered together with sin is spent with loss.  If,
 then, you wish to lose nothing unjustly, endeavour to the utmost to
 have nothing got by injustice.  For in earthly matters loss has always
 its origin in sin.  You, therefore, if you wish to stand above adverse
 nations, if you would speedily, with God's leave, be victorious over
 them, receive with trembling the commandments of the same Almighty God,
 that He Himself may fight for you against your adversaries, Who has
 promised in Holy Writ, saying, The Lord shall fight for you, and ye
 shall hold your peace (Exod. xiv. 14).

 [In Collect. Pauli Diac.:  Data die decima Kalend., Indict. 4.  In
 Remigiano:  Data die x Kalendas Julii, Indict. 4.]

 Epistle LXIV.

 To Augustine, Bishop of the Angli [174] .

 Here begins the epistle of the blessed Gregory pope of the city of
 Rome, in exposition of various matters, which he sent into transmarine
 Saxony to Augustine, whom he had himself sent in his own stead to
 preach.

 Preface.--Through my most beloved son Laurentius, the presbyter, and
 Peter the monk, I received thy Fraternity's letter, in which thou hast
 been at pains to question me on many points.  But, inasmuch as my
 aforesaid sons found me afflicted with the pains of gout, and on their
 urging me to dismiss them speedily were allowed to go, leaving me under
 the same painful affliction; I have not been able to reply, as I ought
 to have done, at greater length on every single point.

 Augustine's first question.

 I ask, most blessed father, concerning bishops, how they should live
 with their clergy:  And concerning the offerings of the faithful which
 are received at the altars, both into what portions they should be
 divided, and how the bishop ought to deal with them in the Church.

 Answer of Saint Gregory, pope of the city of Rome.

 Holy Scripture, which no doubt thou knowest well, bears witness, and
 especially the epistles of the blessed Paul to Timothy, in which he
 studied to instruct him how he ought to behave himself in the house of
 God.  Now it is the custom of the Apostolic See to deliver an
 injunction to bishops when ordained, that of all emoluments that come
 in four divisions should be made:  to wit, one for the bishop and his
 household on account of hospitality and entertainment; another for the
 clergy; a third for the poor; and a fourth for the reparation of
 Churches.  But, inasmuch as thy Fraternity, having been trained in the
 rules of a monastery, ought not to live apart from thy clergy in the
 Church of the Angli, which by the guidance of God has lately been
 brought to the faith, it will be right to institute that manner of life
 which in the beginning of the infant Church was that of our Fathers,
 among whom none said that aught of the things which he possessed was
 his own, but they had all things common (Acts iv.).

 Augustine's second question [175] .

 I wish to be taught whether clerics who cannot contain may marry; and,
 if they marry, whether they should return to the world.

 Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

 If, however, there are any clerics, not in sacred orders, who cannot
 contain themselves, they ought to take to themselves wives, and receive
 their stipends separately, since we know that it is written of those
 same Fathers whom we have before mentioned, that distribution was made
 unto every man according as he had need.  Wherefore thought should be
 taken and provision made for their stipends, and they should be kept
 under ecclesiastical rule, that they may lead good lives, and give
 attention to the singing of psalms, and by the help of God preserve
 their heart and tongue and body from all that is unlawful.  But as to
 those who live in community, what is there more for us to say with
 regard to assigning portions, or shewing hospitality, or executing
 mercy, seeing that what remains over and above their needs is to be
 expended for pious and religious uses, as the Lord and Master of us all
 says, Of what is over give alms, and behold all things are clean unto
 you (Luke xi. 41)?

 Augustine's third question.

 Since there is but one faith, why are the uses of Churches so
 different, one use of Mass being observed in the Roman Church, and
 another in the Churches of Gaul?

 Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

 Thy Fraternity knows the use of the Roman Church, in which thou hast
 been nurtured.  But I approve of thy selecting carefully anything thou
 hast found that may be more pleasing to Almighty God, whether in the
 Roman Church or that of Gaul, or in any Church whatever, and
 introducing in the Church of the Angli, which is as yet new in the
 faith, by a special institution, what thou hast been able to collect
 from many Churches.  For we ought not to love things for places, but
 places for things.  Wherefore choose from each several Church such
 things as are pious, religious, and right, and, collecting them as it
 were into a bundle, plant them in the minds of the Angli for their use.

 Augustine's fourth question.

 Pray tell me what any one ought to suffer who may have abstracted
 anything from a church by theft?

 Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

 In this case thy Fraternity can consider, with regard to the person of
 the thief, how he may be best corrected.  For there are some who commit
 theft though they have resources, and there are others who transgress
 in this matter out of want.  Hence it is needful that some should be
 corrected by fines, but some by stripes, and some more severely, but
 some more lightly.  And, when any one is somewhat severely dealt with,
 he should be dealt with in charity, and not in anger; since to the man
 himself who is corrected the punishment is assigned lest he should be
 given up to the fires of hell.  For we ought so to maintain discipline
 towards believers as good fathers are wont to do towards their sons,
 whom they both smite with blows for their faults, and yet seek to have
 as their heirs the very persons on whom they inflict pain, and keep
 what they possess for the very same whom they seem to assail in anger.
 This charity, then, should be retained in the mind, so that nothing at
 all be done beyond the rule of reason.

 Thou askest also how they ought to restore what they have abstracted by
 theft from churches.  But far be it from us that the Church should
 receive back with increase what it seems to lose of its earthly things,
 and seek gain out of losses.  [al., for de damnis, de vanis.  So Bede.]

 Augustine's fifth question.

 I beg to know whether two brothers may marry two sisters, who are far
 removed from them in descent.

 Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

 This by all means may be done.  For nothing at all is found in Holy
 Writ which seems to be opposed to it.

 Augustine's sixth question.

 As far as what generation believers ought to be joined in marriage with
 their kin, and whether it is lawful to be joined in marriage with
 stepmothers and brothers' wives?

 Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

 A certain earthly law in the Roman republic allows the son and
 daughter, whether of a brother and sister, or of two brothers, or of
 two sisters, to marry together.  But we have learnt by experience that
 progeny cannot ensue from such marriages.  And the sacred law forbids
 to uncover the nakedness of kindred.  Whence it follows that only the
 third or fourth generations of believers may be lawfully joined
 together [176] .  For the second which we have spoken of, ought by all
 means to abstain from each other.  But to have intercourse with a
 stepmother is a grave offence, seeing that is also written in the law,
 thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father (Lev. xviii. 7).
 Not indeed that a son can uncover his father's nakedness; but, since it
 is written in the law, They too shall be one flesh (Gen. ii. 24), he
 who has presumed to uncover the nakedness of his stepmother, who has
 been one flesh with his father, has in truth uncovered his father's
 nakedness.  It is also forbidden to have intercourse with a brother's
 wife, who, through her former conjunction, has become the flesh of the
 brother.  For which thing also John the Baptist was beheaded, and
 crowned with holy martyrdom.  He was not bidden to deny Christ; and yet
 for confessing Christ he was slain; because the same our Lord Jesus
 Christ had said, I am the truth (John xiv. 6); and because John was
 slain for the truth, he shed his blood for Christ.

 Augustine's seventh question [177] .

 I request to have it declared whether to such as are thus foully joined
 together separation should be enjoined, and the oblation of sacred
 communion denied them?

 Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

 But, since there are many in the nation of the Angli who while they
 were yet in unbelief are said to have been associated in such unholy
 marriages, they should be admonished, when they come to the faith, to
 abstain from each other, and be made to understand that this is a
 grievous sin.  Let them fear God's tremendous judgment, lest for carnal
 delight they incur the pains of eternal torment.  Yet they should not
 on this account be deprived of the communion of the Lord's body and
 blood, lest we should seem to punish them for what they had bound
 themselves in through ignorance before the laver of baptism.  For at
 this time holy Church corrects some things with fervour, tolerates some
 things with gentleness, connives at and bears some things with
 consideration, so as often to repress what she opposes by bearing and
 conniving.  But all who come to the faith are to be warned not to dare
 to perpetrate any such thing:  and if any should perpetrate it, they
 must be deprived of the communion of the Lord's body and blood, since,
 as in those who have done it in ignorance the fault should be to a
 certain extent tolerated, so it should be severely visited in those who
 are not afraid to sin in spite of knowledge.

 Augustine's eighth question.

 I ask whether, if length of way intervenes, and bishops are not able to
 assemble easily, a bishop should be ordained without the presence of
 other bishops.

 Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

 Indeed in the Church of the Angli, wherein thou art so far the only
 bishop, thou canst not ordain a bishop otherwise than without bishops.
 For, when bishops shall come from Gaul they will attend thee as
 witnesses for the ordination of a bishop [178] .  But we desire thy
 Fraternity so to ordain bishops in England that the bishops themselves
 be not separated from one another by long distances, to the end that
 there be no necessary cause why they should not come together in the
 case of the ordination of any bishop.  For the presence of some other
 pastors also is exceedingly advantageous; and hence they ought to be
 able to come together as easily as possible.  When therefore, God
 granting it, bishops shall have been ordained in places not far from
 each other, an ordination of bishops should in no case take place
 without three or four bishops being assembled.  For in spiritual things
 themselves, that they may be ordered wisely and maturely, we may draw
 an example even from carnal things.  For assuredly, when marriages are
 celebrated in the world, some married persons are called together, that
 those who have gone before in the way of marriage may be associated
 also in the ensuing joy.  Why then, in this spiritual ordination too,
 wherein man is joined to God through a sacred mystery, should not such
 come together as may both rejoice in the advancement of him who is
 ordained bishop and pour forth prayers to the Almighty Lord for His
 protection?

 Augustine's ninth question.

 I ask also how we should deal with the bishops of Gaul and of the
 Britons.

 Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

 Over the bishops of Gaul we give thee no authority, since from the
 ancient times of my predecessors the bishop of Arelate (Arles) has
 received the pallium, and we ought by no means to deprive him of the
 authority that he has acquired.  If therefore it should happen that thy
 Fraternity should pass into the provinces of Gaul, thou shouldest act
 with the same bishop of Arelate in such a way that vices in bishops, if
 any, may be corrected.  And, if he should by chance be lukewarm in the
 vigour of discipline, he must be stirred up by the zeal of thy
 Fraternity.  To him we have also written letters [179] , bidding him
 aid thee with his whole soul, whenever thy Holiness may be present in
 Gaul, that you may together repress in the manners of bishops all that
 is contrary to the command of our Creator.  But thou thyself wilt not
 have power to judge the bishops of Gaul by authority of thine own; but
 by persuading, alluring, and also exhibiting thine own good works for
 their imitation, and so moulding the dispositions of the vicious to
 concern for holiness; seeing that it is written in the law, One passing
 through the standing corn of another must not put in a sickle, but rub
 the ears with his hand and eat (Deut. xxxii. 25).  Thou canst not,
 then, put in the sickle of judgment into the crop that is seen to be
 committed to another; but by kindly good offices thou canst strip the
 corn of the Lord from the chaff of its defects, and by admonishing and
 persuading, convert it, as it were by chewing, into the body of the
 Church.  But whatever is to be done authoritatively, let it be done
 with the aforesaid bishop of Arelate, lest there should be any
 disregard of what the ancient institution of the Fathers has provided.
 But of all British bishops we commit the charge to thy Fraternity, that
 the unlearned may be taught, the weak strengthened by persuasion, the
 perverse corrected by authority.

 Augustine's request.

 I request that the relics of Saint Sixtus the martyr may be sent to us
 [180] .

 The grant of Gregory.

 We have done what thou hast requested, to the end that the people who
 formerly said that they venerated in a certain place the body of Saint
 Sixtus the martyr, which seems to thy Fraternity to be neither the true
 body nor truly holy, may receive certain benefits from the most holy
 and approved martyr, and not reverence what is uncertain.  Yet it seems
 to me that, if the body which is believed by the people to be that of
 some martyr is distinguished among them by no miracles, and if further
 there are none of the more aged who declare that they had heard the
 order of his passion from progenitors, the relics which thou hast asked
 for should be so deposited apart that the place in which the aforesaid
 body lies, be entirely blocked up, and that the people be not allowed
 to desert what is certain, and venerate what is uncertain.

 Augustine's tenth question.

 Whether a pregnant woman should be baptized, or, when she has brought
 forth, after what length of time she should be allowed to enter the
 church.  Or, to guard also against her issue being surprised by death,
 after how many days it may receive the sacrament of holy baptism.  Or
 after what length of time her husband may have carnal intercourse with
 her.  Or, if she is in her sickness after the manner of women, whether
 she may enter the church, or receive the sacrament of sacred
 communion.  Or whether a man after intercourse with his wife, before he
 has been washed with water, may enter the church, or even go to the
 ministry (ministerium:  in Bede, mysterium) of sacred communion.  All
 these things it is right we should have made known to us for the rude
 nation of the Angli.

 Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

 I doubt not that thy Fraternity has been asked these questions, and I
 think that I have supplied thee with answers to them.  But I believe
 that thou wishest what thou art able of thyself to say and think to be
 confirmed by my reply.  For why should not a pregnant woman be
 baptized, fecundity of the flesh being no fault before the eyes of
 Almighty God?  For, when our first parents had transgressed in
 Paradise, they lost by the just judgment of God the immortality which
 they had received.  Therefore, because Almighty God would not utterly
 extinguish the human race for their fault, He took away immortality
 from man for his sin, and yet, in the kindness of His pity, reserved to
 him fruitfulness in offspring.  With what reason then can what has been
 preserved to the human race by the gift of Almighty God be debarred
 from the grace of holy baptism?  For indeed it is very foolish to
 suppose that a gift of grace can possibly be inconsistent with that
 mystery wherein all human sin is entirely extinguished.

 But as to how many days after her delivery a woman may enter the
 church, thou hast learnt that by the direction of the Old Testament she
 ought to keep away xxxiii. days for a male child, but lxvi. for a
 female.  It should be known, however, that this is understood
 mystically.  For, if in the same hour in which she has been delivered
 she enters the church, she subjects herself to no burden of sin.  For
 it is the pleasure of the flesh, not the pain, that is in fault.  But
 it is in the carnal intercourse that the pleasure lies; for in bringing
 forth of offspring there is pain and groaning.  Whence even to the
 first mother of all it is said, In sorrow thou shalt bring forth
 children (Gen. iii. 16).  If, therefore, we forbid a woman after her
 delivery to enter the church, we reckon her very penalty to her for a
 fault.  Moreover, it is by no means forbidden that either a woman after
 delivery or that which she has brought forth should be baptized without
 delay, if in peril of death; she even in the same hour in which she is
 delivered, or it in the same hour in which it is born.  For, as in the
 case of those who live and have discretion the grace of the holy
 mystery should be seen to with great discernment, so to those who are
 in imminent danger of death it should be offered without any delay,
 lest, while time is being sought for administering the mystery of
 redemption, death should shortly intervene, and no way be found of
 redeeming the time that has been lost.

 Further, her husband ought not to cohabit with her till that which is
 brought forth be weaned.  But an evil custom has arisen in the ways of
 married persons, that women scorn to nurse the children whom they bring
 forth, and deliver them to other women to be nursed.  Which custom
 appears to have been devised for the sole cause of incontinency, in
 that, being unwilling to contain themselves, they think scorn to suckle
 their offspring.  Those women therefore who, after an evil custom,
 deliver their children to others to be nursed ought not to have
 intercourse with their husbands unless the time of their purification
 has passed, seeing that, even without the reason of childbirth, they
 are forbidden to have intercourse with their husbands while held of
 their accustomed sicknesses; so much so that the sacred law smites with
 death any man who shall go into a woman having her sickness (Lev. xx.
 18).  Yet still a woman, while suffering from her accustomed sickness,
 ought not to be prohibited from entering the church, since the
 superfluity of nature cannot be imputed to her for guilt, and it is not
 just that she should be deprived of entrance into the church on account
 of what she suffers unwillingly.  For we know that the woman who
 suffered from an issue of blood, coming humbly behind the Lord, touched
 the hem of his garment, and immediately her infirmity departed from her
 (Luke viii.).  If then one who had an issue of blood could laudably
 touch the Lord's garment, why should it be unlawful for one who suffers
 from a menstruum of blood to enter in the Lord's Church?

 But that woman, thou wilt say, was compelled by infirmity; but these
 are held of their accustomed sicknesses.  Yet consider, dearest
 brother, how all that we suffer in this mortal flesh is of infirmity of
 nature, ordained after guilt by the fitting judgment of God.  For to
 hunger and to thirst, to be hot, to be cold, to be weary, is of
 infirmity of nature.  And to seek food against hunger, and drink
 against thirst, and cool air against heat, and clothing against cold,
 and rest against weariness, what is it but to search out certain
 healing appliances against sicknesses?  For in females also the
 menstruous flow of their blood is a sickness.  If therefore she
 presumed well who in her state of feebleness touched the Lord's
 garment, why should not what is granted to one person in infirmity be
 granted to all women who through defect of their nature are in
 infirmity?

 Further, she ought not to be prohibited during these same days from
 receiving the mystery of holy communion.  If, however, out of great
 reverence, she does not presume to receive, she is to be commended;
 but, if she should receive, she is not to be judged.  For it is the
 part of good dispositions in some way to acknowledge their sins, even
 where there is no sin, since often without sin a thing is done which
 comes of sin.  Whence also, when we hunger, we eat without sin, though
 it has come of the sin of the first man that we do hunger.  For the
 menstruous habit in women is no sin, seeing that it occurs naturally;
 yet still that nature itself has been so vitiated as to be seen to be
 polluted even without the intention of the will is a defect that comes
 of sin, whereby human nature may perceive what through judgment it has
 come to be, so that man who voluntarily committed sin may bear the
 guilt of sin involuntarily.  And so females, when they consider
 themselves as being in their habit of sickness, if they presume not to
 approach the sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord, are to be
 commended for their right consideration.  But when, out of the habit of
 a religious life, they are seized with a love of the same mystery, they
 are not to be restrained, as we have said.  For, as in the old
 Testament outward acts were attended to, so in the New Testament it is
 not so much what is done outwardly as what is thought inwardly that is
 regarded with close attention, that it may be punished with searching
 judgment.  For while the law forbids the eating of many things as being
 unclean, the Lord nevertheless says in the Gospel, Not that which goeth
 into the mouth defileth a man, but the things which come forth from the
 heart, these are they which defile a man (Matth. xv. 11).  And soon
 after He added in explanation, Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts
 (Ib. 19).  Hence it is abundantly indicated that what is shewn by
 Almighty God to be polluted in act is that which is engendered of the
 root of polluted thought.  Whence also Paul the Apostle says, All
 things are pure to the pure; but unto them that are defiled and
 unbelieving is nothing pure (Tit. i. 15).  And immediately, to declare
 the cause of this defilement, he subjoins, For their mind and
 conscience is defiled.  If, then, food is not impure to one whose mind
 is not impure, why should what with a pure mind a woman suffers from
 nature be reckoned to her for impurity?

 Further, a man after sleeping with his own wife ought not to enter the
 church unless washed with water, nor, even when washed, enter
 immediately.  Now the law enjoined on the ancient people that a man
 after intercourse with a woman should both be washed with water and not
 enter the church before sunset.  Which may be understood spiritually as
 meaning that a man has intercourse with a woman when his mind is joined
 with delight in thought to illicit concupiscence, and that, unless the
 fire of concupiscence in his mind should cool, he ought not to think
 himself worthy of the congregation of his brethren, seeing himself to
 be burdened with by lewdness of wrong desire.  For, although in this
 matter different nations of men have different notions, and some are
 seen to observe one practice and some another, yet the usage of the
 Romans from ancient times has always been for a man after intercourse
 with his own wife both to seek the purification of the bath and to
 refrain reverently for a while from entering the church.

 Nor do we, in saying these things, account wedlock as sin.  But, since
 even the lawful intercourse of the wedded cannot take place without
 pleasure of the flesh, entrance into a sacred place should be abstained
 from, because the pleasure itself can by no means be without sin.  For
 he had not been born of adultery or fornication, but of lawful wedlock,
 who said, Behold I was conceived in iniquities, and in sin my mother
 brought me forth (Ps. l. 7).  For, knowing himself to have been
 conceived in iniquities, he groaned for having been born in sin,
 because the tree bears in its branch the vicious humour which it has
 drawn from its root.  Yet in these words he does not call the
 intercourse of the wedded iniquity in itself, but in truth only the
 pleasure of the intercourse.  For there are many things which are
 allowed and legitimate, and yet we are to some extent defiled in the
 doing of them; as often we attack faults with anger, and disturb the
 tranquillity of our own mind.  And, though what is done is right, yet
 it is not to be approved that the mind is therein disturbed.  For
 instance, he had been angry against the vices of transgressors who
 said, Mine eye is disturbed because of anger (Ps. vi. 8).  For, since
 the mind cannot, unless it be tranquil, lift itself up to the light of
 contemplation, he grieved that his eye was disturbed in anger, because,
 though assailing evil doings from above, he still could not help being
 confused and disturbed from contemplation of the highest things.  And
 therefore his anger against vice is laudable, and yet it troubles him,
 because he felt that he had incurred some guilt in being disturbed.
 Lawful copulation of the flesh ought therefore to be for the purpose of
 offspring, not of pleasure; and intercourse of the flesh should be for
 the sake of producing children, and not a satisfaction of frailties.
 If, then, any one makes use of his wife not as seized by the desire of
 pleasure, but only for the sake of producing children, he certainly,
 with regard to entering the church or taking the mystery of the body
 and blood of the Lord, is to be left to his own judgment, since by us
 he ought not to be prohibited from receiving it who knows no burning
 though in the midst of fire.  But, when not the love of producing
 offspring but pleasure dominates in the act of intercourse, married
 persons have something to mourn over in their intercourse.  For holy
 preaching concedes them this, and yet in the very concession shakes the
 mind with fear.  For, when the Apostle Paul said, Who cannot contain
 let him have his own wife, he straightway took care to add, But I speak
 this by way of indulgence, not by way of command (1 Cor. vii. 7).  For
 what is just and right is not indulged:  what he spoke of as indulged
 he shewed to be a fault.

 Furthermore it is to be attentively considered that the Lord in mount
 Sinai, when about to speak to the people, first charged the same people
 to abstain from women.  And if there, where the Lord spoke to men
 through a subject creature, purity of body was required with such
 careful provision that they who were to hear the words of God might not
 have intercourse with women, how much more ought those who receive the
 Body of the Almighty Lord to keep purity of the flesh in themselves,
 lest they be weighed down by the greatness of the inestimable mystery!
 Hence also it is said through the priest to David concerning his
 servants, that if they were pure from women they might eat the shew
 bread; which they might not receive at all unless David first declared
 them to be pure from women.  Still a man who after intercourse with his
 wife has been washed with water may receive even the mystery of sacred
 communion, since according to the opinion above expressed it was
 allowable for him to enter the church.

 Augustine's eleventh question.

 I ask also whether after an illusion, such is accustomed to occur in
 dreams, any one may receive the body of the Lord, or, if he be a
 priest, celebrate the sacred mysteries?

 Answer of the blessed Pope Gregory.

 Such a one the Testament of the old law, as we have already said in the
 last section, declares indeed to be polluted, and does not allow to
 enter the church until the evening, or without being washed with
 water.  But one who understands this not only with special reference to
 that people at that time, but also spiritually, will regard it under
 the same intellectual conception that we have spoken of before; namely,
 that he has, as it were, an illusion in a dream who, being tempted by
 uncleanness, is defiled in thought by true images.  But he is to be
 washed with water in the sense of washing away the sins of thought with
 tears.  And, unless the fire of temptation has passed away, he should
 feel himself to be guilty, as it were, until the evening.

 But in this same illusion discrimination is very necessary, since it
 ought to be nicely considered from what cause it occurs to the mind of
 the sleeper.  For sometimes it happens from surfeit, sometimes from
 superfluity or infirmity of nature, sometimes from cogitation.  And
 indeed when it has come to pass from superfluity or infirmity of
 nature, it is by no means to be viewed with alarm, since the mind is to
 be commiserated as having endured it unwittingly rather than as having
 done it.  But when the appetite of gluttony in taking food is carried
 beyond measure, and consequently the receptacles of the humours are
 loaded, the mind has therefore some guilt, yet not to the extent of
 prohibition from receiving the sacred mystery, or celebrating the
 solemnities of mass, when perchance a festival day demands it, or
 necessity itself requires the mystery to be exhibited by reason of
 there being no other priest in the place.  For, if others competent to
 execute the mystery are present, an illusion caused by surfeit ought
 not to debar from receiving the sacred mystery, though immolation of
 the sacred mystery ought, as I think, to be humbly abstained from;
 provided only that foul imagination has not shaken the soul of the
 sleeper.  For there are some to whom the illusion for the most part so
 arises that their mind, though in the body which sleeps, is not defiled
 by foul imaginations.  With regard to this, there is one case in which
 it is shewn that the soul itself is guilty, not being free even from
 its own judgment; that is where, while it remembers having seen nothing
 when the body was asleep, it still remembers having fallen into
 lewdness when the body was awake.  But, if the illusion arises in the
 soul of the sleeper from foul cogitation while he was awake, the mind's
 guilt is patent to itself.  For a man sees from what root that
 defilement proceeded, if he has endured unwittingly what he wittingly
 cogitated.  But it is to be considered whether the cogitation ensued
 from suggestion, or delight, or sinful consent.  For there are three
 ways in which all sin is accomplished; to wit, by suggestion, by
 delight, and by consent.  Suggestion is through the devil, delight
 through the flesh, consent through the spirit; since, in the case of
 the first sin, the serpent suggested it, Eve, as the flesh, delighted
 in it, but Adam, as the spirit, consented to it.  And great discernment
 is needed, that the mind may sit as judge of itself to distinguish
 between suggestion and delight, between delight and consent.  For, when
 the evil spirit suggests sin in the soul, if no delight in sin should
 follow, no sin is in any wise committed.  But, when the flesh has begun
 to take delight, then sin has its commencement.  But, if it sinks to
 deliberate consent, then sin is known to be completed.  In suggestion
 therefore is the seed of sin, in delight its nutriment, in consent its
 completion.  And it often happens that what the evil spirit sows in the
 thought the flesh draws into delight, and yet the mind does not consent
 to this delight.  And, while the flesh cannot be delighted without the
 soul, still the mind, though struggling against the pleasures of the
 flesh, is in some way bound against its will in carnal delight, so as
 by force of reason to protest against it and not consent to it, and yet
 to be bound by the delight, but still to groan exceedingly for being
 bound.  Whence even that chief soldier of the heavenly army groaned,
 saying, I see another law in my members fighting against the law of my
 mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my
 members (Rom. vii. 23).  Yet, if he was a captive, he did not fight.
 But he did fight too, and therefore he was not a captive.  And
 therefore he fought by the law of the mind, which the law which is in
 the members fought against.  If he thus fought, he was not a captive.
 Behold then man is, so to speak, both a captive and free:  free with
 regard to the righteousness which he loves; a captive with regard to
 the delight which he endures unwillingly.

 [174] This important epistle is given below as published in the
 Benedictine edition, with notes pointing out its main variations from
 Bede (H. E. i. 27), and with addition of the Preface, first published
 by Mansi (Supplem. ad Concil. tom. vi., p. 385) from a ms. Codex of the
 eighth century (Cod. Lucen.).  Bede's copy may be regarded as the most
 authentic, having been brought to him from Rome by Nothelm, a.d.
 715-731 (Bede H. E. Præf.).  However, he does not give the Preface,
 which has internal evidence of authenticity.  Subsequently to Nothelm's
 visit to Rome, it would seem that the whole epistle had been mislaid
 there, not having been kept among the rest of Gregory's letters.  For
 St. Boniface, a.d. 736 (Epist. XL. ad Nothelm. Episc Cantuar.) requests
 Nothelm to send him a copy of these Questions and Answers from England,
 saying that no copy of them could at that time be found at Rome.  They
 were, we may conclude, discovered subsequently.  Internal evidence, as
 well as historic probability, supports the superior genuineness of
 Bede's copy (Cf. Councils, &c., relating to Great Britain and Ireland,
 Oxf., 1871.  Vol. III., p. 32.)  The edition of the Epistle (Cod.
 Lucen.) above referred to as published by Mansi, though containing
 several variations, agrees in many respects with that of Bede, and
 especially in the absence of "the request of Augustine" (obsecratio
 Augustini) and "the grant of Gregory" (Concessio Gregorii) after the
 answer to the ninth question.  See note there.

 [175] In Bede, and Cod. Luc , this question does not appear, what
 follows as a reply to it being in continuation of the answer to
 Question I.  The form of the beginning of the reply, "Si qui vero sunt
 clerici," favors it having been so.

 [176] This allowance of marriage between second cousins seems to have
 caused surprise in some quarters.  Cf. Epistle of Felix of Messana to
 Gregory (XIV. 16).  The motive of St. Boniface in his letter to
 Nothelm, referred to above under note 1, in which he asked for a copy
 of these Questions and Answers, seems to have been a desire to
 ascertain whether Gregory had really allowed such marriages.  He
 writes, "in qua inter cætera capitula continetur quod in tertia
 generatione propinquitatis fidelibus liceat matrimonia copulare."

 [177] This question is not in Bede, or in Cod. Lucens., what follows
 being given as a continuation of the preceding answer.  It begins with
 "Quia vero."  Cf. note 2.

 [178] It is to be observed that Gregory, though aware of the existence
 of British bishops, as his answer to the following questions shews,
 does not contemplate their taking part in ordinations.  He may have
 been unwilling to invite their co-operation till assured of their
 orthodoxy and submission to the Roman See.  The failure of Augustine's
 negotiations with them has been attributed to his own imperious
 attitude towards them.  But it is at least a question whether his
 instructions did not justify the position he assumed (see Bede, H. E.
 II. 2.).

 [179] Cf. XI. 68.

 [180] This question, with the answer to it, is absent from Bede, and
 Cod. Lucens , and may be regarded as an interpolation.

 Epistle LXV.

 To Augustine, Bishop of the Angli [181] .

 Gregory to Augustine, &c.

 Though it is certain that for those who labour for Almighty God
 ineffable rewards of an eternal kingdom are reserved, yet we must needs
 bestow honours upon them, that by reason of remuneration they may apply
 themselves the more manifoldly in devotion to spiritual work.  And,
 since the new Church of the Angli has been brought to the grace of
 Almighty God through the bountifulness of the same Lord and thy
 labours, we grant to thee the use of the pallium therein for the
 solemnization of mass only, so that thou mayest ordain bishops in
 twelve several places, to be subject to thy jurisdiction, with the view
 of a bishop of the city of London being always consecrated in future by
 his own synod, and receiving the dignity of the pallium from this holy
 and Apostolical See which by the grace of God I serve.  Further, to the
 city of York we desire thee to send a bishop whom thou mayest judge fit
 to be ordained; so that, if this same city with the neighbouring places
 should receive the word of God, he also may ordain twelve bishops, so
 as to enjoy the dignity of a metropolitan:  for to him also, if our
 life is continued, we propose, with the favour of God, to send a
 pallium; but yet we desire to subject him to the control of thy
 Fraternity.  But after thy death let him be over the bishops whom he
 shall have ordained, so as to be in no wise subject to the jurisdiction
 of the bishop of London.  Further, between the bishops of London and
 York in the future let there be this distinction of dignity, that he be
 accounted first who has been first ordained.  But let them arrange by
 council in common, and with concordant action, whatever things may have
 to be done in zeal for Christ; let them be of one mind in what is
 right, and accomplish what they are minded to do without disagreement
 with each other.

 But let thy Fraternity have subject to thyself under our God not only
 those bishops whom thou shalt ordain, and those whom the bishop of York
 may ordain, but also all the priests of Britain, to the end that they
 may learn the form of right belief and good living from the tongue and
 life of thy Holiness, and, executing their office well in their faith
 and manners, may attain to heavenly kingdoms when it may please the
 Lord.  God keep thee safe, most reverend brother.  Given on the tenth
 day of the Kalends of July, in the 19th year of the empire of our lord
 Mauricius Tiberius, the 18th year after the consulship of the same
 lord, Indiction 4.

 [181] In the scheme, sketched in this letter, for the constitution of
 the Church in England which Gregory seems to have contemplated being
 carried out in Augustine's own day, he shews serious ignorance of the
 state of things in England at the time, and consequently of
 possibilities.  Among other things he appears to have known little of
 the ancient British Church or of the independent position which its
 bishops would be likely to assume.  Still it is interesting to observe
 that the scheme in its main features--that of two independent
 Metropolitans in the North and in the South, each with his suffragan
 bishops under them--was after all eventually realized, and that the
 present constitution of the English Church may be traced to this
 letter; only that Canterbury never yielded its primitive dignity, as
 had been proposed, to London.

 Epistle LXVI.

 To Edilbert, King of the Angli.

 Gregory to Edilbert, &c.

 On this account Almighty God advances good men to the government of
 peoples, that through them He may bestow the gifts of His
 loving-kindness on all over whom they are preferred.  This we have
 found to be the case in the nation of the Angli, which your Glory has
 been put over to the intent that through the good things granted to
 you, heavenly benefits might be conferred on the nation subject to
 you.  And so, glorious son, keep guard with anxious mind over the grace
 which thou hast received from above.  Make haste to extend the
 Christian faith among the peoples under thy sway, redouble the zeal of
 thy rectitude in their conversion, put down the worship of idols,
 overturn the edifices of their temples [182] , build up the manners of
 thy subjects in great purity of life by exhorting, by terrifying, by
 enticing, by correcting, by shewing examples of well-doing; that so you
 may find Him your recompenser in heaven Whose name and knowledge you
 shall have spread abroad on earth.  For He Himself will make the name
 of your glory even more glorious to posterity, if you seek and maintain
 His honour among the nations.  For so Constantine, the once most pious
 Emperor, recalling the Roman republic from perverse worshippings of
 idols, subjected it with himself to our Almighty Lord God Jesus Christ,
 and turned himself with his subject peoples with all his heart to Him.
 Hence it came to pass that that man surpassed in praise the name of
 ancient princes, and excelled his predecessors as much in renown as in
 well-doing.  And now, therefore, let your Glory make haste to infuse
 into the kings and peoples subject to you the knowledge of God, Father,
 Son and Holy Spirit, that you may both surpass the ancient kings of
 your race in renown and in deserts, and the more you shall have wiped
 away the sins of others among your subjects, the more secure you may
 become with regard to your own sins before the terrible scrutiny of
 Almighty God.

 Moreover, you have with you our most reverend brother, Augustine the
 bishop, learned in monastic rule, replete with knowledge of holy
 Scripture, endowed by the grace of God with good works.  Listen gladly
 to his admonitions, follow them devoutly, keep them studiously in
 remembrance:  for, if you listen to him in what he speaks in behalf of
 Almighty God, the same Almighty God will the sooner listen to him when
 he prays for you.  For, if (which God forbid) you disregard his words,
 when will it be possible for Almighty God to hear him for you, whom you
 neglect to hear for God?  With all your heart, therefore, bind ye
 yourselves in fervour of faith to him, and aid his endeavours by the
 power which he gives you from above, that He Whose faith you cause to
 be received and kept in your kingdom may Himself make you partakers of
 His own Kingdom.

 Furthermore, we would have your Glory know that, as we learn from the
 words of the Almighty Lord in holy Scripture, the end of the present
 world is already close at hand, and the reign of the saints is coming,
 which can have no end.  And, now that this end of the world is
 approaching, many things are at hand which previously have not been; to
 wit, changes of the air, terrors from heaven, and seasons contrary to
 the accustomed order of times, wars, famine, pestilences, earthquakes
 in divers places.  Yet these things will not come in our days, but
 after our days they will all ensue.  You therefore, if you observe any
 of these things occurring in your land, by no means let your mind be
 troubled, since these signs of the end of the world are sent beforehand
 for this purpose, that we should be solicitous about our souls,
 suspectful of the hour of death, and in our good deeds be found
 prepared for the coming Judge.  These things, glorious son, we have now
 briefly spoken of, that, when the Christian faith shall have been
 extended in your kingdom, our speech to you may also extend itself to
 greater length, and that we may be pleased to speak so much the more
 fully as joy multiplies itself in our heart for the perfected
 conversion of your nation.

 I have sent you some small presents, which to you will not be small,
 when received by you as of the benediction of the blessed Apostle
 Peter.  And so may Almighty God guard and perfect in you the grace
 which He has begun, and extend your life here through courses of many
 years, and after a long life receive you in the congregation of the
 heavenly country.  May heavenly grace keep your Excellency safe, sir
 son (domine fili).  Given this 10th day of the Kalends of July, the
 19th year of the empire of our most pious lord Mauricius Tiberius
 Augustus, the 18th year after the consulship of the same our lord,
 Indiction 4.

 [182] This direction was modified in a subsequent letter to Mellitus
 (XI. 76).

 Epistle LXVII.

 To Quiricus, Bishop, &c.

 Gregory to Quiricus, Bishop, and the other catholic bishops in Hiberia
 [183] .

 Since to charity nothing is afar off, let those who are divided in
 place be joined by letter.  The bearer of these presents, coming to the
 Church of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, asserted that he
 had received letters for us from your Fraternity, and had lost them,
 with other things also, in the city of Jerusalem.  In them, as he says,
 you were desirous of enquiring with regard to priests and people who
 have been bewildered in the error of Nestorian heresy, when they return
 to the Catholic Church which is the mother of all the elect, whether
 they should be baptized, or joined to the bowels of the same mother
 Church by confession only of the one true faith.

 And indeed we have learnt from the ancient institution of the Fathers
 that whosoever among heretics are baptized in the name of the Trinity,
 when they return to holy Church, may be recalled to the bosom of mother
 Church either by unction of chrism, or by imposition of hands, or by
 profession of the faith only.  Hence the West reconciles Arians to the
 holy Catholic Church by imposition of hands, but the East by the
 unction of holy chrism.  But Monophysites and others are received by a
 true confession only, because holy baptism, which they have received
 among heretics, then acquires in them the power of cleansing, when
 either the former receive the Holy Spirit by imposition of hands, or
 the latter are united to the bowels of the holy and universal Church by
 reason of their confession of the true faith.  Those heretics, however,
 who are not baptized in the name of the Trinity, such as the Bonosiaci
 and the Cataphrygæ, because the former do not believe in Christ the
 Lord, and the latter with a perverse understanding believe a certain
 bad man, Montanus, to be the Holy Spirit, like unto whom are many
 others;--these, when they come to holy Church, are baptized, because
 what they received while in their error, not being in the name of the
 Holy Trinity, was not baptism.  Nor can this be called an iteration of
 baptism, which, as has been said, had not been given in the name of the
 Trinity.  But the Nestorians, since they are baptized in the name of
 the Holy Trinity--though darkened by the error of their heresy in that,
 after the manner of Jewish unbelief, they believe not the Incarnation
 of the Only-begotten--when they come to the Holy Catholic Church, are
 to be taught, by firm holding and profession of the true faith, to
 believe in one and the same Son of God and man, our Lord God Jesus
 Christ, the same existing in Divinity before the ages, and the same
 made man in the end of the ages, because The Word was made flesh and
 dwelt among us (Joh. i. 14).

 But we say that the Word was made flesh not by losing what He was, but
 by taking what He was not.  For in the mystery of His Incarnation the
 Only-begotten of the Father increased what was ours, but diminished not
 what was His.  Therefore the Word and the flesh is one Person, as He
 says Himself, No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down
 from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven (Joh. iii. 14).  He
 Who is the Son of God in heaven was the Son of man who spoke on earth.
 Hence John says, We know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us
 an understanding (1 Joh. v. 20).  And as to what understanding He has
 given us, he straightway added, That we may know the true God.  Whom in
 this place does he mean as the true God but the Father Almighty?  But,
 as to what he conceives also of the Almighty Son, he added, And that we
 may be in his true Son Jesus Christ.  Lo, he says that the Father is
 the true God, and that Jesus Christ is His true Son.  And what he
 conceives this true Son to be he shews more plainly; This is the true
 God, and eternal life.  If, then, according to the error of Nestorius
 the Word were one and the man Jesus Christ were another, he who is true
 man would not be the true God and eternal life.  But the Only-begotten
 Son, the Word before the Ages, was made man.  He is, then, the true God
 and eternal life.  Certainly, when the holy Virgin was about to
 conceive Him, and heard the angel speaking to her, she said, Behold the
 hand-maid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word (Luke i.
 38).  And, when she had conceived Him, and went to Elizabeth her
 kinswoman, at once she heard, Whence am I worthy that the mother of my
 Lord should come to me?  Lo, the same Virgin is called both the
 handmaid and the mother of the Lord.  For she is the handmaid of the
 Lord, because the Word before the Ages, the Only-begotten, is equal to
 the Father; but the mother, because in her womb from the Holy Spirit
 and of her flesh He was made man.  Nor is she the handmaid of one and
 the mother of another, because, when the Only-begotten of God, existing
 before the ages, of her womb was made man, by an inscrutable miracle
 she became both the handmaid of man by reason of the divinity and the
 mother of the Word by reason of the flesh.  It was not that the flesh
 was first conceived in the womb of the Virgin, and the divinity
 afterwards came into the flesh; but that as soon as the Word came into
 the womb, immediately the Word, retaining the excellence of His own
 nature, was made flesh.  And the Only-begotten Son of God, through the
 womb of the Virgin, was born a perfect man, that is, in verity of flesh
 and of rational soul.  Whence also He is called Anointed above his
 fellows, as the Psalmist says, God, thy God, hath anointed thee with
 the oil of gladness above thy fellows (Ps. xliv. 8) [184] .  For He is
 anointed with oil, that is to say with the gift of the Holy Spirit.
 But He was anointed above His fellows, because all we men first exist
 as sinners, and afterwards are sanctified through the unction of the
 Holy Spirit.  But He Who, existing as God before the ages, was
 conceived as man through the Holy Spirit in the Virgin's womb at the
 end of the ages, was there anointed by the same Spirit, even where He
 was conceived.  Nor was He first conceived and afterwards anointed; but
 to be conceived by the Holy Spirit of the flesh of the Virgin was
 itself to be anointed by the Holy Spirit.  This truth, then, concerning
 His nativity let all who are brought back from the perverse error of
 Nestorius confess before the holy congregation of your Fraternity,
 anathematising the same Nestorius with all his followers, and all other
 heresies.  The venerable synods also which the universal Church
 receives let them promise to receive and venerate; and let your
 Holiness without any hesitation receive them in your assembly, allowing
 them to retain their own orders, in order that, while you both
 carefully sift the secrets of their hearts, and teach them through true
 knowledge the right things they ought to hold, and in gentleness make
 no difficulty or contradiction with them with respect to their own
 orders, you may snatch them from the mouth of the ancient foe; and that
 the retribution of eternal glory with Almighty God may increase to you
 the more as you gather together many who may glory with you in the Lord
 without end.  Now may the Holy Trinity keep you in its protection while
 you pray for us, and grant you in its love still more manifold gifts.

 [In Colbert. and Collect. Paul, "Given on the tenth day of the Kalends
 of Jul. Indict. 4."]

 [183] Or Iberia, corrected from Hibernia by the Benedictine Editors,
 with the support of some few mss.  That the letter was addressed to the
 bishops of Hibernia (i.e. Ireland) is highly improbable.  Not only is
 it unlikely that the Eastern heresy of Nestorianism would have infected
 Ireland, but the fact also, mentioned in the beginning of the letter,
 that the messenger from the bishops addressed had passed through
 Jerusalem on his way to Rome evidently points to some Eastern
 locality.  For similar reasons it cannot well be supposed that Iberia
 here denotes Spain.  It may have been the territory so-called in the
 neighbourhood of Armenia, between Cholchis on the West, and Albania on
 the East, now Gurgistan.

 [184] xlv. 7.

 Epistle LXVIII.

 (To Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate (Arles).)

 Gregory to Virgilius, &c.

 What affection should be bestowed on brethren who come to us of their
 own accord is apparent from the fact that they are usually invited to
 visit us for the sake of charity.  And so, if our common brother the
 bishop Augustine should chance to come to you, let your Love, as is
 fit, so affectionately and sweetly receive him as both to refresh him
 with the boon of your consolation and teach others also how fraternal
 charity should be cultivated.  And, since it often happens that those
 who are placed at a distance learn first from others of things that
 require amendment, if he should perchance intimate to your Fraternity
 any faults in priests or others, do you, in concert with him, enquire
 into them with all subtle investigation.  And do you both shew
 yourselves so strict and solicitous against things that offend God and
 provoke Him to wrath that, for the amendment of others, both vengeance
 may smite the guilty and false report not afflict the innocent.  God
 keep thee safe, most reverend brother.  Given the 10th day of the
 Kalends of July, the 19th year of the empire of our most pious lord
 Mauricius Tiberius Augustus, the 18th year after the same our lord's
 consulship, Indiction 4.

 Epistle LXIX.

 To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.

 Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

 Since it is written, Righteousness exalteth a nation; but sin maketh
 peoples miserable (Prov. xiv. 34), a kingdom is then believed to be
 stable when a fault that is known of is quickly amended.  Now it has
 come to our ears by the report of many, what we cannot mention without
 exceeding affliction of heart, that certain priests in those parts live
 so immodestly and wickedly that it is a shame for us to hear of it and
 lamentable to tell it.  Lest, then, now that the rumour of this
 iniquity has extended as far as here, the wrong doing of others should
 smite either our soul or your kingdom with the dart of its sin, we
 ought to arise with ardour to avenge these things, lest the wickedness
 of a few should be the perdition of many.  For bad priests are the
 cause of the ruin of a people.  For who may offer himself as an
 intercessor for a people's sins, if the priest who ought to have prayed
 for it commits more grievous offences?  But, since those whose place it
 is to prosecute these things are stirred neither by care to enquire
 into them nor by zeal to punish them, let letters from you be addressed
 to us, and let us send over, if you order it, a person with the assent
 of your authority, who together with other priests may search into
 these things thoroughly, and amend them according to the will of God.
 For indeed what we speak of is not a thing to be winked at, since one
 who can amend a fault and neglects to do so without doubt makes himself
 partaker in it.  See therefore to your own soul, see to your grandsons,
 whom you wish to reign happily, see to the provinces; and, before our
 Creator stretches out His hand to smite, take most earnest thought for
 the correction of this wickedness, lest He afterwards smite by so much
 the more sharply as He now waits longer and more mercifully.  Know
 moreover that you will offer a great sacrifice of expiation to our God,
 if you cut off speedily from your territories the infection of so great
 a sin.

 Epistle LXXVI.

 To Mellitus, Abbot.

 Gregory to Mellitus, Abbot in France [185] .

 Since the departure of our congregation, which is with thee, we have
 been in a state of great suspense from having heard nothing of the
 success of your journey.  But when Almighty God shall have brought you
 to our most reverend brother the bishop Augustine, tell him that I have
 long been considering with myself about the case of the Angli; to wit,
 that the temples of idols in that nation should not be destroyed, but
 that the idols themselves that are in them should be.  Let blessed
 water be prepared, and sprinkled in these temples, and altars
 constructed, and relics deposited, since, if these same temples are
 well built, it is needful that they should be transferred from the
 worship of idols to the service of the true God; that, when the people
 themselves see that these temples are not destroyed, they may put away
 error from their heart, and, knowing and adoring the true God, may have
 recourse with the more familiarity to the places they have been
 accustomed to.  And, since they are wont to kill many oxen in sacrifice
 to demons, they should have also some solemnity of this kind in a
 changed form, so that on the day of dedication, or on the anniversaries
 of the holy martyrs whose relics are deposited there, they may make for
 themselves tents of the branches of trees around these temples that
 have been changed into churches, and celebrate the solemnity with
 religious feasts.  Nor let them any longer sacrifice animals to the
 devil, but slay animals to the praise of God for their own eating, and
 return thanks to the Giver of all for their fulness, so that, while
 some joys are reserved to them outwardly, they may be able the more
 easily to incline their minds to inward joys.  For it is undoubtedly
 impossible to cut away everything at once from hard hearts, since one
 who strives to ascend to the highest place must needs rise by steps or
 paces, and not by leaps.  Thus to the people of Israel in Egypt the
 Lord did indeed make Himself known; but still He reserved to them in
 His own worship the use of the sacrifices which they were accustomed to
 offer to the devil, enjoining them to immolate animals in sacrifice to
 Himself; to the end that, their hearts being changed, they should omit
 some things in the sacrifice and retain others, so that, though the
 animals were the same as what they had been accustomed to offer,
 nevertheless, as they immolated them to God and not to idols, they
 should be no longer the same sacrifices.  This then it is necessary for
 thy Love to say to our aforesaid brother, that he, being now in that
 country, may consider well how he should arrange all things.  God keep
 thee safe, most beloved son.  Given this 15th day of the Kalends of
 July, the 19th year of the empire of our most pious lord Mauricius
 Tiberius Augustus, the 18th year after the consulship of the same our
 lord, Indiction 4.

 [185] This letter was sent after the departure of Mellitus with the
 band of new missionaries from Rome to Britain (see Prolegomena, p.
 xxvi.), being intended to reach him while still in France.  In the date
 given at the end there is evidently an error with regard to the day of
 the month.  For several of the letters sent by Mellitus being dated 10
 Kal. Jul. (i.e. June 22), this, which was subsequent, cannot have been
 originally dated xv Kal. Jul. (i.e. June 17).  The Indiction is given
 correctly.  Gregory had directed King Ethelbert (XI. 66) to destroy the
 heathen temples.  He now sees reason to modify any such orders.

 Epistle LXXVII.

 To Boniface, Guardian (Defensorem), in Corsica.

 Gregory to Boniface, &c.

 Thy experience is not free from blame, in that, knowing Aleria and
 Adjacium, cities of Corsica, to have been long without bishops, thou
 hast delayed admonishing their clergy and people to choose for
 themselves priests.  But, since they ought to be no longer without
 rulers of their own, hasten thou, on receiving this authority, to
 exhort the clergy and people of these cities severally, that they
 disagree not among themselves, but that each city with one consent
 choose for itself a priest to be consecrated.  And, when they have made
 their decree, let such person as shall have been elected come to us.
 But, if they should be unwilling to come to an unanimous decision,
 being divided in their choice between two persons, let both in like
 manner come to us, the decree having been made in the usual way, that,
 after enquiry made into their lives and characters, the one who may
 appear to be most fit may be ordained.  Seeing, moreover, that many
 poor persons there are said to be oppressed and to suffer prejudice,
 let thy Experience give heed to this, and not allow them to be unjustly
 aggrieved; but so endeavour thyself that neither they who take action
 be unreasonably hindered nor those against whom action is taken be in
 danger of sustaining damage unjustly.

 Furthermore, it has reached our ears that some of the clergy, thou
 being on the spot, are held in custody by laymen.  If this is so, know
 that the blame will be imputed to thee, since, if thou wert a man, it
 would not have been the case.  And accordingly thou must needs pay
 attention in future so that thou permit not the like to be done; but
 that, if any one should have a cause of complaint against a clerk, he
 resort to his bishop.  And, if perchance the latter should be
 suspected, a commissioner must be deputed by him--or, if this too
 should be objected to by the plaintiff, by thy Experience,--who may
 compel the parties to choose arbitrators by mutual consent.  And
 whatever may be decided by them, let it be in all ways so carried out,
 with due observance of law, by thy own or the bishop's care, that there
 may be no occasion for them to weary themselves with disputes.

 Epistle LXXVIII.

 To Barbara and Antonina [186] .

 Gregory to Barbara, &c.

 On receiving your epistles, I was in all manner of ways delighted to
 hear of your well being, and I entreat Almighty God that He would guard
 you by His protection from malignant spirits in thought, and from
 perverse men, and from all contrariety; and that He would, with the
 grace of His fear, settle you in unions worthy of you, and cause us all
 to rejoice in your settlement [187] .  But do you, most sweet
 daughters, rest your hope on His help, and, being always under the
 shadow of His defence, both by praying and by well doing, escape the
 plots of bad men.  For, whatever human comforts or adversities there
 may be, there are none, unless either His grace protects or His
 displeasure troubles you.  Rest therefore your hope on no one among
 men, but bind your whole soul to trust in Almighty God.  While we
 sleep, then, He will protect you, of whom it is written, Behold he that
 keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep (Ps. cxx. 4) [188] .

 As to your saying that you are in haste to approach the threshhold of
 the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, I wish exceedingly, and wait
 with fervent desire, to see you in his church united to husbands well
 worthy of you; that so both you may obtain some little comfort from me,
 and I no little joy from your presence.  I have also commended your
 causes to thy most reverend brother the bishop John [189] , and to
 Romanus the guardian (defensori), that under God they may accomplish
 what they have begun.

 Your present of two racanæ [190] , which you sent me word were your
 work, I accepted gladly.  But yet know ye that I did not believe the
 word you sent me.  For you are seeking praise from the work of others,
 seeing that you have perhaps never yet put hand to spindle.  Nor yet
 does this circumstance distress me, since I wish you to love the
 reading of Holy Scripture, that, so long as Almighty God shall unite
 you to husbands, you may know how you should live and how you should
 manage your houses.

 [186] See above, Epp. XXXV., XXXVI., in this book, and I. 34, note 8,
 there referred to.

 [187] If the marriage of the parents, Venantius and Italica, took
 place, as conjectured in the note to I. 34, in the eleventh Indiction
 (a.d. 592-3), and this letter was written in the fourth (a.d. 600-1),
 the daughters would not be more than seven or eight years of age.
 Still, even at this early age, their betrothal may have been
 contemplated with a view to their settlement in life.  But Venantius
 may have married earlier than 592-3, soon after his return to a secular
 life, and so the girls may have been a little older.  Neither, however,
 if our dates are right, could be more than ten years old.

 [188] In English Bible, cxxi. 4.

 [189] Viz. John, bishop of Syracuse.  See above, Ep. XXXVI.

 [190] On the meaning of this word, see XII., note 3.

 Book XII.

 Epistle I.

 To Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage.

 Gregory to Dominicus, &c.

 How abundant is the charity of your heart you shew by its
 interpreter--your tongue, while so seasoning the words of your epistles
 with its sweetness that all you write is pleasant and delightful.
 Hence it comes that we embrace your Fraternity in the arms of love,
 though unable to do so in the body.  For it is the office of charity to
 supply to souls that are in concord what distance of place denies.  And
 since the sickness of our most loving brethren saddens us even as their
 health refreshes us, we give thanks to Almighty God, who has solaced
 our sadness by good news.  For, having heard that you had contracted a
 very severe illness, before the receipt of your letter we were in a
 state of great distress.  But since, when we are snatched from peril of
 death, it is uncertain, dearest brother, for what we are reserved, let
 us turn the time of respite to the profit of our souls, and, having to
 render our accounts to the coming Judge, let us fortify our cause
 before Him with tears and good works, that we may be counted worthy to
 have security given us with regard to the things that we have done.
 For in secular causes also a kind judge frequently grants a respite to
 this end, that one who had not been prepared before may afterwards come
 to his trial prepared.  And what a thing it would be, were we to
 neglect for the salvation of the soul what we carefully attend to in
 matters of earthly concern!  And so, since, according to the words of
 the Apostle John, no one is without sin, let us call to mind
 enticements of thought, incontinence of tongue, deeds of transgression;
 and let us, while we may, with great knocking, do away with the stains
 of our iniquities, that our just and loving Redeemer may not execute
 vengeance according to our deservings, but according to His mercy be
 bent to pardon.  And, since we do not sufficiently fulfil our office by
 weeping for our own sins only, let us the more earnestly devote
 ourselves to the custody of the flock committed to us, and by
 persuading, by exhorting, by alarming, by preaching, so far as heavenly
 clemency gives us power, let us hasten to fulfil our office in very
 deed, that, through the bounty of our Creator, we may look for the
 longed for reward.  But, since we cannot do anything that is good
 without divine aid, let us implore Almighty God, most beloved brother,
 with united prayers, that He would direct us, with the flock committed
 to us, into the way of His commandments by the leading of His grace,
 and Himself, who by the gift of His mercy has willed us to have the
 name of shepherds, grant to us to understand and do what is well
 pleasing to Him.  Moreover, we have received with the charity wherewith
 you sent it the blessing of the blessed martyr Agileus, transmitted to
 us by your Holiness.  In the month of September, Indiction 5.

 Epistle VIII.

 To Columbus, Bishop of Numidia [191] .

 Gregory to Columbus, &c.

 How serious, and intolerable even to be heard of, is the complaint of
 Donadeus, the bearer of these presents, who describes himself as having
 been a deacon, will be made manifest to your Fraternity by the petition
 presented by him, which is contained in what is subjoined below.  But,
 since it has come to our ears that he had been deposed for bodily sin,
 let your Love make full enquiry into this, and, if it is so, let him be
 consigned to penance, that he may free himself by tears from the bond
 of the profligacy of which he has been guilty.  If, however, he should
 be proved innocent of any such transgression, all that his petition
 contains must be enquired into with diligent examination by you,
 together with the primate of the council, and others our brethren and
 fellow-bishops.  And, if his complaint is supported by the truth, let
 both such strictness of canonical discipline be brought to bear on his
 bishop Victor [192] , who has not lighted to commit so great a
 wickedness against God and his own priestly profession, that he may
 understand the wickedness of what he has done; and let the man himself
 be restored to his order:  for it is indeed preposterous, and
 confessedly against ecclesiastical order, that any one whom his own
 fault or crime does not depose from the rank of the office which he
 fills should be deprived invalidly at the will of this or that person.

 [191] Cf. II. 48, note 8.

 [192] Victor was Primate of Numidia.  See IV. 34, note 4.

 Epistle XXIV.

 To John, Subdeacon of Ravenna [193] .

 Gregory to John, &c.

 Some monks who came to me from the monastery of the late abbot Claudius
 have petitioned me that the monk Constantius should be constituted
 their abbot.  But I was exceedingly set against them as touching their
 petition, because they appeared to me to be altogether of a worldly
 mind in seeking to have a very worldly man for their abbot.  For I have
 learnt how this same Constantius studies to possess property of his
 own:  and this is the strongest evidence that he has not the heart of a
 monk.  And I have learnt further that he presumed to go alone, without
 any one of his brethren with him, to a monastery that is situate in the
 province of Picenum.  From this proceeding of his we know that he who
 walks without a witness lives not aright:  and how can he maintain the
 rule for others who knows not how to maintain it for himself?

 Giving him up, therefore, they asked to have a certain cellarer, Maurus
 by name, to whose life and industry there are many testimonies, the
 late abbot Claudius also with certain others having spoken in his
 praise.  Let thy Experience therefore make careful enquiry; and, if his
 life should be such as fit him for a place of government, cause him to
 be ordained abbot by our brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus.  But, if
 there is anything decidedly against him, and they cannot find any
 suitable person in their own congregation, let them choose some one
 from elsewhere, and let him whom they may choose be made abbot.
 Further, take care by all means to tell our aforesaid brother and
 fellow-bishop to put down with the utmost earnestness the possession of
 property of their own by four or five of the monks of the monastery,
 which it has been found so far impossible to correct, and to make haste
 to cleanse this same monastery from such a pest; since, if private
 property is held there by monks, it will not be possible for either
 concord or charity to continue in this same congregation.  What,
 indeed, is a monk's state of life but a despising of the world?  How,
 then, do they despise the world who while placed in a monastery seek
 gold?  Wherefore let thy Experience so proceed that neither the
 ordering of the place be deferred, nor any complaint reach us any more
 on this subject.

 Furthermore, forasmuch as my late most dear son Claudius had heard me
 speak something about the Proverbs, the Song of Songs, the Prophets,
 and also about the Books of Kings and the Heptateuch, which on account
 of my infirmity I was unable to commit to writing, and he himself had
 dictated them for transcription according to his own understanding of
 their meaning, lest they should be forgotten, and in order that he
 might bring them to me at a suitable time, so that they might be more
 correctly dictated (for, when he read to me what he had written, I
 found the sense of what I had said had been altered very
 disadvantageously), it is hence necessary that thy Experience, avoiding
 all excuse or delay, should go to his monastery, and assemble the
 brethren, and that they should produce fully and truly whatsoever
 papers on divers Scriptures he had brought thither; which do thou take,
 and transmit them to me with all possible speed.

 Further, about thy return, having learnt that thou hast incurred
 serious trouble, we will consider by and by.  Further, I have not been
 pleased to hear what has been told me by certain persons; namely that
 our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus causes my
 comments on the blessed Job to be read publicly at vigils; seeing that
 this is not a popular work, and engenders hindrance rather than
 advancement to rude hearers.  But tell him to cause the comments on the
 Psalms to be read at vigils, which mould the minds of secular persons
 to good manners.  For indeed I do not wish, while I am in this flesh,
 that what I may have said should be readily made known to men.  For I
 took it amiss that Anatolius the deacon of most beloved memory gave to
 the lord Emperor, at his request and command, the book of Pastoral
 Rule, which my most holy brother and fellow-bishop Anastasius of
 Antioch translated into the Greek tongue.  And, as I was informed by
 letter, it pleased him much; but it much displeased me that those who
 have what is better should be occupied in what is least.

 Further, in the third part of the blessed Job, in the verse wherein it
 is written, I know that my Redeemer liveth, I suspect that my aforesaid
 brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus has a corrupt copy.  For in the
 copy in our bookcase this passage is given differently from what I find
 to be in the copies possessed by others; and consequently I have had
 this passage corrected, so that our often-named brother may have it as
 it is in our bookcase.  For there are four words, the absence of which
 from the passage may cause the reader no little difficulty.  Execute
 all these things thoroughly and speedily.  And, if thou canst do
 nothing with the most excellent Exarch, shew thyself not to have
 neglected to do what is in thy power.

 What shall I say concerning the place of Albinus, as to which the
 answer given us is plainly contrary to justice?  Thou oughtest,
 however, to consider the case attentively.  Furthermore, a little time
 ago we had enjoined thy Experience to treat with our most eminent son
 the præfect to the end that the care of the conduits (formarum) should
 be committed to Augustus the vicecount, in that he is in all respects a
 diligent and energetic man [194] .  And thou hast so far so put off the
 business as not even to inform us of what thou hast done.  And so, even
 now, hasten thou with all earnestness to treat with the same our most
 eminent son, that the conduits may be entirely committed to the
 aforesaid most distinguished man, to the intent that he may to some
 extent succeed in repairing them.  For these conduits are so scorned
 and neglected that, unless greater attention be given to them, within a
 short time they will go utterly to ruin.  As thou knowest, then, how
 necessary this business is, and how advantageous to the general
 community, thou must use thy best endeavours that it may be committed,
 as we have said, to the aforesaid man for his careful attention.  Given
 in the month of January, Indiction 5.

 [193] This subdeacon John appears to have been at this time the pope's
 representative to Ravenna, the seat of the exarch of Italy.

 [194] The reference is to the conduits or aqueducts for supplying water
 to Rome, which it was the duty of the officer called "præfectus," who
 appears to have been at this time resident at Ravenna, to keep in
 order.

 Epistle XXV.

 To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem) [195] .

 Gregory to Romanus, &c.

 It is well known to thy Experience that Peter, whom we have made a
 guardian (defensorem), is sprung from the estate belonging to our
 Church which is called Vitelas.  And so, since we ought to shew
 kindness towards him in such a way that nevertheless the Church may
 suffer no disadvantage, we command thee by this order to charge him
 strictly not to presume, under any pretext or excuse, to marry his
 children anywhere but in that estate to which they are bound by law and
 their condition [196] .  In this matter, too, it is necessary for thy
 Experience to be very careful, and to threaten them, so that on no
 occasion whatever they may go out of the property to which by their
 birth they are subjected.  For, if any one of them (as we do not
 believe will be the case) should presume to depart from it, he may be
 assured that our assent will never be given to any of them dwelling or
 being married outside the estate on which they were born, but that also
 their land should be superscribed [197] .  And then know that you will
 run no slight risk, if through your negligence any of them should
 attempt to do any of the things which we forbid.

 [195] Romanus had been appointed guardian (defensor) of the patrimony
 in Sicily.  See IX. 18.

 [196] This was a case of a native of Sicily, who had been ascriptus
 glebæ, having been appointed a Defensor Ecclesiæ.  The purpose of the
 epistle is to guard against his supposing that such appointment
 exempted his children from the restrictions imposed by their birth.

 [197] Sed et superscribi terram eorum.  The meaning may be that notices
 should be put on the land to which such defaulters were attached,
 declaring that such and such persons belonged to it and were bound to
 remain on it.  Cf. V. 41, note 3, on the phrase titulos imponere.

 Epistle XXVIII.

 To Columbus, Bishop of Numidia [198] .

 Gregory to Columbus, &c.

 Inasmuch as it has long been known to us how thy Fraternity is
 distinguished for priestly gravity and ecclesiastical zeal, we have
 seen sufficient reason for thy taking part in the cognizance of things
 that require rebuke, lest, if they should be put off through
 connivance, every one should suppose that what he is able to do is
 allowed him.  Now after what manner our brother Paulinus, bishop of the
 city of Tegessis is alleged by his clerics and by those who are
 constituted in sacred orders, to have been excessive towards them in
 corporal correction, thou needest not to be told, seeing that, before
 this complaint reached us, the matter, as we have learnt from their
 statement, had already been made known to thee.  And, since superiors
 ought not to have the right of punishing their subordinates savagely,
 we have taken care to write to Victor our brother and fellow-bishop,
 who holds the primacy among you [199] , that, together with thy
 Fraternity, or with others our brethren and fellow bishops whom you may
 think fit to call in, he may take cognizance of and thoroughly
 investigate the case between our aforesaid brother priest and his
 clergy.  And let thy Love so give the matter thy close and careful
 attention, that the things that have been reported to us may not pass
 without a hearing, lest discord should be fomented in the Church,
 whence it ought by all means to be banished.  And, if indeed the
 complaint of his clergy against him is well founded, so take cognizance
 of his fault, which he has scorned of his own accord to correct, with
 the force of our ecclesiastical decision that he may both feel for the
 present what a grave offence he has committed, and may learn for the
 future that he cannot do more than it is lawful for him to do.  Above
 all things, then, we exhort thee that thou study ardently to exercise
 the zeal which we know thee to have for the sake of God.

 And, inasmuch as our said brother Paulinus is said to confer
 ecclesiastical orders through simoniacal heresy, which is a thing awful
 to hear of, let it be thy care, along with the aforesaid primate or
 others, to enquire thoroughly into this also with all diligence.  And,
 if it should be found to be so (which God forbid), effort must be made
 and action taken that both he who has not feared to accept and he who
 has not feared to give a bribe may be smitten by a sentence of
 canonical punishment, to the end that their correction may avail as a
 reproof to many.  And, before this deadly root acquires strength and
 slays many more, let it be condemned by the decision of the whole
 council, so that no one may ever dare to accept or to give anything for
 any order whatever, nor any be promoted for favour, but all for merit,
 lest both ecclesiastical order be confounded, and probity of life be
 held in contempt, if one that is unworthy should receive the reward of
 merit.

 Further we have given orders to Hilarus our Chartularius that, if the
 case should require it, he refuse not to take part in your enquiry.

 If, therefore, it should be necessary, inform him by letter that you
 wish him to come to you, to the end that by treating the matter
 together with him you may better determine what ought to be ordained.
 In the month of March, Indiction 5.  [N.B. This date is absent from
 several Codices.]

 [198] See II. 48. note 1.

 [199] For the custom in Africa with regard to the primacy, see I. 74,
 note 9.

 Epistle XXIX.

 To Victor, Bishop [200] .

 Gregory to Victor, &c.

 While on the one hand it is a joy to us to learn that our brethren are
 solicitous about their children in fatherly charity, on the other we
 count it no less a matter for sadness when neither regard for other
 brethren nor consideration of their priestly office avails to restrain
 them from unlawful doings.  How serious, then, and how harsh is the
 complaint against our brother Paulinus, bishop of the city of Tegessis,
 made by his clerics and by those who are in sacred orders, I have no
 doubt is well known to thy Fraternity, since what has reached us from a
 distance cannot have been hidden from thee who art near at hand.  And,
 since there is need of great caution lest this bodily injury which they
 complain of at his hands in excess of his powers should be ventured on
 with allowance, or should grow worse by being connived at, manifest
 excesses should ever be so suppressed by canonical control that one
 proceeding may serve as a reproof of what is past and a rule for the
 future.  Accordingly it becomes thee, together with our most beloved
 common brother the bishop Columbus, and with other priests whom you may
 think fit to call on, to sift the case between our above-named brother
 and his clergy by means of a thorough investigation.  And, if the
 complaint of the petitioners stands with truth, so correct ye this
 thing by a regular reformation, that he may both be made aware what
 evil thing he has done and learn for the future not to exceed the
 limits of his office.  And suffer him not, as is said to be the case,
 to disregard the rank of thy position, lest his contempt be to his risk
 and to thy blame.  For whatever is committed by an inferior, unless it
 be carefully corrected, reflects on the person who occupies the
 superior place.

 That other matter also, namely that the same our brother Paulinus is
 said to confer ecclesiastical orders for money, you should fully and
 very strictly enquire into.  And, if it should clearly appear to be so,
 as we hope will not be the case, let your zeal for God so kindle itself
 to avenge this wrong that both the avarice of the ordainer may be
 turned into a penalty, and, the unlawful ordination being void of
 effect, the person ordained may not enjoy the longed-for object of his
 ambition.  Herein we exhort you and before all things admonish you,
 that your Fraternity study to be so solicitous that, before the
 iniquity of simoniacal heresy shall gain strength in your parts from
 the offence of one, it may be cut off from the root by the pruning-hook
 of your sentence after a council diligently held.  For whosoever does
 not, in consideration of his office, burn vehemently to correct this
 atrocity, let him not doubt that he will have his portion with him from
 whom this peculiar enormity took its beginning.  And so, as we have
 said, you must act vigilantly and earnestly, that your council, which
 up to this time, under God's keeping, has been preserved from any bad
 repute of this kind, may not by any possibility be polluted and ruined
 by the poison of this wickedness.

 Furthermore, we have given orders to Hilarus our Chartularius, that, if
 the case should require it, he defer not to join you.  Wherefore,
 should it be necessary, inform him by your letters of the need of his
 coming to you, to the end that you, together with him, may be able, God
 helping you, to determine all these things in a salutary way.

 [200] At this time primate of Numidia.  See preceding epistle.

 Epistle XXXII.

 To all the Bishops of the Council of Bizacium [201] .

 Gregory to all, &c.

 As it is laudable and discreet to shew due reverence and honour to
 superiors, so it belongs to rectitude and the fear of God, if anything
 in them needs correction, not to put it off by any connivance, lest
 disease should begin to invade the whole body (which God forbid),
 sickness not being cured in the head.  Now a considerable time ago
 certain things were reported to us about our brother Crementius, your
 primate, such as to pierce our heart with no slight sorrow.  But
 through the pressure of divers tribulations, and especially from
 enemies raging round us, we had not time to enquire into the matter.
 And, since it is so serious that it ought by no means to be passed over
 without investigation, we hereby exhort your Fraternity with all
 carefulness and activity to search out in all ways the substantial
 truth, in order that either if these things are so, they may be cut off
 by canonical punishment, or, if they are false, the innocence of our
 brother may not long lie under the laceration of an infamous report.
 Wherefore, that there may be no torpor of idleness in the enquiry, we
 admonish you that neither the interest nor the favour nor the
 cajoleries of any person whatever, nor anything else, soften any one of
 you in your sifting of what has been reported to us, or shake you from
 the path of truth; but gird ye yourselves in priestly wise to
 investigate the truth.  For, if any one should presume to be sluggish,
 or to shew himself negligent in this matter, let him know that he will
 be a partaker in the said crimes before Almighty God, by zeal for whom
 he is not moved to enquire fully into the causes of atrocious
 wickedness.

 [201] Cf. IX. 58, note 1 and IX. 59.

 Epistle L.

 To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

 Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

 The bearers of these presents, coming to Sicily, were converted from
 the error of the Monophysites, and united themselves to the holy
 universal Church.  Having proceeded to the church of the blessed Peter,
 Prince of the apostles, they requested of me that I should commend them
 by letter to your Blessedness, to the end that they may not now be
 allowed to suffer any wrong from the heretics that are near them.  And
 because one of them says that the monastery in which he was had been
 founded by his kindred, he desires to receive authority from your
 Holiness that the heretics who are in it may either return to the bosom
 of holy Church or be expelled from the same monastery.  Let it be
 enough for us to have indicated this to you:  for we know of your
 Blessedness that whatever pertains to zeal for Almighty God you hasten
 with all fervour to do.  But for me I beg you to pray, since amid the
 swords of the Lombards which I endure I am excessively afflicted by
 pains of gout.

 Book XIII.

 In the Sixth Indiction, and the Thirteenth Year from his Ordination.

 Epistle I.

 To the Roman Citizens.

 Gregory, servant of the servants of God, to his most beloved sons the
 Roman citizens.

 It has come to my ears that certain men of perverse spirit have sown
 among you some things that are wrong and opposed to the holy faith, so
 as to forbid any work being done on the Sabbath day.  What else can I
 call these but preachers of Antichrist, who, when he comes, will cause
 the Sabbath day as well as the Lord's day to be kept free from all
 work.  For, because he pretends to die and rise again, he wishes the
 Lord's day to be had in reverence; and, because he compels the people
 to judaize that he may bring back the outward rite of the law, and
 subject the perfidy of the Jews to himself, he wishes the Sabbath to be
 observed.

 For this which is said by the prophet, Ye shall bring in no burden
 through your gates on the Sabbath day (Jerem. xvii. 24), could be held
 to as long as it was lawful for the law to be observed according to the
 letter.  But after that the grace of Almighty God, our Lord Jesus
 Christ has appeared, the commandments of the law which were spoken
 figuratively cannot be kept according to the letter.  For, if any one
 says that this about the Sabbath is to be kept, he must needs say that
 carnal sacrifices are to be offered:  he must say too that the
 commandment about the circumcision of the body is still to be
 retained.  But let him hear the Apostle Paul saying in opposition to
 him, If ye be circumcised, Christ profiteth you nothing (Galat. v. 2).

 We therefore accept spiritually, and hold spiritually, this which is
 written about the Sabbath.  For the Sabbath means rest.  But we have
 the true Sabbath in our Redeemer Himself, the Lord Jesus Christ.  And
 whoso acknowledges the light of faith in Him, if he draws the sins of
 concupiscence through his eyes into his soul, he introduces burdens
 through the gates on the Sabbath day.  We introduce, then, no burden
 through the gates on the Sabbath day if we draw no weights of sin
 through the bodily senses to the soul.  For we read that the same our
 Lord and Redeemer did many works on the Sabbath day, so that he
 reproved the Jews, saying, Which of you doth not loose his ox or his
 ass on the Sabbath day, and lead him away to watering (Luke xiii. 15)?
 If, then, the very Truth in person commanded that the Sabbath should
 not be kept according to the letter, whoso keeps the rest of the
 Sabbath according to the letter of the law, whom else does he
 contradict but the Truth himself?

 Another thing also has been brought to my knowledge; namely that it has
 been preached to you by perverse men that no one ought to wash on the
 Lord's day.  And indeed if any one craves to wash for luxury and
 pleasure, neither on any other day do we allow this to be done.  But if
 it is for bodily need, neither on the Lord's day do we forbid it.  For
 it is written, No man ever hated his own flesh, but nourisheth it and
 cherisheth it (Ephes. v. 29).  And again it is written, Make not
 provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof (Rom. xiii. 14).
 He, then, who forbids provision for the flesh in the lusts thereof
 certainly allows it in the needs thereof.  For, if it is sin to wash
 the body on the Lord's day, neither ought the face to be washed on that
 day.  But if this is allowed for a part of the body, why is it denied
 for the whole body when need requires?  On the Lord's day, however,
 there should be a cessation of earthly labour, and attention given in
 every way to prayers, so that if anything is done negligently during
 the six days, it may be expiated by supplications on the day of the
 Lord's resurrection.

 These things, most dear sons, being endowed with sure constancy and
 right faith, observe; despise the words of foolish men, and give not
 easy belief to all that you hear of having been said by them; but weigh
 it in the scale of reason, so that, while in firm stability you resist
 the wind of error you may be able to attain to the solid joys of the
 heavenly kingdom.

 [In two mss., one Colbert, and Vatic. F., "mense Septembri, indict.
 6."]

 Epistle V.

 To Etherius, Bishop of Lugdunum (Lyons).

 Gregory to Etherius, Bishop.

 Although what we say is very distressing to us, and fraternal
 compassion rather moves us to weep than allows us to lay down anything
 concerning the things we have heard of, yet solicitude for the
 government undertaken by us pricks our heart with an urgent spur to see
 with great care to the good of churches, and to arrange what should be
 done before their interests might possibly suffer irretrievably.  It
 has come, then, to our ears from the report of certain persons that an
 affection of the head has so befallen a certain bishop that it is a
 matter of groaning and weeping to hear of what he is wont to do under
 alienation of mind.  Lest, therefore, while the shepherd is sick, the
 flock should be exposed to be torn by the teeth of the lyer-in-wait
 (which God forbid), or the interests of the Church itself should suffer
 irretrievably, it is necessary for us to treat the case with cautious
 provision.  And so, since during the life of a bishop, whom unavoidable
 infirmity and not crime withdraws from his office, no reason allows
 another to be ordained in his place except on his resignation [202] ,
 let him, if he is accustomed to have intervals of sanity, himself make
 petition, declaring that he is no longer equal to this ministry owing
 to subversion of his intellectual faculties by infirmity, and let him
 request that another be ordained in his place.  Which being done, let
 another who may be worthy be solemnly consecrated bishop in his place,
 by the election of all; yet so that, as long as life shall retain the
 said bishop in this world, his due expenses be supplied to him by the
 same Church.  If, however, he at no time recovers the faculties of a
 sound mind, a trustworthy person of approved life must be chosen, who
 may be fit for the government of the Church, take thought for the
 benefit of souls, restrain the unquiet under the bond of discipline,
 take care of ecclesiastical property, and exhibit himself in all
 respects ripe and efficient.  And also, should he survive the bishop
 who is now sick, he should be consecrated in his place.

 But as to ordinations of presbyters or deacons, or of any other order,
 if cause requires any to be made in that Church, know that this is to
 be reserved to thy Fraternity, to the end that, it being in thy
 diocese, thou mayest enquire concerning the life, manners, and conduct
 of him who is chosen to such office.  And if thou shouldest be
 satisfied, and there is nothing in him liable to the censure of
 canonical strictness, let him attain to his destined order not
 otherwise than through ordination by thee.  Let thy Fraternity then, so
 proceed, and so order these things with vigilant provision, that the
 Church of God may no longer suffer from any neglect, and that thou
 mayest warn thy fellow-priests, not only by word but also by example,
 to have a care laudably for venerable places.

 [202] On this head, see also XI. 48.

 Epistle VI.

 To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks [203] .

 Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

 Among other excellencies in you this holds the chief place beyond the
 rest, that in the midst of the waves of this world, which are wont with
 turbulent vexation to confound the minds of rulers, you so bring back
 your heart to the love of divine worship and to providing for the quiet
 of venerable places as if no other care troubled you.  Whence, since
 conduct of this kind on the part of potentates is wont to be a great
 defence to subjects, we declare the nation of the Franks happy beyond
 other nations, having been accounted worthy to have a queen thus
 endowed with all good qualities.

 On learning from the information contained in your letters that you
 have built the Church of Saint Martin in the suburbs of Augustodunum
 (Autun), and a monastery for hand-maidens of God, and also a hospital
 in the same city, we rejoiced greatly, and returned thanks to Almighty
 God, who stimulates the sincerity of your heart to the doing of these
 things.  In this case, that we may be held to some degree sharers in
 your good deeds, we have granted privileges according to your wish, to
 those places for the quiet and protection of those who live in them;
 nor have we borne to defer even in the least degree our embracing of
 your Excellency's desires.

 Furthermore, addressing you in the first place with the greeting of
 paternal charity, we inform you that to our illustrious sons, but your
 servants and legates, Burgoaldus and Varmaricarius, we have granted a
 private interview in accordance with what you wrote to us; and they
 have disclosed to us in detail all that they said they had been charged
 with.  It will be our care in time to come to inform your Excellency of
 whatever is done with regard to these things.  For, as for us, whatever
 is possible, whatever is profitable, and tends to the settlement of
 peace between you and the republic, we desire, under God, with the
 utmost devotion, that it should be accomplished.

 As to Mennas, our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop, after we had
 enquired into what had been said about him, and found him in no way
 culpable, and he having made satisfaction under oath before the most
 sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter, and so proved himself to be
 unaffected by what had been objected against his reputation, we have
 allowed him to return to his post purged and acquitted, since, as it
 was right, if he were in any respect guilty, that we should punish his
 fault canonically, so it was not right when he had the support of
 innocence, that we should detain him longer, or any way distress him.

 Moreover, with respect to a certain bishop who, as the aforesaid
 magnificent men have told us, is prevented by infirmity of the head
 from administering his office, we have written to our brother and
 fellow-bishop Etherius [204] , that if he should have intervals of
 freedom from this infirmity, he should make petition, declaring that he
 is not competent to fill his own place, and requesting that another be
 ordained to his Church.  For during the life of a bishop, whom not his
 own fault but sickness, withdraws from the administration of his
 office, the sacred canons by no means allow another to be ordained in
 his place.  But, if he at no time recovers the exercise of a sound
 mind, a person should be sought adorned with good life and
 conversation, who may be able both to take charge of souls, and look
 with salutary control after the causes and interests of the same
 church; and he should be such as may succeed to the bishop's place in
 case of his surviving him.  But, if there are any to be promoted to a
 sacred order, or to any clerical ministry, we have ordained that the
 matter is to be reserved and announced to our aforesaid most reverend
 brother Etherius, provided it belong to his diocese [205] , so that,
 enquiry having then been made, if the persons are subject to no fault
 which the sacred canons denounce, he himself may ordain them.  Let,
 then, the care of your Excellency conjoin itself with our ordering, to
 the end that the interests of the Church, which you have exceedingly at
 heart, may not suffer damage, and that increase of reward may accrue to
 the good deeds of your Excellency.

 Having been asked likewise concerning a certain bigamist whether he
 might be admitted to a sacred order, we have, according to canonical
 rule, altogether forbidden it.  For God forbid that in your times, in
 which you do so many pious and religious things, you should allow
 anything to be done contrary to ecclesiastical ordinance.

 Moreover the aforesaid magnificent men, our sons, having delivered us a
 schedule, have requested among other things, what they said had been
 enjoined on them by your order, that such a person may be sent from us
 into Gaul as may, on the assembling of a synod, correct under the
 guidance of Almighty God whatever has been perpetrated against the most
 sacred canons.  Herein we recognize the care of your Glory, how you
 take thought for the life of the soul and the stability of your
 kingdom, seeing that, fearing our Redeemer, and observing His precepts
 in all ways, you act in this case also so that the government of your
 kingdom may long subsist, and that after long courses of years you also
 may pass from an earthly to a heavenly kingdom.  At a fitting time, if
 what we have said should be pleasing to God, we will take care to
 fulfil the venerable desires of your Excellency.

 We, then, for the defence of the places about which your Excellency has
 written to us have been careful to order all things as you wish.  But,
 lest haply our decrees should be suppressed at any time by the
 governors of those places on the ground that they are found to be
 interdicted from doing certain things, this same ordinance must be
 inserted among the public acts, that so it may be kept in your royal
 archives as well as in ours.

 May Almighty God ever keep your Excellency in His fear, and so fulfil
 your desires and those of our sons the most excellent kings your
 grandsons, through the intercession of the blessed Peter, Prince of the
 apostles, to whom you commend them, as to grant you to have stable joy
 in their continual welfare, as you desire.  Given in the month of
 November, Indiction 6.

 [203] On Brunechild, see VI. 5, note 4.  Having after the death of her
 son Childebert II. acted as guardian of his son Theodebert II., who had
 received the kingdom of Austrasia with his Capital at Metz, she had
 been expelled by the Austrasians in the year 599, and been received by
 her other grandson, Theoderic II., who reigned over Burgundy with his
 Capital at Orleans.  When this letter was sent (a.d. 602) Theoderic
 would be about fifteen years of age, and, as appears from the letter to
 himself which follows, under the management of his grandmother.

 [204] See preceding epistle.

 [205] i.e. his metropolitan province, Lyons being a metropolitan See.

 Epistle VII.

 To Theoderic, King of the Franks [206] .

 Gregory to Theoderic, &c.

 We have received with joy your written address to us indicating your
 health and safety, and we thereby perceive that you so transcend your
 age in prudence as to make it evident that it is for the happiness of
 the nation of the Franks that the government of royal dominion has been
 committed by the favour of heavenly grace to your Excellency.  And this
 in you among other things is enough to call for praise and admiration,
 that in such things as you know that our daughter your most excellent
 grandmother desires for the love of Almighty God, in these you make
 haste most earnestly to lend your aid, so that thereby you may reign
 both happily here, and in a future life with the angels [207] .
 Seeing, then, that this comes, by the gift of God, from great
 discreetness of judgment, we have so speedily and gladly fulfilled what
 your Excellency desires as to show by the celerity of our execution how
 much your good deeds have pleased us.

 Furthermore, greeting you with paternal sweetness, we inform you that
 all the matters which you enjoined on the illustrious men your servants
 Burgoaldus and Varmaricarius, our sons, to be transacted with us have
 been disclosed to us in a private interview.  And we praised you
 greatly, that you both attend wisely, as becomes you, to the present,
 and also make haste so to provide for security in the future by means
 of a lasting peace between you and the Republic that, being made one,
 you may extend the stability of your kingdom salutarily to all time.
 With regard to this we will announce to you in time to come what it may
 please God to order.  For, as to us, whatever is proved to be
 advantageous and conducive to peace, we desire and strive that it
 should be brought to pass.  The one thing is that, as our will is with
 regard to what is expedient, so should be the will of God, without whom
 we can do nothing.  May the Holy Trinity make you to advance always in
 His fear, and so dispose your heart in moderation well-pleasing to Him
 as both to grant to your subjects now joy from you, and to you from
 Himself joy without end hereafter.

 [206] See preceding epistle, note 2.

 [207] If the accounts given by the Frankish historians be true,
 Brunechild's influence over her grandson was not in all respects such
 as to prepare him for life with the angels.  She is said to have
 encouraged him in licentious living for fear of her own power being
 undermined by the introduction into his court of a lawful queen.
 (Greg. Turon., Hist. Franc. XI. 36; Fredegar. XXX., XXXVII.).

 Epistle VIII.

 To Senator, Abbot.

 Gregory to Senator, presbyter and abbot of a hospital (or guest-house,
 xenodochii).

 When the hearts of Catholic Kings, &c.

 [See the epistle following (Ep. ix.), with which this agrees
 throughout, as does also Epistle X. to Lupo, except for the different
 designations of the persons addressed and places referred to, and the
 addition in epistles VIII. and IX., after the words "or absolve her
 (him) as innocent," of the following paragraph.]

 By a similar definition, according to the desire of the founders, we
 decree that none of those who may in future have been ordained as abbot
 or presbyter to the same guest-house and monastery shall dare by any
 secret scheming whatever to take the office of the Episcopate, unless
 he has been first deprived of the office of abbot, and another has been
 substituted in his place; lest, by consuming the property of the
 guest-house or monastery in unfair expenditure, he should cause most
 serious pressure of want to the poor and strangers, or to others who
 live from its resources.  Moreover, we forbid that the bishop have
 licence, without the consent of the abbot and presbyter, to remove from
 the same place any monk for promotion to an ecclesiastical order, or
 for any cause whatever, lest usurpation in this regard should be
 carried to such an extent that places which have to be built up by the
 acquisition of men be destroyed by their removal.

 Epistle IX.

 To Thalassia, Abbess.

 Gregory to Thalassia, &c.

 When the hearts of catholic kings are so inflamed with ardent desire,
 by divine grace preventing them, as of their own accord to demand the
 things that pontifical admonitions should provoke them to, such things
 are to be granted with cheerful and joyful mind all the more as the
 very things which they desire ought to have been demanded of them, had
 they been unwilling to do them.  Accordingly, in accordance with the
 letters of our most Excellent royal children, Brunichild and her
 grandson Theoderic, to the monastery of Saint Mary, where there is
 constituted a congregation of handmaidens of God, founded in the city
 of Augustodunum by the bishop Siagrius of reverend memory, over which
 you preside, we indulge, grant and confirm by the decree of our present
 authority privileges as follows;--Ordaining that no king, no bishop, no
 one endowed with any dignity whatsoever, or any one else whatsoever,
 shall have power, under show of any cause or occasion whatsoever, to
 diminish or take away, or apply to his own uses, or grant as if to
 other pious uses for excuse of his own avarice, anything of what has
 been given to the same monastery by the above-written king's own
 children, or of what shall in future be bestowed on it by any others
 whatever of their own possessions.  But all things that have been there
 offered, or may come to be offered, we will to be possessed by thee, as
 well as by those who shall succeed thee in thy office and place, from
 the present time inviolate and without disturbance, provided thou apply
 them in all ways to the uses of those for whose sustentation and
 government they have been granted.

 We also appoint that on the death of an abbess of the aforesaid
 monastery no other shall be ordained by means of any kind of craftiness
 of secret scheming, but such a one as the king of the same province,
 with the consent of the nuns, shall have chosen in the fear of God, and
 provided for the ordination of.

 Under this head we also add, in order that we may exclude all place for
 avarice, that no one of the kings, no one of the priests, or any one
 else in person or by proxy, shall dare to accept anything in gold, or
 in any kind of consideration whatever, for the ordination of such
 abbess, or for any causes whatever pertaining to this monastery, and
 that the same abbess presume not to give anything on account of her
 ordination, lest by such occasion what is offered or has been offered
 to places of piety should be consumed.  And, inasmuch as many occasions
 for the deception of religious women are sought out, as is said, in
 your parts by bad men, we ordain that an abbess of this same monastery
 shall in no wise be deprived or deposed unless in case of criminality
 requiring it.  Hence it is necessary that if any complaint of this kind
 should arise against her, not only the bishop of the city of
 Augustodunum should examine the case, but that he should call to his
 assistance six other of his fellow-bishops, and so fully investigate
 the matter, to the end that, all judging with one accord, a strict
 canonical decision may either smite her if guilty, or absolve her if
 innocent.

 All these things, therefore, which the paper of this our precept and
 decree contains we decree to be observed in perpetuity for thee as well
 as for all who may succeed thee in the same rank and place, and for all
 whom they may concern.  Moreover, if any one, whether king, priest,
 judge, or secular person, being aware of this our written constitution,
 should attempt to contravene it, let him be deprived of the dignity of
 his power and honour, and know that he stands guilty before divine
 judgment for the iniquity that he has perpetrated.  And, unless he
 either restore what he has wrongfully taken away, or lament what he has
 done unlawfully with fit penitence, let him be debarred from the most
 sacred body and blood of our God and Lord, the Redeemer Jesus Christ,
 and be subject to strict vengeance in the eternal judgment.  But the
 peace of our Lord Jesus Christ be to all who observe what is just to
 this same place, to the end that they may both receive here the fruit
 of their well-doing, and find the rewards of eternal peace at the hands
 of the strict Judge.

 Epistle X.

 To Lupo, Abbot.

 Gregory to Lupo, Presbyter and Abbot.

 When the hearts of catholic kings, &c. [208]

 [208] For the rest of this epistle see preceding Epistle IX., with
 which, mutatis mutandis, it is identical, as was Epistle VIII., save
 for an additional paragraph given under Epistle VIII.  See what has
 been said with regard to that Epistle.  The genuineness, or at any rate
 the freedom from interpolation, of all these three Epistles is
 disputed.  The Benedictine Editors of Gregory's works defend their
 authenticity.  See their note (b) to Ep. VIII (Patrologiæ Tomus LXVII.
 Sancti Gregorii Magni tomus tertius).  The purport of all three letters
 is to confer privileges on, and provide for the future security and
 regulation of, three recent foundations of Queen Brunechild at
 Augustodunum (Autun); viz. 1.  A hospital, or guest-house (xenodochium)
 in Autun, over which a Senator, described as "presbyter and abbot," had
 been appointed to preside; 2. A monastery for women, of which Thalassia
 had been appointed Abbess; 3. The Church of St. Martin in the suburbs,
 over which Lupo, "presbyter and abbot," presided.  These foundations
 are referred to, though not described, in Epistle VI. to Brunechild
 herself, where Gregory speaks of having issued decrees for their
 protection in the future, which he desires should be kept among the
 royal archives.  In those times of continual conflict among the Frank
 potentates royal founders might naturally wish to protect their
 foundations from disturbance by means of spiritual fulminations; and
 the queen's desire in this respect might account for the anathemas in
 these epistles, which have been said to be characteristic of a later
 age than that of Gregory.  It may be observed further that the
 appointment of the heads of these religious institutions is, in the
 letters before us, reserved to "the kings of the province" instead of
 free election, subject to episcopal approval, being left to the
 inmates, as was usual in other cases.  This might be due, if the
 letters are genuine, to the request of Brunechild, whom, as a staunch
 Catholic and a supporter of the Church, Gregory ever shews himself
 anxious to conciliate.  With regard to his politic flattery of her, or
 of others similarly situated, cf. VI. 5, note 4.

 Epistle XII.

 To Paschasius, Bishop of Neapolis (Naples).

 Gregory to Paschasius, &c.

 Those who with pure intent desire to bring to the true faith aliens
 from the Christian religion should study kindness, and not asperity;
 lest such as reason rendered with smoothness might have appealed to
 should be driven far off by opposition.  For whosoever act otherwise,
 and under cover of such intention would suspend people from their
 accustomed observance of their own rites, are proved to be intent on
 their own cause rather than on God's.  To wit, the Jews dwelling in
 Naples have complained to us, asserting that certain persons are
 endeavouring unreasonably to drive them from certain solemnities of
 their holidays, so that it may not be lawful for them to observe the
 solemnities of their festivals, as up to this time since long ago it
 has been lawful for them and their forefathers to keep and observe
 them.  Now, if this is true, these people appear to be taking trouble
 to no purpose.  For what is the use, when even such long unaccustomed
 prohibition is of no avail for their faith and conversion?  Or why
 should we lay down rules for the Jews as to how they should observe
 their ceremonies, if we cannot thereby win them?  We should therefore
 so act that, being rather appealed to by reason and kindness they may
 wish to follow us, and not to fly from us; and that proving to them
 from their own Scriptures what we tell them, we may be able, with God's
 help, to convert them to the bosom of Mother Church.

 Wherefore let thy Fraternity, so far as may be possible, with the help
 of God, kindle them to conversion, and not allow them any more to be
 disquieted with respect to their solemnities; but let them have free
 licence to observe and celebrate all their festivals and holidays, even
 as hitherto both they and their forefathers for a long time back have
 kept and held them.

 Epistle XVIII.

 To certain Bishops of Sicily.

 Gregory to Leo, Secundinus, John, Donus, Lucidus, Trajan, bishops of
 Sicily.

 Even as we are admonished through the speech of the apostles to impart
 one to another spiritual aids,--so, in matters that by God's ordering
 we may have to settle in virtue of the government imposed on us for
 administration of the affairs of the poor, it is fit that priestly
 succour be not wanting.  Accordingly in sending the bearer of these
 presents, Adrian our Chartularius [209] , to govern the patrimony of
 our Church, to wit in the Syracusan district, we have thought it
 necessary to commend him to your Fraternity, that, wherein custom may
 demand it, you may afford him your succour, to the end that, while he
 is supported by you with bodily aid for doing his work, and with the
 spiritual aid of your prayers for carrying out with facility whatever
 he may undertake, he may be able, God also working with him, to
 accomplish prosperously what has been by us enjoined on him.  But, as
 for yourselves, you should so acquit yourselves in good works before
 the face of Almighty God that there be not found in your doings
 anything that may be smitten by the judgment of God, or for which you
 may be accused by any man whatever lying in wait against you.  For we
 have charged our aforesaid Chartularius that, if he should come to know
 of any inordinate doings on the part of our most reverend brethren the
 bishops, he should first himself take them to task by private and
 modest admonition; and, that, if such things are not amended, he should
 inform us of them speedily.

 Furthermore, it has been reported to us that in the times of our
 predecessor of holy memory it was arranged by the deacon Servusdei, who
 then had charge of the ecclesiastical patrimony, that the priests [210]
 of your several dioceses, when you go forth to seal infants [211] ,
 should not be immoderately burdened.  For a certain sum had been fixed,
 and this, as I hear, with your consent, to be given by the same priests
 for the services of the clerks (clericorum).  And this, which was then
 approved of, is said to be by no means kept to now.  Wherefore I
 admonish your Fraternity to endeavour not to be burdensome to your
 subjects, and, if they have any grievances, to abate them, seeing also
 that you ought not to have departed from what had once been
 determined.  For you will be seeing to your own interest both in the
 future and the present life, if you keep those who have been committed
 to you free from grievance.

 [209] Adrian, who had already been commissioned as notarius Siciliæ (X.
 23), had now been made rector patrimonii, being succeeded as notary by
 Pantaleo (XIII. 34).

 [210] Sacerdotes, meaning here apparently parish priests, though more
 commonly, in Gregory's epistles, denoting bishops.  The abuse
 complained of seems to have been that of charging priests of parishes
 unreasonably for the remuneration of the clerici who attended the
 bishops on their confirmation progresses.

 [211] Ad consignandos infantes; i.e. for confirmation, cf. IV. 26, note
 6.

 Epistle XXII.

 To Rusticiana, Patrician Lady.

 Gregory to Rusticiana, &c.

 As often as any one comes to us from the royal city, we take care to
 enquire of your bodily health; but, my sins being the cause, I always
 hear what I am sorry to hear, since, frail and weak as you already are,
 it is reported that the pains of gout still grow upon you.  But I pray
 the Almighty Lord that whatever befalls your body may be ordered to the
 health of your soul, and that temporal scourges may prepare for you
 eternal rest, and that through the pains which have an end He may grant
 you joys without end.  As for me, I live in such a state of groaning
 and in the midst of such occupations that it irks me to have arrived at
 these days which now I spend, and my only consolation is the
 expectation of death.  Wherefore I beg you to pray for me, to the end
 that I may be soon released from this prison of the flesh, so as to be
 no longer tormented by such great pains.

 Furthermore, I have to inform you that a certain person has come here,
 Beator by name, who gives himself out as comes privatarum [212] , and
 is doing many things against all, but principally against your
 Excellency's people, or those of your most noble granddaughters, as
 though he were making enquiry into matters of public import.  And we
 indeed will not permit him to act wrongfully, but neither can we stand
 in the way of public interests.  Do you therefore treat as you can with
 the most pious princes, that they may countermand any wrongful
 proceeding on his part.  For neither is the public interest served by
 any kind of turmoil, nor does he appear to reclaim anything of great
 amount.  I beg that my most sweet son the lord Strategius [213] be
 greeted in my behalf, whom may Almighty God nourish for Himself and for
 you, and ever comfort you by His own grace and by the young lord's
 life.  Further, what should I write to you concerning your return
 hither, knowing as you do how much I desire it?  But, when I look to
 the obligations of the business that detains you, I am in despair; and
 so I implore the Creator of all that, wherever you are, and wherever
 you may be, He would protect you by the extension of His right hand,
 and preserve you from all evil.

 [212] This designation may mean a kind of private secretary to the
 Emperor, or one to whom the secret service of the government was
 committed.

 [213] See II. 27, note 2.

 Epistle XXVI.

 To Anthemius, Subdeacon.

 Gregory to Anthemius, Subdeacon of Campania.

 It has reached our ears that our brother and fellow-bishop Paschasius
 [214] is so idle and negligent in all ways that he is in no respect
 recognised as bishop; and that so neither his own Church, nor the
 monasteries, nor any, whether the sons of the Church [215] , or the
 oppressed poor, are conscious of any earnestness of love on his part
 towards them; nor does he afford any help in what is just to those who
 supplicate him, and (what is a still more serious thing to say) he
 cannot bear on any account to receive the counsels of the wise and of
 such as admire what is right, so that he might at any rate learn from
 another what he cannot attend to of himself; but, passing over the
 things that pertain to a pastor's charge, he occupies himself with his
 whole attention unprofitably in the building of ships.  Whence, as is
 reported, it has come to pass that he has already lost four hundred
 solidi, or more.  This also is added to his faults, that he is said to
 go down daily to the sea with one or two clerics in so mean a guise as
 to be the talk among his own people, and to scent to strangers so vile
 and despicable that he is judged to have nothing in him of the
 character or venerableness of a bishop.  If this be so, know that it is
 not without fault of thine, who hast delayed to rebuke and restrain
 him, as is fit.  Seeing, then, that all this not only discredits him,
 but also evidently brings reproach on the office of the priesthood, we
 desire thee to summon him for this thing before other priests [216] ,
 or some of his noble sons [217] , and exhort him that, shaking off the
 vice of sluggishness, he be not idle, but vigilant in the care of his
 Church and of the monasteries, exhibit fatherly charity to his sons,
 stand up for the defence of the poor with discretion in cases that are
 commended by justice, and receive gladly the counsels of the wise, to
 the end that both that city may be comforted by his solicitude, and he
 himself succeed in covering the faults of his idleness.  If however, as
 we do not believe will be the case, after this our exhortation he
 should venture to be negligent after his accustomed manner, he must by
 all means be sent to us, that in our presence he may learn what it
 becomes a priest to do, and how to do it, after the fear of God.  Given
 in the month of March, Indiction 6.

 [214] Bishop of Naples.  A few epistles not included in this
 translation are addressed to him as such.

 [215] Filii ecclesiæ, or, according to the authority of mss., simply
 filii.  Cf. III. 56, where the expression occurs.  It is understood to
 denote the lay members of any Church, among whom those of the highest
 social position were called nobiles (see below), and others plebs.
 Mandates for the election of bishops are addressed to clero, nobilibus,
 ordini, et plebi (as in II. 6), or to clero ordini, et plebi (as in I.
 58), or occasionally clero et nobilibus (as in I. 80); ordo being
 understood to denote persons of position, though not ranking as nobles.

 [216] i.e. bishops, as commonly meant by sacerdotos.

 [217] See above, note 5.

 Epistle XXVII.

 To Anthemius, Subdeacon.

 Gregory to Anthemius, Subdeacon of Campania.

 As often as we hear things of our brethren and fellow-bishops that shew
 them to be to blame and cause us sadness, necessity compels us in no
 slight degree to take thought for their amendment.  Seeing, then, that
 it has been reported to us that the bishops of Campania are so
 negligent that, unmindful of the dignity and character of their office,
 neither towards their Churches nor towards their sons do they shew the
 care of paternal vigilance, nor concern themselves about monasteries,
 nor bestow their protection on the oppressed and the poor, we therefore
 enjoin thee and hereby give thee authority to call them together, and
 strictly admonish them in virtue of our mandate, that they be not any
 longer idle, but so evince their priestly zeal and solicitude, and be
 so vigilant in what it becomes them justly and according unto God to
 do, that no murmur concerning them may exasperate us any more.  If,
 however, thou shouldest find any one of them to be negligent after this
 being done, send him to us without allowing any excuse, that by regular
 exercise of discipline they may be made to feel how serious a matter it
 is to refuse to be corrected in things that are reprehensible and
 exceedingly to be condemned.

 Epistle XXXI.

 To Phocas, Emperor [218] .

 Gregory to Phocas Augustus.

 Glory to God in the highest who, according as it is written, changes
 times, and transfers kingdoms, seeing that He has made apparent to all
 what He vouchsafed to speak by His prophet, That the most High ruleth
 in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will (Dan. iv.
 17).  For in the incomprehensible dispensation of Almighty God there
 are alternate controlments of mortal life; and sometimes, when the sins
 of many are to be smitten, one is raised up through whose hardness the
 necks of subjects may be bowed down under the yoke of tribulation, as
 in our affliction we have long had proof.  But sometimes, when the
 merciful God has decreed to refresh the mourning hearts of many with
 His consolation, He advances one to the summit of government, and
 through the bowels of His mercy infuses the grace of exultation in Him
 into the minds of all.  In which abundance of exultation we believe
 that we shall speedily be confirmed, who rejoice that the Benignity of
 your Piety has arrived at imperial supremacy.  Let the heavens rejoice,
 and let the earth be glad (Ps. xcv. 11); and let the whole people of
 the republic, hitherto afflicted exceedingly, grow cheerful for your
 benignant deeds.  Let the proud minds of enemies be subdued under the
 yoke of your domination.  Let the crushed and depressed spirits of
 subjects be revived by your mercy:  let the power of heavenly grace
 make you terrible to your enemies, your piety kind to your subjects.
 Let the whole republic have rest in your most happy times, the pillage
 of peace under colour of processes at law being exposed.  Let plottings
 about wills cease, and benevolences exacted by force.  Let secure
 possession of their own return to all, that they may rejoice in having
 without fear what they have acquired without fraud.  Let every single
 person's liberty be now at length restored to him under the yoke of
 empire.  For there is this difference between the kings of the nations
 and the emperors of the republic, that the kings of the nations are
 lords of slaves, but the emperors of the republic lords of freemen.
 But we shall better speak of these things by praying than by putting
 you in mind of them.  May Almighty God in every thought and deed keep
 the heart of your Piety in the hand of His grace; and whatever things
 should be done justly, whatever things with clemency, may the Holy
 Spirit who dwells in your breast direct, that your Clemency may both be
 exalted in a temporal kingdom, and after courses of many years attain
 to heavenly kingdoms.  Given in the month of June, Indiction 6.

 [218] Phocas succeeded Mauricius as Emperor in November, a.d. 602.
 With regard to Gregory's adulatory tone towards this sanguinary usurper
 and his consort Leontia, see Prolegomena, p. xxvii.

 Epistle XXXIV.

 To Pantaleo, Notary.

 Gregory to Pantaleo, &c.

 Thy Experience remembers what and what kind of oath thou tookest over
 the most sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter.  Whence also we
 committed to thee without fear the charge of enquiry in the patrimony
 of the Syracusan district.  It is, then, incumbent on thee to have
 thine own good faith and the fear of the same blessed apostle Peter
 ever before thine eyes, and so to act that neither with men in this
 present life nor with Almighty God in the last judgment thou mayest be
 open to blame.  Now from the report of Salerius our chartularius we
 have learnt that thou hast found the modius in which the husbandmen
 (coloni) [219] of the Church have been compelled to give their corn to
 be one of twenty-five sextarii [220] .  This we altogether execrated,
 and were sorry thou hadst been late in making it a subject of enquiry.
 We rejoice, therefore, at thy telling us that thou hast broken the said
 modius and made a just one.  But, inasmuch as the aforesaid
 chartularius has taken care to mention also what has already been
 collected under thy Experience by the fraudulent dealings of the
 farmers (conductores) [221] from two territories, therefore, even as
 with a view to the future, we rejoice that thou hast acted zealously in
 breaking the unjust modius, so also we think of sins in the past; lest,
 if what the farmers have fraudulently taken away from the peasants
 (rusticis) [222] accrues to us, we should be implicated in their sins.
 And accordingly we desire thy Experience, with all faithfulness, with
 all integrity--having regard to the fear of Almighty God, and recalling
 to mind the strictness of the blessed apostle Peter--to make a list
 throughout each several estate (massam) [223] of poor and indigent
 husbandmen, and with the money found to have been got by fraud to
 procure cows, sheep, and swine, and distribute them among the several
 poor husbandmen.  And this we desire thee to do with the advice of the
 most reverend lord bishop John [224] , and Adrian our chartularius and
 rector [225] .  If, moreover, it should be necessary for the sake of
 consultation, our son also the lord Julian should be called in, so that
 no one else may know, but all be kept quite secret.  Do you therefore
 consult among yourselves whether this same assistance should be given
 to the said poor husbandmen in money or in kind.  But, whatever be the
 common fund, first, as I have said, make a list, and afterwards take
 pains to distribute to each according to the degree of his poverty.
 For I, as the teacher of the Gentiles testifies, have all and abound;
 nor do I seek money, but reward (Phil. iv.).  So act therefore that in
 the day of judgment thou mayest shew me fruit of thy labour from the
 service that has been committed to thy Experience.  If thou do this
 purely, faithfully, and strenuously, thou wilt both receive it back
 here in thy children, and hereafter wilt have plenary retribution in
 the scrutiny of the Eternal Judge.

 [219] Cf. I. 44, note 1.

 [220] Cf. ib., note 4.

 [221] Cf. ib., note 5.

 [222] Cf. ib., note 1.

 [223] Cf. ib., note 5.

 [224] Bishop of Syracuse.  Cf. V. 17.

 [225] Adrian, previously addressed as notarius Siciliæ (X. 23), had
 been succeeded by Pantaleo and made rector patrimonii (XIII. 18).

 Epistle XXXVIII.

 To Phocas, Emperor.

 Gregory to Phocas Augustus.

 It pleases us to consider, with rejoicings and great thanksgivings,
 what praises we owe to Almighty God, that the yoke of sadness has been
 removed, and we are come to times of liberty under the imperial Piety
 of your Benignity.  For that your Serenity has not found a deacon of
 the Apostolic See resident at the court according to ancient custom, is
 not owing to my negligence, but to most grave necessity.  For, while
 all the ministers of this our Church shrunk and fled with fear from
 times of such oppression and hardship, it was not possible to impose on
 any of them the duty of going to the royal city to remain at the
 court.  But now that they have learnt that your Clemency, by the
 ordering of God's grace, has attained to the summit of Empire, those
 who had before greatly feared to go there hasten even of themselves to
 your feet, moved thereto by joy.  But, seeing that some of them are so
 weak from old age as to be hardly able to bear the toil, and some are
 deeply engaged in ecclesiastical cares, and the bearer of these
 presents, who was the first of all our guardians (defensores), has been
 long well known to me for his diligence, and proved in life, faith, and
 character, I have judged him fit to be sent to the feet of your Piety
 [226] .  I have accordingly, by God's permission, made him a deacon,
 and have been at pains to send him to you with all speed, that he may
 be able, when a convenient time is found, to inform your Clemency of
 all that is being done in these parts.  To him I beg your Serenity to
 deign to incline your pious ears, that you may find it in your power to
 have pity on us all the more speedily as you learn the more truly from
 his account what our affliction is.  For in what manner by the daily
 swords, and by how many invasions, of the Lombards, lo now for the
 length of five and thirty years, we have been oppressed, by no words of
 description can we fully express.  But we trust in the Almighty Lord,
 that He will complete for us the good things of His consolation which
 He has begun, and that, having raised up pious lords in the republic,
 He will also extinguish cruel enemies.  And so may the Holy Trinity
 guard your life for many years, so that we may the longer rejoice in
 the good of your Piety, which we have received after long waiting.

 [226] The person thus sent was Boniface (see below, Ep. XL., and XIV.
 8), who afterwards became pope.

 Epistle XXXIX.

 To Leontia, Empress.

 Gregory to Leontia Augusta.

 What tongue may suffice to speak, what mind to think, what great thanks
 we owe to Almighty God for the serenity of your empire, in that such
 hard burdens of long duration have been removed from our necks, and the
 gentle yoke of imperial supremacy has returned, which subjects are glad
 to bear?  Glory, then, be given to the Creator of all by the hymning
 choirs of angels, thanksgiving be paid by men on earth, for that the
 whole republic, which has endured many wounds of sorrow, has now at
 length found the balm of your consolation.  Hence we must needs implore
 the more earnestly the mercy of Almighty God, that He would keep the
 heart of your Piety ever in His right hand, and dispose your thoughts
 by the aid of heavenly grace, to the end that your Tranquillity may be
 able to rule those who serve you the more righteously as you know more
 truly how to serve the Sovereign of all.  May He make you His champions
 in love of the catholic faith, having, of His benign dealing, made you
 our emperors.  May He infuse into your minds zeal together with
 gentleness, that you may always be able with pious fervour not to leave
 unavenged whatever is done amiss with regard to God, and in case of any
 delinquency against yourselves to bear and spare.  May He give us in
 your Piety the clemency of Pulcheria Augusta, who for her zeal for the
 catholic faith was called in the holy synod the new Helena (Act. 1
 synodi Chalcedonensis).  May the Almighty mercy of God grant to you
 fuller length of days to live with our most pious lord, that the longer
 your life is extended, the more strongly may the consolation of your
 subjects be confirmed.

 I ought perhaps to have requested that your Tranquillity should hold as
 especially commended to you the Church of the blessed apostle Peter,
 which up to this time has laboured under grievous plots against it.
 But, knowing that you love Almighty God, I ought not to ask what you
 will exhibit of your own accord out of the benignity of your piety.
 For the more you fear the Creator of all, the more fully may you love
 the Church of him to whom it was said, Thou art Peter, and upon this
 rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
 against it; and to whom it is said, To thee I will give the keys of the
 kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be
 bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be
 loosed in heaven (Matth. xv. 18).  Whence it is not doubtful to us with
 what strong love you will bind yourself to him through whom you
 earnestly desire to be loosed from all sins.  May he, then, be the
 guardian of your empire, may he be your protector on earth, may he be
 an intercessor for you in heaven:  that through your relieving your
 subjects from hard burdens, and causing them to rejoice in your empire,
 you may, after many years, rejoice in the heavenly kingdom.

 Epistle XL.

 To Cyriacus, Patriarch of Constantinople.

 Gregory to Cyriacus, &c.

 Observing diligently, most dear brother, how great is the virtue of
 peace from the Lord's voice, which says, My peace I give unto you (Joh.
 xiv. 27), it becomes us so to abide in the love thereof as in no wise
 to give place to discord.  But, since we cannot otherwise live in its
 root except by retaining in mind and in deed the humility which the
 very author of peace has taught, we entreat you with befitting charity,
 that, treading down with the foot of your heart the profane elation
 which is always hostile to souls, you make haste to remove from the
 midst of the Church the offence of a perverse and proud title, lest you
 should possibly be found divided from the society of our peace.  But
 let there be in us one spirit, one mind, one charity, one bond in
 Christ, who has willed us to be his members.  For let your Holiness
 consider how hard it is, how indecent, how cruel, how alien from the
 aim of a priest, not to have that peace which you preach to others, and
 so abstain from offending your brethren out of pride.  But study this
 rather, how you may prostrate with the sword of humility the author of
 vain and profitless elation, to the end that in such a victory the
 grace of the Holy Spirit may claim you as a habitation for Himself, so
 that what is written may be plainly fulfilled in you; the temple of God
 is holy, which temple ye are (2 Cor. vi. 17.)

 We commend to you in all things the bearer of these presents, our most
 beloved common son, the deacon Boniface, that in whatsoever may be
 needful he may find, as is becoming, the succour of your Holiness.

 Epistle XLI.

 To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

 Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria.

 A conversation having arisen one day between me and my familiar friends
 about the customs of churches, one who had studied the art of medicine
 in the great city of Alexandria told us that he had a fellow-student
 attending the same lectures, a boy of extreme depravity, who, he said,
 had been suddenly ordained a deacon.  And he added that he had procured
 ordination by bribes and gifts; for he acknowledged that this custom
 had prevailed in the holy Alexandrine Church.  On hearing this I was
 amazed, and exceedingly surprised that the tongue of the most holy and
 blessed man the lord Eulogius, which recalls so many heretics to the
 catholic faith, has not extirpated simoniacal heresy from the holy
 Alexandrine Church.  And who will there be whose exhortation or
 correction will be able to amend this, if his great and admirable
 teaching shall have left it without amendment?

 Wherefore, for the absolution of your soul, for the increase of your
 reward, that your works may be in all respects perfect before the eyes
 of the tremendous Judge, you ought to make haste utterly to pull up and
 eradicate simoniacal heresy, which was the first to arise in the
 Church, from your most holy See, which is ours [227] .

 For on this account it comes to pass that the holiness of
 ecclesiastical orders falls away from very many, because persons are
 promoted to these orders, not for their life and deeds, but for
 bribes.  But if meritorious character, and not bribes, be sought after,
 unworthy persons will not come to ordination.  And by so much the more
 will reward begin to accrue to you as any good men who have been
 promoted to sacred orders shall have devoted themselves to the care of
 winning souls.

 [227] See VII. 40, for Gregory's view of the three sees of Rome,
 Antioch, Alexandria, all representing the see of St. Peter.

 Epistle XLII.

 To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

 Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

 We return great thanks to Almighty God, that in the mouth of the heart
 a sweet savour of charity is experienced, when that which is written is
 fulfilled, As cold water to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far
 country (Prov. xxv. 25).  For I had previously been greatly disturbed
 by a letter from Boniface the Chartularius, my responsalis, who dwells
 in the royal city, saying that your to me most sweet and pleasant
 Holiness had suffered from failure of bodily sight.  From this letter I
 was smitten by heavy sorrow.  But suddenly, by the prospering grace of
 our Creator and Redeemer, I received the epistle of your Blessedness,
 and, learning that the bodily trouble of which I had heard was cured, I
 rejoiced exceedingly, since gladness of heart succeeded which was as
 great as the bitterness of the sadness which had come before.  For we
 know that, with the help of Almighty God, your life is the health of
 many.  For sailors sail secure through the waves when an instructed and
 skilful steersman sits at the helm.

 Moreover in my joy for your health I have this additional cause for
 exultation, that I have learnt how through your mouth the enemies of
 the Church are decreased in number, and the flocks of the Lord
 multiplied.  For through the ploughshare of your tongue heavenly corn
 increases daily, and is multiplied in the garners on high; so that in
 you we rejoice that what is written is fulfilled, Where there is much
 increase, there is manifest the strength of the oxen (Prov. xiv. 4).
 Whence we gather plainly that the more you bring back fugitives to the
 service of Almighty God, the more merit you have with Him.  And by how
 much the more merit you receive, the more fully can you obtain what you
 ask for.  I beseech you therefore to pray the more earnestly for me a
 sinner, since both pain of body, and bitterness of heart, and immense
 ravages of mortality among the swords of so many barbarians, afflict me
 exceedingly.  In the midst of all these things it is not temporal but
 eternal consolation that I require, which of myself I am not able to
 win by prayer, but which I trust that I shall obtain by the
 intercessions of your Blessedness.  Last year I received no letters
 from your Holiness, and I was much distressed.  It is true that your
 blessing, which you sent without a letter, was both given and
 received.  But, since your tongue delights me more than your gifts, I
 was less gratified than I might have been by what was given.  But I
 directed our common son, the deacon Epiphanius, to write to Alexander
 and Isidore, deacons of your most holy Church, to acknowledge the
 receipt of what had been sent.

 I wrote to you, further, that I had got ready large pieces of timber
 for making masts and rudders, but that the small ship which had come
 could not carry them; and you have since written nothing in reply.
 Wherefore, if you need them, write to our common son Boniface, whom we
 are now sending as our representative (responsalem) to the royal city,
 that he may send me word that they may be prepared, and that they may
 be found ready when your Blessedness shall send for them.

 Furthermore, we have sent you a small cross, in which is inserted a
 blessing from the chains of your lovers the apostles Saint Peter and
 Saint Paul; and let this be continually applied to your eyes, seeing
 that many miracles have been wont to be wrought through this same
 blessing.

 May Almighty God inspire the heart of your Blessedness to be careful to
 pray for me continually, and may He protect you and all yours with His
 right hand, and after many courses of years bring you to the heavenly
 kingdom.

 We have received, corresponding with your description of them, the
 blessings [228] of Saint Mark, sent to us by your most blessed
 Fraternity, and we return thanks for your kindness, since from these
 outward things we learn what you are towards us inwardly.

 [228] Eulogias, apparently in the same sense as benedictiones, used
 elsewhere as denoting presents.

 Book XIV.

 Epistle II.

 To Vitalis, Guardian (Defensorem) of Sardinia.

 Gregory to Vitalis, &c.

 From the information given us by thy Experience we find that the
 hospitals [or guest-houses, xenodochia] founded in Sardinia are
 suffering from grievous neglect.  Hence our most reverend brother and
 fellow-bishop Januarius [229] would have had to be most strongly
 reprehended, did not his old age and simplicity, and the sickness which
 thou hast told us of coming on besides, keep us in check.

 Seeing, then, that he is so situated that he cannot be fit to order
 anything, do thou warn the steward of that Church, and Epiphanius the
 archpresbyter, under our strict authority, that they themselves at
 their own peril endeavour themselves carefully and profitably to set
 those same hospitals (xenodochia) in order.  For, if there should be
 any neglect there hereafter, let them know that they will not be able
 in any manner, or to any extent, to excuse themselves before us.

 Further, since the proprietors of Sardinia have petitioned us that,
 seeing that they are afflicted by diverse burdens, thou mightest go to
 Constantinople for their redress, we grant thee leave to go.  And we
 have also written to our most beloved son Boniface, desiring him to do
 his best to lend thee his aid in obtaining redress for that province.

 Moreover, with regard to the Churches which thou hast informed us are
 without priests [230] , we have written to our aforesaid most reverend
 brother and fellow-bishop Januarius, that he should supply them; yet so
 that all be not chosen for the episcopate from his own Church.  For it
 becomes him so to supply other Churches as not to cause want in his own
 of persons who may be of advantage to it.

 As to what thou hast told us of persons having been preferred to the
 government of certain monasteries who, while they were in a lower
 monastic order, had fallen into sin, they ought not indeed to have
 undertaken the office of abbot except after entire reformation of life
 and after due preceding penance.  But since, as thou sayest, they have
 undertaken the office of abbots, heed must be given to their life,
 manners, and attention to duty.  And, if their conduct should not be
 found inconsistent with their office, let them persevere in the order
 in which they are.  Otherwise let them be removed, and others ordained
 who may profit the souls committed to them.

 Furthermore, in the case of the monastery of Saint Hermas, which was
 founded by our brother in the house of the religious lady Pomponiana,
 inasmuch as it should be treated with tenderness rather than with
 strictness, let thy Experience endeavour to deal sweetly with the said
 lady, to the end that neither may she, to her own sin, disregard the
 will of the founder, nor thou fail to provide salubriously for the
 advantage of the monastery.  Further, as to the girls of whom the
 aforesaid Pomponiana had formerly changed the religious dress, and
 converted them in the monastery [231] , thou must by no means suffer
 them to be withdrawn from her, or disquieted; but let them continue,
 God protecting them, in the state of life in which they are.

 With regard to the recovery of the property of Churches, or of
 monasteries, or any other devoted to pious uses, about which thou hast
 written, those who are interested must be admonished that it is for
 them to seek in all ways to recover it with thy support and aid.  But,
 if they should haply prove negligent, or in any case if such as ought
 to recover it should not be found, then do thou search it all out and
 so get it back, when discovered, as not to appear to take legal action
 against any one with a high hand.  As to what thou hast told us with
 respect to the hospitals (xenodochia) of Hortulanus and Thomas, we so
 far have no knowledge.  Wherefore let thy Experience look diligently
 into the order of the Emperor so far given, and arrange all according
 to its tenour, and make known to us whatever thou hast done.

 Concerning what thou hast written about our brother and fellow-bishop
 Januarius at the time when he celebrates the sacrifice often suffering
 such distress that he can hardly after long intervals return to the
 place in the canon where he has left off, and as to many doubting
 whether they should receive the Communion from his consecration, they
 are to be admonished to be in no alarm at all, but communicate with
 full faith and security, since a person's sickness neither alters nor
 defiles the benediction of the sacred mystery.  Nevertheless our said
 brother should by all means be exhorted privately, that, as often as he
 feels any trouble coming on, he should not proceed to celebration, lest
 he thus expose himself to contempt, and cause offence to the minds of
 the weak.

 Furthermore, the religious lady Pomponiana [232] has complained to us
 that the inheritance of her late son-in-law Epiphanius--of which the
 said Epiphanius had appointed his wife Matrona, daughter of the
 aforesaid Pomponiana, to be usufructuary for the benefit of the
 monastery which he had directed to be founded in his house, and for its
 benefit also in all ways after the extinction of the usufruct--together
 with other things which are proved to belong to the same Matrona by
 right of possession, have been unjustly taken away by thy Experience
 and by our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Januarius, and that
 nothing therefore has so far been paid to her daughter, or been of
 profit to the monastery.  Now if the truth is so, and thou art aware of
 having done anything unbecomingly, without any delay restore what has
 been taken away; or at any rate, if thou thinkest it to be otherwise
 lest the opposite party should seem to be aggrieved prejudicially, by
 no means defer submitting the case to arbitrators chosen with her
 concurrence, that it may be declared by a definite decision whether her
 complaint be true and just.

 [229] See I. 62, note 9.

 [230] Sacerdotes, here as elsewhere meaning bishops.

 [231] "Convertit in monasterio."  Conversio, as usually, means here
 monastic profession.

 [232] As to this Pomponiana (al. Pompeiana), cf. I. 48; XI. 25.

 Epistle IV.

 To Fantinus, Guardian (Defensorem) of Panormus.

 Gregory to Fantinus, &c

 Such things about our brother and fellow-bishop Exhilaratus, as thou
 thyself also knowest, have come to our ears as ought by all means to be
 visited with severe punishment.  But, since it has been smoothed over
 by our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Leo [233] , who has also
 declared that he was judge in that case, we have thought it fit that he
 [i.e. Exhilaratus] should be sent back to his Church, considering that
 what we have inflicted on him by keeping him here so long may be enough
 for him.  Therefore we enjoin thy Experience to pay attention to his
 manners and deeds, and to admonish him frequently, to the end that he
 may shew himself solicitous in extending kind charity to his clerks
 (clericis), and, should need require, in correcting faults.  But we
 desire thee also to admonish his clergy that they exhibit humility
 towards him, and the obedience which the Lord commands, nor in any
 respect presume to behave proudly with regard to him.  And if any one
 of them, that is, either bishop or clerk, should disregard thy
 admonition, do thou, under this authority from us, either correct the
 sin of disobedience by canonical coercion, as thou seest fit, or make
 haste to send a report to us, that we may be able to arrange how the
 rein of discipline may keep from going off their road those whom the
 goad of evil inclination provokes to transgression.

 [233] Bishop of Catana in Sicily.  Cf. IV. 36.

 Epistle VII.

 To Alcyson, Bishop of Corcyra.

 Gregory to Alcyson, &c.

 Not undeservedly does the ambition of an elated heart require to be
 quelled, when, disregarding the force of the sacred canons, the excess
 of rash presumption in coveting unlawfully what belongs to others is
 shewn to be not only harmful in causing expense, but also opposed to
 the peace of the Church.  Having, then, perused thy Fraternity's
 epistles, we have learnt what has been done formerly or of late by the
 bishop of the City of Euria with regard to the camp of Cassiopus [234]
 , which is situated in thy diocese, and we are distressed that those
 who should have been debtors to thy Church for charity bestowed upon
 them, should rather become its enemies, no shame restraining them; and
 at last that, in a way contrary to ecclesiastical arrangement, contrary
 to priestly moderation, contrary to the ordinances of the sacred
 canons, they should attempt to withdraw the aforesaid camp from thy
 jurisdiction and subject it to their own power, so as to become as it
 were masters where they had before been received as strangers.
 Concerning which matter, seeing that Andrew, our brother of venerable
 memory, Metropolitan of Nicopolis, with the support also of an imperial
 order whereby the cognizance of this case had been enjoined on him, is
 known to have determined in a sentence promulged by him, as has been
 made manifest to us, that the aforesaid camp of Cassiopus should remain
 under the jurisdiction of thy Church as it always has been, we,
 approving of the form of that sentence, confirm it, as justice
 approves, by the authority of the Apostolic See, and decree that it
 remain firm in all respects.  For no reason of equity, no canonical
 order, sanctions that one person should in any way occupy the parish
 [235] of another.  Wherefore, though the guilt of this contentiousness
 seems to require no slight strictness of treatment, in that they have
 returned evil for good, nevertheless care should be taken that kindness
 be not overcome by excess, nor that what is due to strange brethren,
 when they are suffering constraint too, be denied them, lest charity
 should be judged to have no operation in the minds of bishops, if those
 to whom great compassion is due should be left without the remedy of
 consolation.  It is right, then, that the priests and clergy of the
 city of Euria be not repelled from habitation of the aforesaid camp of
 Cassiopus, but that they should have leave also to deposit with due
 reverence the holy and venerable body of the blessed Donatus, which
 they have brought with them, in one of the churches of the aforesaid
 place such as they may choose.  Yet so that protection be procured for
 thy Love, in whose diocese this camp is situate, by the issue of a
 security whereby the bishop of Euria shall promise not to claim for
 himself any power therein, or any privilege, or any jurisdiction, or
 any authority in future, as though he were cardinal bishop; but that,
 peace being restored by the favour of God, they shall return by all
 means to their own places, taking away with them, if they will, the
 venerable body of Saint Donatus.  So, this promise being kept in mind,
 neither may they dare on any pretext whatever to claim further to
 themselves any right of rule there, but acknowledge themselves guests
 there at all times, nor may the Church of thy Fraternity in any degree
 incur prejudice to its rights and privileges.

 [234] Castrum Cassiopi, which appears to have been a fortress in the
 isle of Corcyra, to which refugees from the mainland of Epirus had
 resorted in time of war.  Euria was one of the sees in Epirus Vetus
 under the jurisdiction of which these refugees had been; and it seems
 that the bishop of Euria had been complained of by Alcyson, bishop of
 Corcyra, for asserting jurisdiction over them in their new abode.  See
 also Ep. VIII., which follows, and Ep. XIII.

 [235] Parochiam, in the then usual sense of what is now called a
 diocese.

 Epistle VIII.

 To Boniface, Deacon.

 Gregory to Boniface, Deacon at Constantinople [236] .

 As often as the discord of those who ought to have been preachers of
 peace makes us sad, we should study with great solicitude that cause of
 contention may be removed, and that those who differ among themselves
 may return to concord.  Now what has been done with respect to the camp
 of Cassiopus, which is situate in the island of Corcyra, and how the
 bishop of Euria is endeavouring to withdraw it from the jurisdiction of
 the bishop of Corcyra, and iniquitously to subject it to his own
 jurisdiction, it would be very tedious to tell [237] .  But, that your
 Love may understand all things fully, we have sent to you the letters
 of our brother Alcyson, the bishop of Corcyra, and have caused his man
 to go to you to inform you of everything more particularly by word of
 mouth.  This, however, we briefly mention, that an order having been
 surreptitiously obtained from the late Emperor Mauricius, which order,
 having been given in opposition to the laws and sacred canons, had no
 effect, and the dispute between the parties remaining undecided, he
 gave another order to our late brother Andrew, then Metropolitan of
 Nicopolis, to the effect that, as both parties were subject to his
 jurisdiction, he should take cognizance of the case and terminate it
 canonically.  The said Metropolitan, having taken cognizance of the
 case and pronounced sentence, of which we send you a copy, decided the
 aforesaid camp of Cassiopus to be under the power and jurisdiction of
 the bishop of Corcyra, in whose diocese it always was; and we,
 approving his sentence, have thought fit to confirm it by the authority
 of the Apostolic See.  And, lest what we decreed should be so strict as
 to seem to have no admixture of benignity, we took care so to order the
 matter for the time being (as the text of our sentence which we send to
 thee shews) that neither should the bishop or clergy of the city of
 Euria incur the necessity of residence, nor the privileges of the
 Church of Corcyra be in any way disturbed.  But inasmuch as at the very
 beginning of proceedings an order was surreptitiously got from the most
 serene lord the Emperor, and (contrary to the judgment of the
 Metropolitan of Nicopolis, which rested on ecclesiastical propriety and
 canonical reason) the aforesaid camp of Cassiopus is said to have been
 handed over to the bishop of Euria (a thing we cannot hear without
 grief or tell without groans), with still greater wrong to the bishop
 of Corcyra and his clergy, in such sort as (sad to say) to take away
 entirely the jurisdiction of the Church of Corcyra, and give as it were
 to the bishop of Euria the whole principal jurisdiction there; this
 being so, we have thought right to deliver our sentence to no one, lest
 we should seem to do anything contrary to the order of our most clement
 lord the Emperor, or (which God forbid) in contempt of him.  Wherefore
 let thy Love diligently represent the whole matter to his Piety, and
 steadily insist that the thing is altogether unlawful, altogether bad,
 altogether unjust, and greatly opposed to the sacred canons.  And so
 may he not allow a sin of this sort to be introduced in his times to
 the prejudice of the Church.  But represent to him what is contained in
 the judgment of the aforesaid late metropolitan on the business, and in
 what manner his decision had been confirmed by us, and endeavour so to
 act that our sentence, with an order from him, may be sent to those
 parts, to the end that we may be seen to have paid due deference to his
 Serenity, and to have corrected reasonably what had been presumptuously
 done amiss.  In this affair pains must by all means be taken that, if
 it can be effected, he may contribute also his own order, enjoining the
 observance of what has been decided by us.  For if this is done, all
 place for subornation hereafter will be shut out.  Make haste, then, so
 to exercise thy vigilance, with the help of Almighty God, for abating
 these wrongs, that neither may the will of those who attempt perverse
 things obtain any advantage now against the ancient settlement of
 ecclesiastical usage, nor a nefarious proceeding gain ground for
 example afterwards.

 Furthermore, that thou mayest know what wrongs and what oppressions the
 above-written Alcyson, our brother and fellow-bishop, asserts that he
 endures from the agents (actionariis) of the Church of Thessalonica, we
 have forwarded to thy Love the letter which he has sent to us.  And do
 thou accordingly cause the responsalis of the aforesaid Church to come
 to thee, and take cognizance of the case in his presence, and write to
 our brother and fellow-bishop Eusebius, on such heads as reason may
 suggest to thee, that he may prohibit his men from acting unjustly, and
 warn them not to oppress inferiors, but rather help them in whatever
 may be just.  This also we desire; that thy Love should write to him
 who may have been ordained as Metropolitan in the city of Nicopolis, to
 the end that he may take cognizance of the case with regard to the
 injuries which our aforesaid brother Alcyson complains of having been
 inflicted on his Church, and decide what is just, seeing that the
 matter itself is stated not to have been decided by his predecessors,
 but reserved.

 [236] See XIII. 38, note 1.

 [237] Cf. preceding epistle.

 Epistle XII.

 To Theodelinda, Queen of the Lombards.

 Gregory to Queen Theodelinda.

 The letters which you sent us a little time ago from the Genoese parts
 have made us partakers of your joy on account of our learning that by
 the favour of Almighty God a son has been given you, and, as is greatly
 to your Excellency's credit, has been received into the fellowship of
 the catholic faith [238] .  Nor indeed was anything else to be supposed
 of your Christianity but that you would fortify him whom you have
 received by the gift of God with the aid of Catholic rectitude, so that
 our Redeemer might both acknowledge thee as His familiar servant, and
 also bring up prosperously in His fear a new king for the nation of the
 Lombards.  Wherefore we pray Almighty God both to keep you in the way
 of His commandments, and to cause our most excellent son, Adulouvald
 [239] , to advance in His love, to the end that, as he is in this world
 great among men, so also he may be glorious for his good deeds before
 the eyes of our God.

 Now as to what your Excellency has requested in your letter, that we
 should reply in full to what our most beloved son, the abbot Secundus
 has written [240] , who could think of putting off his petition or your
 wishes, knowing how profitable they would be to many, did not sickness
 stand in the way?  But so great an infirmity from gout has held us fast
 as to render us hardly able to rise, not only for dictating, but even
 for speaking, as also your ambassadors, the bearers of these presents,
 are aware, who, when they arrived, found us weak, and when they
 departed, left us in the utmost peril and danger of our life.  But, if
 by the ordering of Almighty God I should recover, I will reply in full
 to all that he has written.  I have, however, sent by the bearers of
 these presents the Synod that was held in the time of Justinian of
 pious memory, that my aforesaid most-beloved son may acknowledge on
 reading it that all that he had heard against the Apostolic See or the
 Catholic Church was false.  For far be it from us to accept the views
 of any heretic whatever, or to deviate in any respect from the tome of
 our predecessor Leo, of holy memory; but we receive whatever has been
 defined by the four holy synods, and condemn whatever has been rejected
 by them.

 Further, to our son the King Adolouvald we have taken thought to send
 some phylacteries; that is, a cross with wood of the holy cross of the
 Lord, and a lection of the holy Gospel enclosed in a Persian case.
 Also to my daughter, his sister, I send three rings, two of them with
 hyacinths, and one with an albula [241] , which I request may be given
 them through you, that our charity towards them may be seasoned by your
 Excellency.

 Furthermore, while paying you our duty of greeting with fatherly
 charity, we beg you to return thanks in our behalf to our most
 excellent son the King your consort for the peace that has been made,
 and to move his mind to peace, as you have been accustomed to do, in
 all ways for the future; that so, among your many good deeds, you may
 be able in the sight of God to find reward in an innocent people, which
 might have perished in offence.

 [238] i.e. the child had been baptized a catholic.  It would seem from
 Gregory's way of speaking, and the absence of allusion to the
 conversion of the father, that king Agilulph had not yet announced his
 Arianism.  Paul Diaconus alleges that he did so eventually through the
 influence of Theodelinda.

 [239] The child who had been baptized (al. Adaloaldus, or Adoaldus).
 He succeeded his father as king of the Lombards, a.d. 616, being still
 a boy, reigning under his mother's guardianship.  According to Paul
 Diaconus, Gregory's hopes were for a short time fulfilled:--"Under them
 Churches were restored, and many endowments were bestowed on venerable
 places;"--but before long he became insane, and after ten years (a.d.
 626) was deposed, Arioald being appointed to succeed him (Hist. Longob.
 iv. 43).

 [240] On the subject of the "Three Chapters," as appears from what
 follows.  It is evident that the able and conscientious queen
 Theodelinda never found herself able to accept the ruling of the See of
 Rome on this question (cf. IV. 2, note 3); and she seems now to have
 employed the abbot Secundis to draw up a statement of the arguments on
 her side, inviting Gregory to reply to them.  He did not, however, on
 this account cease to address her cordially as a good catholic.  He
 seems to have condoned in her what he so strongly condemned in others
 as involving them in schism.  On the schism arising from the matter of
 the "Three Chapters," see I. 16, note 3; and Prolegom., p. x.

 [241] Some precious stone, probably of a white colour.

 Epistle XIII.

 To Alcyson, Bishop of Corcyra [242] .

 Gregory to Alcyson, &c.

 To brethren who bethink themselves and return to wholesome counsels
 kindness is not to be denied, lest a fault seem to weigh more in the
 minds of bishops than charity.  We have therefore received, in the
 presence of thy Love's responsales, Peter, reader of the Church of
 Euria, who came to us with letters from our brother and fellow-bishop
 John, and, when the letters which he had brought had been read, we took
 care to ask him if he had anything to say against the allegation of
 those thy responsales.  And on his stating that he had been charged
 with nothing, and had no answer to make, beyond what the epistle of his
 bishop contained, we decreed without tardiness, under God, what was
 agreeable to the canons.  After a long time, however, the above-written
 Peter produced a document which he asserted had been given him by his
 bishop; and so the case underwent delay.  But inasmuch as in this
 document the above-mentioned bishop was found to say that he had hoped
 to have leave to deposit the holy and venerable body of the blessed
 Donatus in the church of the blessed John which is within the camp
 called that of Cassiopus, saying that he is prepared, on account of its
 being proved to be in thy diocese, to give thy Love a security that no
 prejudice to thee should thence arise, we thought it right that his
 petition should not be left without effect, now that in a time of
 necessity he desires provision to be made for him in such a way as to
 secure his acknowledgment in all respects of the jurisdiction of thy
 Church.  Moved therefore by this reason, we exhort thy Fraternity by
 this present letter, that, without any delay or excuse thou afford
 opportunity for depositing the venerable body of the above-written
 Saint in the aforenamed Church of the blessed John; on condition only
 that he previously protect thee by a security in writing that he will
 never on any plea whatever claim to himself any jurisdiction or
 privilege in the aforesaid Church or camp, as though he were the bishop
 of the place, but guard there inviolably all the right and power of thy
 Church, the place being in thy diocese.  At the same time it becomes
 thee also, as the same our brother has requested, to reply to him that
 whenever, peace being restored by the mercy of God, he may be at
 liberty to return to his own place, it shall be lawful for him to take
 away with him, without any objection made, the aforesaid venerable
 body.  Herein, lest what is done should seem to be personal, and
 occasion should possibly be found for stirring up the contention anew,
 your successors also should be in all respects included in this promise
 to keep things as they are, to the end that through this preventional
 security neither may he in future presume to claim anything there in
 thy diocese against equity and the decrees of the sacred canons, nor
 the rights of thy Church ever in any manner sustain any prejudice from
 such concession.

 [242] See XIV. 7.

 Epistle XVI.

 From Felix Bishop of Messana [243] to St. Gregory.

 To the most blessed and honourable lord, the holy father Pope Gregory,
 Felix lover of your Weal and Holiness.

 The claims under God of your most blessed Weal and Holiness are
 manifest.  For, though the whole earth was filled with observance of
 the true faith by the preaching and doctrine of the apostles, yet the
 orthodox Church of Christ, having been founded by apostolical
 institution and most firmly established by the faithful fathers, is
 further built up through the teaching of divine discourses, while
 instructed by your hortatory admonition.  To it did all the most
 blessed apostles, endowed with an equal participation of dignity and
 authority [244] , convert hosts of peoples; and by salutary precepts
 and admonitions, piously and holily, brought such as were foreknown in
 the grace of divine predestination from darkness to light, from error
 to the true faith, from death to life.  Following the merits of these
 holy apostles, and perfectly acting up to their example, your honoured
 Paternity adorns with them the Church of God by probity of manners and
 holiness of deeds; and, strong in sacred faith and Christian manners,
 enjoins what should be done to please God, and unceasingly follows and
 fulfils pontifical duties, thus observing the precepts of divine law;
 since (as says the Apostle) Not the hearers of the law are just before
 God, but the doers of the law shall be justified (Rom. ii. 13).

 As we were meditating on these things, news was brought us by certain
 who came from Rome that you had written to our comrade Augustine
 (afterwards ordained Bishop for the nation of the Angli, and thither
 sent by your venerable Holiness), and to the Angli (whom we have long
 known to have been converted to the faith through you), that persons
 related in the fourth degree of descent, if married, should not be
 separated [245] .  Now this was not formerly the custom either in those
 or in these parts, when I was brought up and taught together with you
 from infancy; nor have I read of it in any decrees of your
 predecessors, or in the institutes of other Fathers generally or
 specially, or learnt that it had been allowed hitherto by any of the
 wise.  But I have found from your holy predecessors, and from the rest
 of the holy Fathers, assembled as well in the Nicene synod as in other
 holy councils, that this [i.e. this prohibition of marriage] should be
 observed down to the seventh degree of descent; and I know that this is
 carefully seen to by men who live aright and fear the Lord.  While
 these things were being discussed among us, other things also
 supervened, concerning which it seems necessary for us to consult your
 authority.  For there came to us both Benedict, bishop of the Syracusan
 Church, and also others of our brethren, being bishops, weeping, and
 saying that they were greatly disturbed and afflicted in mind on
 account of the immoderate proceedings of secular and lay persons, in
 consequence of which some unjust things were also being said against
 them.

 There are also some churches in our province about the consecration of
 which doubt is felt; and, because both of their antiquity and of the
 carelessness of their custodians, it is unknown whether they have been
 dedicated by bishops or not.  As to all these things we beg to be
 instructed by your Holiness, and by the authority of your holy see; and
 we ask to be informed by your letters whether what, as we have before
 said, we have heard that you had written to our aforesaid comrade
 Augustine and to the nation of the Angli was written specially to them
 or generally to all; and we desire to be fully informed both on this
 matter and on the others above written.

 For we do not signify to you what we have read, and what we know to be
 observed by the faithful, by way of finding fault (which be far from
 us); but we seek to know what we may reasonably and faithfully observe
 in this matter.  And, since no slight murmuring is going on among us on
 this question, we seek an answer from you, as from the head, as to what
 we should reply to our brethren and fellow bishops; lest we should
 remain doubtful in the matter, and lest this murmuring should remain
 among us both in your times and in times to come, and your reputation,
 which has always been good and excellent, should be lacerated or
 disparaged through detractions, or your name (which God forbid) should
 be evil spoken of in succeeding times.  For we, observing under God
 what is right with humble heart, being bound to you in one bond of
 charity, and defending your religion in all things as faithful pupils,
 seek knowledge of what is right from you.  For we know that, as the
 apostles in the first place who were prelates of the holy See, and
 their successors afterwards, have always done, so you also take care of
 the universal Church, and especially of bishops, who on account of
 their contemplation and speculation are called the eyes of the Lord;
 and that you think continually about our religion and law, as it is
 written, Blessed is he who shall meditate in the law of the Lord day
 and night (Ps. i. 2).  Which meditation of yours is not only seen by
 reading, through the outward expression of letters, but, by the grace
 of Christ abounding in you, is known to be immoveably engrafted in your
 conscience; while the most holy law of Christ the Lord in no wise
 departs from your heart; as says the Prophet in the Psalms, The mouth
 of the righteous will meditate wisdom, and his tongue will be talking
 of judgments:  the law of God is in his heart (Ps. xxxvi. 30); written
 not with ink, but in secret by the Spirit of the living God; not
 therefore on tables of stone, but on the tables of the heart.  Let all
 gloom of darkness, we pray you, be dispelled by your most wise replies
 and assistance, that the morning star may shine upon us through you,
 most holy Father, and a dogmatic definition causing joy to all
 everywhere, because the glorious Fathers of holy Church are known to
 have preached proper and most pious dogmas unto secure inheritance of
 eternal life.

 Subscription.  May the Lord keep you safe and well-pleasing to God for
 ever, holy father of fathers, while you pray for us.

 [243] Messina in Sicily.  This Felix cannot be identified with Felix,
 bishop of the same See, to whom previous letters (viz. I. 66, together
 with two others, I. 40, and II. 5, which have not been translated) had
 been addressed.  For he had been succeeded in the see by Donus,
 probably in the 14th Indiction, i.e. a.d. 595-6, (see VI. 9), when
 Gregory's reply to Augustine's interrogatories, which is the main
 subject of the epistle before us, had not yet been sent.  Augustine
 does not appear to have even arrived in Britain till a.d. 597.  But
 there seems to be no reason against the supposition that a second Felix
 had succeeded Donus at Messina before the death of Gregory, the last
 mention of Donus being in the superscription of Ep. XVIII. in Book
 XIII., assigned to the 16th Indiction, i.e. a.d. 602-3.

 [244] See also below--"the apostles in the first place who were
 prelates of the Apostolic See."  It would seem from these expressions
 that the Sicilian bishops went on the tradition of St. Paul and St.
 Peter having been joint founders of the Roman Church and throughout the
 epistle, though the supremacy of the See of Rome is acknowledged, it is
 not spoken of as derived especially from St. Peter.

 [245] See XI., 64 (Responsio ad Interrog. vi.).

 Epistle XVII.

 To Felix, Bishop of Messana.

 To our most reverend brother, the Bishop Felix, Gregory, servant of the
 servants of God [246] .

 Our Head, which is Christ, to this end has willed us to be His members,
 that through His large charity and faithfulness He might make us one
 body in Himself, to whom it befits us so to cling that, since without
 Him we can do nothing, through Him we may be enabled to be what we are
 called.  From the citadel of the Head let nothing divide us, lest, if
 we refuse to be His members, we be deserted of Him, and wither as
 branches cast off from the vine.  That we may be counted worthy, then,
 to be the habitation of our Redeemer, let us abide with the whole
 desire of our heart in His love.  For he says, He that loveth me will
 keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will make our abode
 with him (Joh. xiv. 23).  Now thy Love, most dear brother, has demanded
 of us that we should reply to thy enquiries with the authority of the
 Apostolic See.  And, though we make haste to do this, not at length but
 succinctly (because of certain pressing cares that have come upon us,
 through the hindrance of our sins), yet we commit what follows to thy
 attention for wider enquiry, and investigation of other institutes of
 holy fathers.  For a mind worn and weighed down with burdens and
 pressing cares cannot effect so much good, or speak of these things so
 freely, as can one that is joyful and free from depression.  We have
 not therefore given the preference to such cares as wishing to deny to
 thy Holiness this and such other information. as we might find to be
 needful, but in order that what is here found deficient may be more
 fully enquired into.

 For, following the examples of thy predecessors, thou hast thought it
 right to consult the Apostolic See, in which thou hast been brought up
 and educated, on three points; that is on marriages of consanguinity,
 on vexation of bishops by subordinates, and on doubt with respect to
 the consecration of churches.  Know then that what I wrote to
 Augustine, bishop of the nation of the Angli (who was, as thou
 rememberest, thy pupil), about marriages of consanguinity was written
 specially to him and to the nation of the Angli which had recently come
 to the faith, lest from alarm at anything too austere they should
 recede from their good beginning; but it was not written generally to
 others.  Of this the whole Roman city is my witness.  Nor did I thus
 order in those writings with the intention that, after they had been
 settled in the faith with a firm root, they should not be separated, if
 found to be below the proper degree of consanguinity, or should be
 united, if below the proper line of affinity, that is as far as the
 seventh generation.  But for those who are still neophytes it is very
 often right in the first place to teach them, and by word and example
 to instruct them, to avoid unlawful things, and then afterwards,
 reasonably and faithfully, to shut out things that they may have done
 in matters of this kind.  For according to the Apostle who says, I have
 fed you with milk, not with meat (1 Cor. iii. 2), we have allowed these
 indulgences for them only, and not (as has been said above) for future
 times, lest the good which had been planted so far with a weak root
 should be rooted up, but that what had been begun should rather be made
 firm, and guarded till it reach perfection.  Certainly, if in these
 things we have done anything otherwise than as we ought to have done,
 know that it has been done, not of wantonness, but in commiseration.
 Wherefore, too, I invoke God as my witness, who knows the thoughts of
 all men, and to whom all things are naked and open.  For, if I were to
 destroy what those who came before me established, I should be justly
 convicted of being not a builder but an over-thrower, as testifies the
 voice of the Truth, who says, Every kingdom divided against itself
 shall not stand (Luke xi. 17); and every science and law divided
 against itself shall be destroyed.  And so it is needful for us all
 with one accord to hold to the appointments of our holy Fathers, doing
 nothing in contention, but, unanimous in every aim of good devotion, to
 obey, the Lord helping us, the divine and apostolical constitutions.

 O how good is charity, which through love exhibits absent things in an
 image to one's self as though they were present, unites things divided,
 sets in order things confused, associates things unequal, consummates
 things imperfect!  How rightly the excellent preacher calls it the bond
 of perfectness, since the other virtues indeed produce perfectness, but
 yet charity so binds them that they cannot now be unloosed from the
 mind of him that loves.  This being duly considered, in what has been
 already spoken of I indulged charitably; nor did I give a command, but
 advice; nor did I deliver a rule to be held to by any who should come
 after, but shewed of two dangers which might be more easily avoided.
 If, then, in secular affairs every one should have his own right and
 his proper rank preserved to him, how much more in ecclesiastical
 arrangements ought no confusion to be induced, lest discord should find
 place there whence the blessings of peace ought to proceed.  And this
 will be thus secured, if nothing is yielded to power, but all to
 equity.  On this account our heart rejoices greatly with your
 greatness, because we find you so earnest in your doings as to have a
 care for us, and at pains to enquire about such things by questioning
 us, to the end that such things may acquire for you not only glory with
 men, but also rewards of recompense with the Almighty Lord.

 But with regard to vexation of bishops, about which you wish to consult
 us, we know that the life of prelates ought to be perturbed by no
 excesses, since it is very unfit that those who are called thrones of
 God should be disturbed by any motion from kings or subjects.  For, if
 David who was the most righteous of kings presumed not to lay his hand
 on Saul who was evidently already rejected of God, how much more should
 heed be taken that none lay the hand of detraction or vituperation or
 indiscreetness or dishonour on the Lord's Anointed, or on the preachers
 of holy Church, since vexation or detraction of them touches Christ, in
 whose stead they fill the office of legates in the Church!  Hence all
 the faithful should be exceedingly cautious not either secretly or
 publicly, by detractions or vituperations rend their bishop, that is,
 the Lord's Anointed, considering that example of Mary [i.e. Miriam],
 who for speaking against Moses the servant of God because of the
 Ethiopian woman was punished with the uncleanness of leprosy (Num.
 xiii.); and that of the Psalmist, Touch not mine anointed, and do my
 prophets no harm (Ps. civ. 15) [247] .  And in the divine law we read,
 Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people (Ex.
 xxii. 28).  Hence great care should be taken by subordinates, whether
 clerical or lay, that they dare not to blame rashly the lives of their
 bishops or superiors, if perchance they see them do anything blameable,
 lest from their position of reproving evil they be sunk into greater
 depths through the impulse of elation.  They are to be admonished also
 that, when they consider the faults of their superiors, they grow not
 too bold against them.  But let them so consider with themselves the
 things that are bad that, constrained by divine fear, they refuse not
 to carry the yoke of reverence, seeing that the things done by bishops
 and superiors are not to be smitten with the sword of the mouth, even
 when they may seem to be such as may be properly blamed; since we are
 aware that it has been laid down by our predecessors and by many other
 holy bishops that sheep should not readily blame their shepherds, or
 presume to criminate or accuse them, because, when we sin against our
 superiors, we go against His ordinance Who gave them to us.  Hence
 Moses, when he had learnt that the people complained against himself
 and Aaron, said, For what are we?  Not against us is your murmuring but
 against God (Ex. xvi. 8).  Wherefore subordinates of either order are
 to be admonished that, when they observe the deeds of their masters,
 they return to their own heart, and presume not in upbraidings of them,
 since The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his
 lord (Matth. x. 24).

 Concerning doubt as to the dedications of churches, about which among
 other things you have wished to consult us, you ought duly to hold to
 this which we have received as handed down to us from those who have
 gone before us; namely, that, as often as doubt is entertained as to
 the baptism or confirmation of any persons, as well as the consecration
 of churches, and there is no certain account to be given, either from
 writings or witnesses, as to whether persons have been baptized or
 confirmed, or whether churches have been consecrated, that such persons
 should be baptized and confirmed, and that such churches should be
 canonically dedicated, lest such doubt should become ruin to the
 faithful; inasmuch as what does not appear by certain proofs to have
 been duly done is not in such case done a second time.  This, divine
 grace supporting us, we desire so to hold; and we enjoin it on you, as
 you have requested, to hold and teach; and we wish not wantonly to
 break through, but faithfully to observe, what has been determined by
 holy Fathers before us.  Wherefore we implore the mercy of our Redeemer
 to assist you with His grace, and give unto you to carry into effect
 what He has granted you to will, since in this matter the good gifts of
 retribution by so much the more accrue to us as the zeal of labour is
 increased.  But we decree that every one of those who have been
 faithfully taught, and already stand ineradicably planted with a firm
 root, shall observe his descent even to the seventh generation.  And as
 long as they know themselves to be related to each other by affinity,
 let them not presume to approach the association of this union; nor is
 it lawful, or shall be lawfully for any Christian to marry a woman of
 his own kindred whom he has lived with as a wife, or whom he has
 stained by any unlawful pollution; since such intercourse is incestuous
 and abominable to God and to all good men.  But we read that it has
 long been determined by holy Fathers that incestuous persons are not to
 be reckoned under any title of wedlock.  And so we desire not to be
 blamed by you or any other of the faithful in this matter, seeing that
 in our indulgence herein to the nation of the Angli we have acted, not
 as laying down a rule, but as taking thought lest they should leave
 imperfect the good which they had begun, &c. [248]

 [246] The genuineness of this epistle is, to say the least, open to
 grave suspicion.  Jaffé (Regesta Pont. Lit. Spur.) rejects it as
 spurious.  Its style in some parts reminds us of Gregory, and it
 contains passages identical with what he had written elsewhere:  but
 its prolixity, bad composition, and repetitions are unworthy of his
 pen.  It reads like an unskilful imitation of his style.  Nor is it
 difficult to understand why such a letter may have been forged.  If, as
 supposed in our note to Ep. XVI., a letter from Sicily had been
 addressed to Gregory not long before his death with reference to his
 answers to Augustine's questions, to which letter he had been unable to
 reply, it was not unlikely that such a letter as the one before us
 would afterwards be composed in his name.  For anxiety might naturally
 be felt to vindicate from inconsistency the teaching of the Roman See
 on the subject of marriages of consanguinity.  Such a letter, too, if
 forged, would be likely to attempt an imitation of Gregory's style, and
 to bring in (as this does) extracts from his previous writings.  It may
 be observed that the plea set forth of the directions to Augustine
 having been meant only as temporary concessions is not borne out by the
 actual language of those directions.  See XI. 64.

 [247] Ps. cv. 15.

 [248] The rest of this long prolix epistle, not being of any peculiar
 interest, has not been translated.

 Selections

 Translated into English

 from the

 HYMNS AND HOMILIES

 of

 Ephraim the Syrian,

 and from the

 DEMONSTRATIONS

 of

 Aphrahat the Persian Sage;

 Edited, with an Introductory Dissertation, by,

 John Gwynn, D.D., D.C.L.,

 Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Dublin

 Preface.

 ------------------------

 In the following selection from the voluminous writings of Ephraim, the
 great light of the Syrian Church of the fourth century, I have
 endeavored to give adequate specimens of his Hymns and of his Homilies;
 but have not included any part of his Commentaries on Holy Scripture.
 These last contain much that is worthy of study, but would not be found
 attractive to the general reader; nor could they be fairly represented
 by a series of extracts such as the limits of the present volume would
 admit of.

 The Hymns (with small exceptions, presently to be specified), and the
 Homilies, which I have selected, appear now for the first time in an
 English version; and are translated from Syriac texts which have come
 to light within the last fifty years, in the great collection of
 manuscripts acquired by the British Museum by the purchase of the
 library of the monastery of the Theotokos in the Nitrian Desert, in
 Egypt.

 To these I have added eight chosen from the twenty-three
 Demonstrations, or Epistles, of Ephraim's contemporary Aphrahat.  These
 also appear for the first time in English, and are translated from a
 Syriac text, long lost, and lately recovered from the same famous
 collection.

 Of the Hymns of Ephraim, I have placed the Nisibene series first,
 including forty-six of the total number (originally seventy-seven; but
 a few are lost).  The first twenty-one, relating to the history of
 Nisibis and of its Bishops, I have given in full, because of their
 special interest and historic value.  The translation of these is the
 work of the Rev. Joseph T. Sarsfield Stopford, B.A. (Dublin), Rector of
 Castle Combe in the Diocese of Gloucester.  It follows the text edited
 by Dr. Bickell (Leipzig, 1866), from Nitrian mss.

 Of the Hymns On the Nativity, which stand next in order, the first
 thirteen have already appeared in the Oxford "Library of the Fathers"
 (1847), translated by the Rev. J. B. Morris, M.A., from the text
 printed in the great Roman edition, S. Ephræmi Syri Opera Syriaca
 (Rome, 1743).  These were all of the series known when that edition was
 published; but since then six complete hymns, and some fragments of the
 same have been recovered from Nitrian mss.  I have reprinted Mr.
 Morris's version of the thirteen, with some modifications, and have
 subjoined the Nitrian six, rendered from the text published by
 Professor Lamy, of Louvain, in Tom. II of his edition of Ephraim
 (Mechlin, 1889).  These last, and the series of fifteen Hymns For the
 Epiphany which follow them, have been translated by the Rev. Albert
 Edward Johnston, B.D. (Dublin), formerly Assistant-Lecturer in Divinity
 in the University of Dublin, and now Principal of the Church Missionary
 Society's College, Benares.  The remaining series, of seven Hymns On
 the Faith, also called The Pearl, is borrowed, like the thirteen On the
 Nativity, from Mr. Morris's version.

 I have carefully revised and in parts rewritten all these translations
 of the Hymns, chiefly with a view to bringing into some approach to
 uniformity the style and method of rendering of a collection which thus
 includes the work of three independent translators.  While very
 sensible of the high merit of Mr. Morris's work, and conscious that by
 retouching and altering it I may incur the blame of presumptuousness, I
 have thought it expedient to tone down somewhat of the exceeding
 severity of his faithfulness to his original, and to remove some of the
 harsh expressions and harsher inversions which make his version,
 valuable as it is to the student, almost repulsive, and often barely
 intelligible, to the English reader.  Of his learned Notes, I have
 retained a few, some of them in a curtailed form, of those which seemed
 most useful for the illustration of the text.

 The three Homilies of Ephraim, which follow the Hymns, have been
 translated by Mr. Johnston from Professor Lamy's text (as above, Tom.
 I., 1889).

 The selections from the Demonstrations of Aphrahat are the work of the
 same translator, and follow the text of Dom Parisot's edition, forming
 Tom. I of the Patrologia Syriaca (Paris, 1894).

 The versions of the Homilies and of the Demonstrations, being all the
 work of one and the same hand, have called for but few and trivial
 alterations from the editor.  I have, however, revised them throughout;
 and am responsible for the general accuracy of the rendering of the
 originals in these, and in the whole of the selections now presented to
 the public.

 In the Introductory Dissertation prefixed to the work, I have drawn
 largely on the materials supplied by the Prolegomena of Dr. Bickell's
 Carmina Nisibena, and of Professor Lamy's S. Ephræmi Hymni et Sermones,
 Tom. I. and Tom. II.; and by Dr. Forget's Treatise De Vita Aphraatis,
 and the Preface of Dom Parisot to Tom. I. of the Patrologia Syriaca.

 John Gwynn.

 Trinity College, Dublin, 31st March, 1898.

 Introductory Dissertation.

 ------------------------

 Ephraim the Syrian

 and

 Aphrahat the Persian Sage.

 ------------------------

 Preliminary.

 The two Fathers of the Syrian Church, from whose writings the present
 Volume presents a selection, are from more than one point of view fitly
 associated as examples of the leaders of Syriac theological thought and
 literature.  They are the earliest Syriac authors of whom any
 considerable remains survive; and they both represent the religious
 mind of the Syrian Church, but little affected by influences from
 without, other than the all-pervading influence of the Jewish and
 Christian Scriptures.

 Syriac Literature is, on the whole, of derivative growth.  It consists
 largely of versions or adaptations from the Greek.  The Syriac
 language, in the hands of those to whom the Syriac Church owes the
 admirable version of the Scriptures known as the "Peshitto," proved
 itself capable of reproducing adequately, not only the sublime
 conceptions of God and of man's relations to God which belong to the
 cognate Hebrew of the Old Testament, but also--the wider, subtler, and
 more complex religious ideas for which the writers of the New Testament
 found their fit vehicle in the Greek.  But the Peshitto, great as its
 value must have been to the religious life of Syriac-speaking
 Christians, never became to them what Luther's Bible has been to
 Germany, and the "Authorized" Bible of King James's translators to
 England--an inspiring force in literature, not merely to elevate and
 enrich its language, but to quicken it in every branch.  Syriac
 literature was indeed deeply penetrated by the Syriac Bible, but its
 level was never raised above mediocrity.  For the most part it is
 imitative not original;--nay, it rarely succeeds in assimilating so as
 to make its own what it has borrowed.  The Syriac translator, if he
 worked on the writings of a Greek divine, would often paraphrase or
 even interpolate; if of a Greek historian, would subjoin a
 continuation; but he would seldom venture farther.  Those who essayed
 independent authorship were few.  A home-grown Syriac literature began
 with Ephraim and Aphrahat; but [setting aside a very small number of
 the writers who followed] it may almost be said to have ended with
 them.  These two, and these alone, in place of being imitators or
 translators, were translated and imitated by the writers of foreign
 nations.  Aphrahat's literary lot was the singular one, that his work
 survived in an alien tongue for alien readers, when the original had
 wellnigh perished out of the memory of his own people.  To Ephraim
 pertains the high and unique distinction of having originated--or at
 least given its living impulse to--a new departure in sacred
 literature; and that, not for his own country merely, but for
 Christendom.  From him came, if not the first idea, at all events the
 first successful example, of making song an essential constituent of
 public worship, and an exponent of theological teaching; and from him
 it spread and prevailed through the Eastern Churches, and affected even
 those of the West.  To the Hymns, on which chiefly his fame rests, the
 Syriac ritual in all its forms owes much of its strength and richness;
 and to them is largely due the place which Hymnody holds throughout the
 Church everywhere.  And hence it has come to pass that, in the Church
 everywhere, he stands as the representative Syrian Father, as the fixed
 epithet appended to his name attests--"Ephraim the Syrian,"--the one
 Syrian known and reverenced in all Christendom.

 Of the two, it has been usual of late to reckon Aphrahat as the elder.
 Further on, it will be shown in this Dissertation that the reasons for
 so reckoning him are inadequate.  For the present it suffices to note
 that they were contemporaries--both living and writing about the middle
 of the fourth century, and that priority of treatment cannot with
 confidence be claimed for either.  On grounds of convenience,
 therefore, we may properly proceed to deal first with Ephraim, as being
 indisputably far the first in order of importance, of copiousness, and
 of celebrity.

 First Part

 Ephraim the Syrian.

 I.--Summary of the Authenticated Facts of His Life.

 All that is known, on early and trustworthy evidence, of the person and
 life of Ephraim may be briefly summed up.  He was born within the Roman
 pale, in the ancient and famous city of Nisibis in Mesopotamia, in, or
 before, the earliest days of the reign (a.d. 306-337) of Constantine
 the Great:  he was a disciple of St. Jacob, Bishop of that city, who
 died a.d. 338:  and he lived in it, under Jacob and the three Bishops
 who successively followed him, through three unsuccessful sieges laid
 to it by Sapor, King of Persia, down to its final surrender under the
 terms of the ignominious peace concluded with Sapor by the Emperor
 Jovian after the defeat and death of his predecessor Julian (a.d.
 363).  Nisibis was then abandoned by its Christian inhabitants; and
 Ephraim finally settled at Edessa, and took up his abode as a
 "Solitary" in a cell on the "Mount of Edessa"--a rocky hill close to
 the city, where many anchorites sought retreat.  Here he rose into
 repute as a teacher, and a champion against heresy; and no less as an
 ascetic and saint.  The fame of St. Basil, metropolitan of Cæsarea in
 Cappadocia (370-379), drew him from his solitude to visit that great
 prelate and doctor, and from him he received the diaconate; but (though
 some affirm that he was advanced to the priesthood) it is agreed that
 he never became a Bishop.  He died at an advanced age, in his retreat,
 in the year 373 according to most authorities, but some suppose him to
 have lived to 378.  He was a most copious writer, and left an immense
 quantity of writings of which a large part is extant,--Sermons,
 Commentaries, and Hymns.  These constitute such a body of instruction
 in the substance of Scripture and the faith of the church, that they
 have justly earned for him the title of malpono, or teacher.  And not
 only have his Hymns done much to shape the ritual of the Syrian
 Churches, in which large portions of them are embodied, but to his
 Sermons this singular honour is paid, that lessons selected from them
 were appointed, and are still read, in the regular course of public
 worship.

 II.--Materials for His Biography.

 Fuller details, of more or less authentic character, are forthcoming in
 many quarters.  In Syriac, we have two Lives, a longer and a shorter;
 but whether the latter is an abridgment of the former, or is rather the
 nucleus from which the other has been expanded, is questionable.  Of
 both alike, the date and the authorship are undetermined.  The longer
 of the two is entitled, the History [tash itha] of the holy Mar
 Ephraim.  It varies not a little in the two copies of it [the Vatican
 and the Parisian] which have been edited; [249] and contains many
 things that are not easily credible, and some things that are
 irreconcilable with one another, or with established facts.  In the
 main facts, however, this History is borne out by the Greek
 authorities--the narrations of three fifth-century historians,
 Socrates, Sozomen and Theodoret, the brief notices of Jerome, De Viris
 Illustribus (392), and of Palladius, in his Lausiac History (circ. 420)
 ci., and (what is of most weight) the almost contemporary biographical
 particulars contained in the Encomium pronounced on Ephraim by Gregory
 of Nyssa.  Other Greek Lives are extant;--one which bears the name of a
 writer coeval with Gregory, Amphilochius of Iconium, but is certainly
 by a later hand; one anonymous, and one ascribed to Simeon the
 Metaphrast, a writer of the tenth century. [250]

 We proceed to give an outline of the contents of the Syriac History,
 adding to it here and there such further noteworthy details or
 incidents as have reached us from the other sources indicated.  Further
 on, it will be our business to examine this narrative and ascertain how
 far its statements are in themselves credible, or attested by other and
 earlier evidence.

 [249] The former in the Roman edition, Opera Syr., Tom. III, p. xxiii;
 the latter in Lamy's Hymni et Sermones, Tom. II.

 [250] Of these, the one, which is ascribed to Amphilochius, is perhaps
 the basis on which the longer Syriac Life was constructed.

 III.--The Life, as Amplified by Mediaeval Biographers.

 1.  His Early Years.--Ephraim, according to this biography, was a
 Syrian of Mesopotamia, by birth, and by parentage on both sides.  His
 mother was of Amid (now Diarbekr) a central city of that region; his
 father belonged to the older and more famous City of Nisibis, not far
 from Amid but near the Persian frontier, where he was priest of an idol
 named Abnil (or Abizal) in the days of Constantine the Great
 (306-337).  This idol was afterwards destroyed by Jovian (who became
 Emperor in 363 after the extinction of the Flavian dynasty by the death
 of Julian).  In Nisibis, then included within the Roman Empire, Ephraim
 was born.  The date of his birth is not stated, but it cannot have been
 later than the earliest years of Constantine's reign.  Though the son
 of such a father, he was from his childhood preserved, by Divine grace
 which "chose him like Jeremiah from his mother's womb," from all taint
 of idolatrous worship and its attendant impurities, to be, like St.
 Paul, a "chosen vessel" to spread the light of truth and to quench
 heresy.  The biographer records farther on, but without fixing its
 time, an intimation of his future work which Ephraim himself relates in
 his "Testament" as belonging to the days "when his mother carried him
 on her bosom."  He saw in dream or vision a vine springing from his
 mouth, which grew so high as to fill all that was under the heavens,
 and produced clusters whereon the fowls of the air fed, and which
 multiplied the more, the more they were fed on.  These clusters (the
 Testament explains) were his Sermons; the leaves of the vine, his
 Hymns.

 But his entrance into the Christian fold was not to be without
 hindrance and suffering.  His father, finding the youth one day in
 converse with some Christians, was filled with anger, chastised him
 with cruel and almost fatal severity, and repaired to the shrine of his
 god to seek pardon for his son by sacrifice and prayer.  A voice
 issuing from the idol rejected his intercession, warned him that his
 son was destined to be the persecutor of his father's gods, and
 commanded his expulsion from home.  The father obeyed:  the son
 received the sentence with joy, and went out from his father's house,
 carrying nothing with him and not knowing whither he went.  His way was
 divinely directed to the famous and saintly Bishop, Jacob of Nisibis,
 to whom he told his story and by whom he was affectionately welcomed
 and admitted into the number of "Hearers,"--that is, Catechumens in the
 first stage of preparatory instruction.  From the first he showed
 himself a diligent disciple, in fasting and prayer, and in daily
 attendance on the teaching of the Scriptures.  He frequented the
 Bishop's abode, imitated his virtues, attracted his special notice, and
 acquired a high place in his love as well as in that of all the Church.

 A slanderous charge, however, was laid against him in his youthful
 manhood, which, but for supernatural interposition granted to his
 prayer, would have ruined his good name.  A damsel of noble birth had
 been seduced by an official (Paramonarius, i.e., sacristan, or perhaps
 rather, steward) of the church, named likewise Ephraim.  When pregnancy
 ensued and her frailty was detected, she at the instance of her
 paramour charged Ephraim the pious Catechumen as being the author of
 her shame.  Her father laid the matter before the Bishop, who in much
 grief and consternation summoned his disciple to answer the
 accusation.  The youth received it at first in amazed silence; but
 finally made answer, "Yea, I have sinned; but I entreat thy Holiness to
 pardon me."  Even after this seeming acknowledgment of guilt, however,
 the Bishop was unconvinced, and prayed earnestly that the truth might
 be revealed to him:  but in vain,--a more signal clearing was in store
 for the humble and blameless youth.  When the child of shame was born,
 and the father of the frail damsel required him to undertake the charge
 of it, he repeated his seeming confession of guilt to the Bishop; he
 received the infant into his arms:  he openly entered the church
 carrying it; and he besought the congregation with tears, saying,
 "Entreat for me, my brethren, that this sin be pardoned to me."  After
 thus bearing for some days the burden of unmerited reproach, he
 perceived the great scandal caused to the people, and began to reflect
 that his meek acceptance of calumny was doing harm.  On the following
 Sunday, therefore, after the Eucharist had been administered, he
 approached the Bishop in church in presence of the people, carrying the
 infant under his mantle, and obtained his permission to enter the bema
 (not the pulpit, but the raised sanctuary where the altar stood).
 Before the eyes of the astonished congregation, he produced the babe,
 held it up in his right hand, facing the altar, and cried aloud,
 "Child, I call on thee and adjure thee by the living God, who made
 heaven and earth and all that therein is, that thou confess and tell me
 truly, who is thy father?"  The infant opened its mouth and said,
 "Ephraim the paramonarius."  Having thus spoken, it died that same
 hour.  The people and the Bishop received this miraculous vindication
 of the wrongfully accused with amazement and tears; the father of the
 sinful mother fell on his knees and cried for forgiveness; the true
 partner of her sin fled and was seen in Nisibis no more; Satan was
 confounded; and Ephraim was restored to more than all the favour and
 affection he enjoyed before.

 Not long after, the young disciple received a singular proof of the
 high esteem in which he was held by his Bishop.  When summoned with the
 other prelates to the great Council of Nicæa (a.d. 325), Jacob took
 Ephraim with him as his attendant or secretary, and brought him into
 that holy Synod.  It is to be inferred that a youth so chosen must have
 shown early maturity and zeal for the Faith.  His presence on this
 first great battlefield of the Church's war against heresy must have
 given a keen stimulus to his polemic activity, and influenced his
 subsequent life as a student and teacher of theology.

 2.  Siege of Nisibis.--After some years his course of assiduous study,
 obedience, and devout piety, was rudely broken by the alarm of war.
 Soon after the death of Constantine (a.d. 337), Sapor, king of Persia
 was moved to seize the opportunity offered by the removal of the great
 Emperor and the inexperience of his sons, and to attempt the recovery
 of the provinces on the Tigris which had been ceded by Narses his
 predecessor to Diocletian (under the treaty of a.d. 297), so as to push
 his border westward in advance of the line which had for forty years
 defined the eastern limits of the Roman Empire.  To this end it was
 essential that he should obtain possession of Nisibis, [251] the
 strength and situation of that city marking it as a necessary safeguard
 for the frontier he sought to attain; and to it accordingly he laid
 siege in great force.  After seventy days' successful resistance, he
 had recourse to a novel mode of assault by which the city was wellnigh
 overpowered.  The river (Mygdonius [252] ) which flowed through it was
 by his orders embanked and its waters intercepted, and then let loose
 so as to bear with destructive rush against the city wall.  It gave
 way; and Sapor prepared to enter and take possession.  To his dismay he
 found his advance vigorously repelled; he saw the breach filled by a
 fresh wall, manned and equipped with engines of war.  The holy Bishop
 Jacob and the devout Ephraim, by their unceasing prayers within the
 church and their exhortations, had stimulated the garrison and the
 people to accomplish this work with incredible rapidity, and had
 secured the divine blessing on its timely completion.  But a more
 amazing sight than the newly-built wall awaited Sapor.  On the ramparts
 there appeared a Figure in royal apparel of radiant brightness,--the
 Emperor Constantius in outward semblance; though he was known to be far
 off, in Antioch.  Sapor in blind fury assailed this majestic phantom
 with missiles, but soon desisted when he perceived the futility of his
 attack.  His final discomfiture was brought to pass by Ephraim.  Having
 first sought and obtained the Bishop's sanction, he ascended a tower
 whence he could view the besieging host, and there he offered prayer to
 God that He should send on them a plague of gnats and mosquitos, and
 show by what puny agents Divine Power could effectually work the ruin
 of its adversaries.  The prayer was instantly answered by a cloud of
 these insects, tiny but irresistible assailants, descending on the
 Persian host.  Maddened by this plague, the horses flung their riders;
 the elephants broke loose and trampled down the men; the camp was
 thrown into irretrievable confusion; a storm of wind, rain, and thunder
 (adds another chronicler) enhanced the panic; and Sapor was forced to
 raise the siege and retire with ignominy and heavy loss instead of
 success.

 Soon after, the saintly Bishop Jacob died, in the fulness of his
 virtues and his fame; and Ephraim in deep affliction conducted his
 funeral.

 3.  Removal to Edessa.--Our biographer then, passing over the remaining
 years of Constantius, goes on to the accession of Julian (a.d. 361).
 The troubles of the intervening period he assigns to the reign of
 Constans, whom (though he died before his brother Constantius) he
 supposes to have reigned after him and before Julian.  He records the
 persecutions suffered by the Christians under the latter, the judgment
 that overtook him in his defeat and death by the hands of the Persians,
 the succession of Jovian, and the treaty concluded by him with Sapor,
 under which Nisibis was surrendered to Persia and emptied of its
 Christian inhabitants.  Of Ephraim he tells us only that he raised his
 voice against Julian and his persecutions, and remained in Nisibis
 until its surrender, and then retired to a place called Beth-Garbaia,
 [253] where he had been baptized at the age of eighteen and had
 received his first instruction in the Scriptures and in psalmody.
 Persecution having arisen there against the Church, he fled to Amid,
 where he spent a year; and thence proceeded to Edessa (now Urfa), which
 city, as soon as he came in sight of it, he fixed on as his permanent
 and final abode.  As he was about to enter it, an incident occurred
 which nearly all the narratives of his life relate with variations, and
 which the historian Sozomen states to have been recorded in one of the
 writings of Ephraim himself.  Beside the river Daisan which surrounds
 the city, he saw some women washing clothes in its waters.  As he stood
 and watched them, one of them fixed her eyes on him and gazed at him so
 long as to move his anger.  "Woman," he said, "art thou not ashamed?"
 She answered, "It is for thee to look on the ground, for from thence
 thou art; but for me it is to look at thee, for from thee was I
 taken."  He marvelled at the reply and acknowledged the woman's wisdom;
 and left the spot saying to himself, "If the women of this city are so
 wise, how much more exceedingly wise must its men be!"

 Other authorities (including Ephraim's contemporary, Gregory of Nyssa,
 who professes to collect the facts of his Encomium exclusively from
 Ephraim's own written remains) give a somewhat different turn to this
 story.  According to them, Ephraim approached the city, praying and
 expecting to meet at his first entrance there some holy and wise man by
 whose converse he might profit.  The first person whom he encountered
 at the gate was a harlot.  Shocked and bitterly disappointed, he eyed
 her, and was passing on; but when he noticed that she eyed him, in
 turn, he asked the meaning of her bold gaze.  In this version of the
 incident, her answer was, "It is meet and fit that I gaze on thee, for
 from thee, as man, I was taken; but look not thou on me, but rather on
 the ground whence thou wast taken."  Ephraim owned that he had learned
 something of value even from this outcast woman; and praised God, who
 from the mouth of such an unlooked-for teacher, had fulfilled his
 desire for edification.

 Another woman of Edessa is related by some of these authorities to have
 accosted the holy man, expecting that, even if she failed to tempt him
 to unchastity, she might at least move him to the sin, against which he
 strove no less sedulously to guard himself, of anger.  He affected to
 yield to her solicitation; but when she invited him to fix on a place
 of assignation, he proposed that it should be in the open and
 frequented street.  When she objected to such shameless publicity, he
 replied, "If we are ashamed in sight of men, how much more ought we to
 be ashamed in the sight of God, who knows all secret things and will
 bring all to His judgment!"  By this reply the woman was moved to
 repentance and amendment, and gave up her sinful life,--and finally (as
 some add) retired from the world into a convent.

 In Edessa, Ephraim at first earned a humble livelihood in the service
 of a bath-keeper, while giving his free time to the task of making the
 Scriptures known to the heathen who then formed a large part of the
 population of the city.  But before long he was led, by the advice of a
 monk whom he casually met, to join himself to one of the Solitaries (or
 anchorites) who dwelt in the caves of the adjacent "Mount of Edessa" (a
 rocky range of hills, now Nimrud Dagh).  There he passed his time in
 prayer, fasting, and study of the Scriptures.

 But a divine intimation was sent to call him back from his retreat into
 active life in the city.  A vision came to the Solitary under whom
 Ephraim had placed himself.  This man, as he stood at midnight outside
 his cell after prayer and psalmody, saw an angel descending from heaven
 and bearing in his hands a great roll written on both sides, and heard
 him say to them that stood by, "To whom shall I give this volume that
 is in my hands?"  They answered, "To Eugenius [254] the Solitary of the
 desert of Egypt."  Again he asked, "Who is worthy of it?"  They
 answered, "Julian the Solitary."  The Angel rejoined, "None among men
 is this day worthy of it, save Ephraim the Syrian of the Mount of
 Edessa."

 He, to whom this vision came, at first regarded it as a delusion; but
 he soon found reason to accept it as from God.  Visiting Ephraim's
 solitary cell, he found him engaged in writing a commentary on the Book
 of Genesis, and was amazed at the exegetical power shown in the work of
 a writer so untrained.  When this was speedily followed by a Commentary
 on Exodus, the truth of the vision became apparent, and the Solitary
 hastened to the "School" of Edessa and showed the book to "the doctors
 and priests, and chief men of the city."  They were filled with
 admiration, and when they learned that Ephraim of Nisibis was the
 author, and heard of the vision by which his merit was revealed, they
 went at once to seek him out in his retreat.  In his modesty he fled
 from their approach; but a second divine vision constrained him to
 return.  In the valley where he had sought to hide, an Angel met him
 and asked, "Ephraim, wherefore fleest thou?"  He answered, "Lord, that
 I may sit in silence, and escape from the tumult of the world."  "Look
 to it," rejoined the Angel, "that the word be not spoken of thee,
 Ephraim hath fled from me as an heifer whose shoulder hath drawn back
 from the yoke" (Hos. iv. 16, x. 11--quoted loosely).  Ephraim pleaded
 with tears, "Lord, I am weak and unworthy;" but the Angel silenced his
 excuses with the Saviour's words, No man lighteth a candle and putteth
 it under a bushel, but on a candlestick that all may see the light (St.
 Matth. v. 5, St. Luke xi. 33).  Accepting the rebuke, Ephraim returned
 to Edessa, with much prayer for strength from on high, to combat false
 doctrine.  There he was ill received, and taunted as one who had fled
 in hypocritical affectation of reluctance, and was now returning in
 vainglorious quest of applause.  This reproach he met with the meek
 reply, "Pardon me, my brethren, for I am a humble man;" at which they
 cried out the more against him, "Come, see the madman, the fool!"  He
 held his ground notwithstanding, and taught many.

 But this work which his adversaries failed to put down, the over-zeal
 of an admirer brought to a sudden close.  One of the recluses of the
 Mount, having occasion to visit the city, saw him and followed him
 crying, "This is the fan in the Lord's hand, wherewith He wilt purge
 all His floor, and the tares of heresy:  this is the fire whereof our
 Lord said, I am come to send fire on the earth" (St. Matth. iii. 12,
 St. Luke xii. 49).  Hearing this, certain chief men of the city,
 heretics, heathens, and Jews, seized him and drew him outside the
 gates, stoned him and left him wellnigh dead.  Next morning he fled
 back to his cell on the Mount.

 4.  Work as a Teacher.--There, he gave himself to the work of refuting
 with his pen the heresies and misbeliefs of his time, which he had thus
 been hindered by violence from combating in speech.  Disciples gathered
 round him, and a school formed itself under the teacher in his
 retirement.  The names are recorded by our narrator of Zenobius,
 Simeon, Isaac, Asuna, and Julian.  Others add those of Abraham, Abba,
 and Mara.  All these are named with favour in his Testament (a document
 of which we shall treat hereafter) except Isaac; but two others,
 Paulinus and Aurit (or Arnad) are denounced as false to the Faith.

 The biographer introduces into his narrative of this stage of Ephraim's
 life an account of his famous dream of the vine (above referred to),
 which foreshowed his future fertility as a writer, as related in his
 Testament.  It will be given farther on, in his own words.

 Remote and isolated as was his abode, the fame of the illustrious
 Basil, Archbishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, reached him there, and
 moved in him a desire to see and hear so great a divine.  He prayed for
 divine guidance in the matter; and in answer a vision was sent to him.
 Before the Holy Table there seemed to stand a pillar of fire, whereof
 the top reached unto heaven, and a voice from heaven was heard to cry,
 "Such as thou seest this pillar of fire, such is the great Basil."

 5.  Journey to Egypt, and Sojourn There.--Thus encouraged, Ephraim set
 out on his journey, taking with him an interpreter, for he was unable
 to speak Greek.  In the first instance, however (according to the
 History), he made his way, not to Cappadocia, but to a seaport (not
 named by the writer--but probably Alexandretta is meant) where he took
 ship for Egypt.  In the voyage the ship encountered perils, first in a
 storm, and afterwards from a sea-monster, but was delivered from both
 by his faith, which enabled him with words of power and the sign of the
 cross to rebuke the winds and waves into calm, and to slay the
 monster.  Arrived in Egypt, he made his way to the city Antino
 (apparently Antinoë or Antinoopolis), [255] and thence towards the
 famous desert of Scete, in the Nitrian valley--then, and still, the
 place of many monasteries.  Here he found an unoccupied cave, in which,
 as a cell, he and his companion took up their abode for eight years.
 His habits of life in this retreat--and (as it appears) at Edessa--were
 of the most austere.  His food was barley bread, varied only by parched
 corn, pulse, or herbs; his drink, water; his clothing, squalid rags.
 His flesh was dried up like a potsherd, over his bones.  He is
 described as being of short stature, bald, and beardless.  He never
 laughed, but was of sad countenance.  Other authorities, Gregory
 especially, dwell much and with admiration on his profuse and perpetual
 weeping. [256]

 In this Egyptian retreat he is related to have proved himself a
 victorious adversary against the Arians.  On his arrival he had sought
 out and found a monk named Bishoi, to whom, because of his special
 sanctity, he had been divinely directed before he quitted Edessa; and
 with him he had sojourned for a week, communing with him by means of a
 miraculous gift which endowed each with the language of the other.  By
 this gift he was enabled to carry on controversy with Egyptian
 heretics, many of whom he reclaimed to orthodoxy.  Over one of these,
 an aged monk who had been perverted to heresy by the possession of a
 demon, he exercised a further miraculous power for his restoration, by
 casting out the evil spirit and restoring the old man at once to his
 right mind and to the right faith.  This gift of language, and the
 intercourse of Ephraim with Bishoi, are told only in the Vatican form
 of the History, which adds that he not only spoke Egyptian, but wrote
 discourses in that tongue.  The other version of it represents him as
 having learned to speak Egyptian in the ordinary way.  It is to be
 noted that the name of Bishoi (in Greek, Pasoës) is known as that of
 the founder (in the fourth century) of the monastery of Amba Bishoi,
 still occupied by a community of monks, in the Nitrian Desert; and that
 in those sequestered regions the tradition of Ephraim's visit to Bishoi
 was lingering even within the last century and probably still lingers.
 To this subject we shall have occasion to recur, further on. [257]

 6.  Visit to St. Basil of Cæsarea.--This long sojourn ended, he resumed
 his purpose of visiting Basil, and left Egypt for Cæsarea (which our
 narrator evidently supposes to be a maritime city--probably confusing
 it with the Cæsarea which was the metropolis of Palestine). [258] He
 was anxious that his first sight of the great Archbishop should be on
 the Feast of the Epiphany, and he succeeded in so timing his journey as
 to arrive the day before that Feast.  On enquiry, he learned that Basil
 would take his part in its celebration in the great church; and thither
 accordingly on the morrow he and his interpreter repaired.  On the same
 day (adds our historian) was the commemoration of St. Mamas. [259] At
 first, when he saw the great Prelate in gorgeous vestments attended by
 his train of richly-robed clergy, the heart of the humble ascetic
 failed him:  this man so surrounded with state and splendor could not
 be (he thought) the pillar of fire revealed to him in his vision.  But
 when Basil ascended the bema to preach, Ephraim, though he could
 understand little if anything of the orator's eloquence, was speedily
 brought to another mind.  As he listened he saw the Holy Ghost (in the
 form of a dove, says Gregory, as also the Vatican History,--or,
 according to another account, [260] of a tongue of fire), speaking from
 his mouth, (Gregory says, hovering by his ear and inspiring his words);
 and he joined in the applause which each period of the oration drew
 from the audience,--so vehemently that while others were content to
 utter the cry of approval (ahâ) but once, he reiterated it (ahâ, ahâ).
 Basil noticing this sent his Archdeacon to invite the stranger into the
 Sanctuary; but the invitation was modestly declined.  Another version
 of the story places this invitation before the sermon, attributing to
 Basil a spiritual insight which discerned the holy man's presence and
 identified him.  Again the Archdeacon was sent to summon him--this
 time, by name:  "Come, my lord Ephraim, before the bema; the Archbishop
 bids thee."  Amazed to find himself thus discovered, Ephraim yielded,
 and praised God, saying, "Great art Thou in very truth; Basil is the
 pillar of fire; through his mouth speaks the Holy Ghost."  He begged,
 however, to be excused from coming into the Archbishop's presence
 publicly, and asked to be allowed instead to salute him privately in
 the "Treasury," "after the Sacred Oblation."  Accordingly, when "the
 Divine Mysteries" had been completed, the Archbishop's Syncellus
 repeated the invitation, saying, "Draw near, Apostle of Christ, that we
 may enjoy thy presence."  He complied, and in his mean rags, silent,
 and with downcast looks, stood before the magnificent Prelate.  Basil
 rose from his seat, received him with the kiss of brotherhood, then
 bowed his head, and even prostrated himself before the humble monk,
 greeting him as the "Father of the Desert," the foe of unclean spirits;
 and asked the purpose of his journey,--"Art thou come to visit one who
 is a sinner?  The Lord reward thy labor."  He then proceeded to give
 the Holy Eucharist to both the strangers.  In the interchange of speech
 (through the interpreter) that ensued, Basil enquired how it was that
 one who spoke no Greek had followed his discourse with such applause.
 When he heard, in reply, of the visible manifestation of the Holy
 Ghost, he exclaimed, "I would I were Ephraim, to be counted worthy by
 the Lord of such a boon!"  Ephraim then entreated of him a boon; "I
 know, O holy man, that whatsoever thou shalt ask of God, He will give
 it thee:  ask Him, therefore, to enable me to speak Greek."  Basil in
 reply disclaimed such intercessory power, but proposed that they should
 join in prayer for the desired gift, reminding him of the promise, "He
 will fulfil the desire of them that fear Him" (Ps. cxlv. 19).  They
 prayed accordingly for a long space; and when they had ceased, Basil
 enquired, "Why, my Lord Ephraim, receivest thou not the Order of
 Priesthood, which befits thee?"  "Because I am a sinner," answered
 Ephraim (through the interpreter).  "I would thy sins were mine!"
 exclaimed Basil.  He then desired Ephraim to bow his head, laid his
 hand on him and recited over him the Prayer of Ordination to the
 Diaconate, inviting him to respond.  Forthwith, to the amazement of
 all, Ephraim answered in Greek, with the due form, "Save, and lift me
 up, O God."  And thenceforth he was able to speak Greek with ease and
 correctness.  He persisted, however, in declining the higher Order of
 the Priesthood; but his interpreter was admitted both Deacon and Priest
 by Basil before they departed.  Their sojourn lasted about a
 fortnight.  Other writers, however, call Ephraim a Priest; and there is
 a passage where he himself seems to speak of himself, as holding the
 Priesthood (koh' nîyô); [261] but Palladius, Jerome, Sozomen, and
 others of the best-informed writers, confirm our History.  He is in
 fact frequently styled Ephraim the Deacon, as if to emphasize the fact
 that one so high in repute never rose above that lowly rank.

 Traces of Ephraim's influence are to be found in two places of Basil's
 writings.  It can scarcely be doubted that he points to Ephraim when
 (De Spiritu Sancto, xxix. 74), in defending the familiar formula "Glory
 to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost,"--and again (Homil.
 in Hexaêm. ii. 6), in explaining the action of the Spirit on the waters
 (Genesis i. 2)--he appeals to the authority of an unnamed man of great
 knowledge and judgment, "as closely conversant with the knowledge of
 all that is true, as he is far removed from worldly wisdom," a
 "Mesopotamian," a "Syrian."  From him he says he learned--in the former
 instance, that "and" was to be inserted before the name of the Holy
 Ghost as well as before that of the Son;--and, in the latter, that the
 Spirit was not to be conceived as being "carried upon" the waters (as
 the Septuagint represents); but (as the Peshitto more truly represents
 the Hebrew), as "brooding upon" them, to cherish them into life--as a
 bird on her nest.  The verb thus variously rendered is common to the
 Hebrew with the cognate Syriac; and the explanation of it given by
 Basil is in fact found in Ephraim's extant Commentary on the passage of
 Genesis: [262] but he understands the "spirit" to be the wind--not
 (as Basil) the Holy Ghost.

 7.  Return to Edessa.--Ephraim's return to Edessa was hastened by the
 tidings that in his absence no less than nine new heresies had appeared
 there.  His way thither lay through Samosata; and there he fell in with
 a chief man of the city, a heretic, who was passing by with a train of
 attendant youths.  As the holy man sat by the wayside to eat bread,
 these followers mocked him, and one of them wantonly smote him on the
 cheek.  The injury was borne in meek silence; but it was speedily
 avenged on the smiter, by a viper which came out from under a stone
 whereon he sat, and bit him so that he died on the spot.  His master
 and companions hastened after Ephraim, and overlook him as he was
 begging his food in a village beyond the city which he had just passed
 through.  At their entreaty he turned back with them, and by his
 prayers restored the dead youth to life.  The nobleman and his
 followers, seeing this miracle, were converted to the orthodox faith.

 8.  Controversies.--Arrived at Edessa, he engaged at once in the
 conflict against the multiform heresies of the place, old and
 new--Manichean and Marcionite, as well as Arian.  Of all the forms of
 error he encountered, the one that gave him most grief and trouble was
 that which had been originated about the year 200 by a Syrian,
 Bardesan. [263] Of this heresiarch he writes, in one of his Nisibene
 Hymns (the 51st; [264] not included in the following selection):

 1.  I have chanced upon tares, my brethren,

 That wear the color of wheat,

 To choke the good seed;

 Concerning which the husbandmen are commanded,

 Take them not away nor root them out;

 And though the husbandmen heeded not,

 The seed waxed stronger than they,

 Grew and multiplied and covered and choked them.

 2.  I have chanced upon a book of Bardaisan,

 And I was troubled for an hour's space;

 It tainted my pure ears,

 And made them a passage

 For words filled with blasphemy.

 I hastened to purge them

 With the goodly and pure reading

 Of the Scriptures of truth.

 3.  I heard as I read them

 How he blasphemes justice,

 And grace her fellow-worker.

 For if the body be not raised,

 It were foul reproach for grace,

 To have created it unto corruption;

 And it were slander against justice,

 To send it unto destruction.

 4.  This then that I read was grievous

 For soul and for body alike;

 And between these partners it casts

 The severance of despair.

 The body it cuts off from its resurrection,

 And the soul from her comrade,

 And the loss which the serpent threw on us

 Bardaisan counts it for gain.

 The controversy against the disciples of this man gave to the literary
 work of Ephraim an impulse to which his fame is largely due.  His
 polemic in the above instance took, as we see, the form of a hymn; and
 his biographer informs us that it was in this controversy he first was
 led to adopt hymnody as a vehicle for teaching truth and confuting
 error.  Of his hymns we possess some which can be confidently assigned
 to an earlier period--the first twenty-one of the Nisibene collection
 (which are the Nisibene Hymns proper), belonging to the epoch of the
 third siege (a.d. 350); but those are songs of triumph and
 thanksgiving, or of personal eulogy and exhortation,--not of
 controversy.  The idea of the controversial use of hymnody he borrowed
 (we are told) from his adversaries.  It appears that Harmodius, the son
 of Bardesan, had popularized the false teaching of his father, as
 embodied in a series of a hundred and fifty hymns (in profane rivalry
 with the Psalms of David), by setting them to attractive tunes, which
 caught the ear of the multitude, and inclined them to receive his
 doctrines.  So Ephraim himself tells us (attributing the work, however,
 to Bardesan solely) in his Homily (metrical) LIII., "Against Heretics"
 (not included in our selection).  "He fashioned hymns, and joined them
 with tunes; and composed psalms, and brought in moods.  By weights and
 measures, he portioned language.  He blended for the simple poison with
 sweetness.  The sick will not choose the food of wholesomeness.  He
 would look to David, that he might be adorned with his beauty, and
 commended by his likeness.  An hundred and fifty psalms, he likewise
 composed." [265]

 To confute the heresies thus circulated, Ephraim borrowed the tunes
 employed by Harmodius; and his hymns, set to these tunes, soon carried
 the day in favor of orthodoxy, partly by the force of their truth,
 partly by their superior literary power, and partly by the help of a
 choir formed among the nuns whom he employed to sing them, morning and
 evening, in the churches.  Thus the rival hymnody of heresy was
 superseded, and the hymns of Ephraim gained the place they have ever
 since held in the Church, wherever Syriac is the ecclesiastical
 language,--even though it is no longer the vernacular.

 He celebrated this victory in the following strain of triumphant
 imprecation:--

 "Cursed be our trust [if it be] on the Seven; [266] the Æons which
 Bardaisan confesses!

 Anathema [be he] who says, as he said:  that from them descend the rain
 and the dew!

 Anathema who affirms, like him:  that from them are the showers and the
 frosts!

 Cursed be he who says, as he said:  that from them are the snow and the
 ice!

 [Cursed be he who affirms, like him]:  that from them are the seeds for
 the husbandmen!

 Anathema who confesses, as he confessed:  that from them are the fruits
 for the labourer!

 Anathema who believes, like him:  that from them are famine and plenty!

 Anathema who confesses, as he taught:  that from them are summer and
 winter!

 Anathema be on the man:  and on the woman who thus speaks!

 Anathema be on the house:  wherein it is thus affirmed!

 Anathema his doctrine which rests:  its trust on the Sevenfold!

 Cursed be he who reproaches his Creator:  and ascribes dominion to the
 Seven!

 Cursed be he who reads the Scriptures:  and becomes a gainsayer of the
 Scriptures!

 Cursed be he who reads the Prophets:  and breaks the words of the
 Prophets!

 Cursed be he who reads the Apostles:  and abides not by their words!"

 To this is subjoined a verse, the response of Balai (Balæus) a
 disciple:--

 "The Lord exalt thy horn:  O Church that art faithful!

 For the King, and the King's son:  are established in thine ark."

 Another demonstration of Ephraim's zeal against heresy, which the
 compiler of the History judiciously omits, is (unhappily for the fame
 of both) attested, and with evident approval, by Gregory of Nyssa.

 Apollinaris, who was his contemporary, and whose erroneous teaching he
 held in abhorrence, had committed his heresies to writing in two
 volumes which he gave into the keeping of a woman, a follower of his
 sect.  Ephraim approached this woman and persuaded her to lend him the
 books, pretending that he agreed with the doctrine of their author and
 desired to use them in controversy against its opponents.  At her
 instance he returned them in a short time; but before so doing, he
 treated them with fish-glue in such fashion that the leaves of each
 cohered into a solid mass, while to outward appearance they were
 unharmed.  Soon after, he challenged Apollinaris to meet him in a
 public disputation concerning the articles of faith which the heretic
 had impugned.  The latter sought to decline the controversy, pleading
 his old age [267] and infirmities; but consented to it,--only on
 condition, however, that he should be allowed to read from these
 volumes the statement and defence of his tenets therein written by
 him.  On these terms, the disputants met.  Apollinaris was called on to
 maintain his thesis, and his writings were placed in his hands; but
 when he went to open the books, it was in vain.  No part of either
 volume would yield to his fingers; he was obliged to desist and to
 retire, baffled and ashamed; in such dismay as to bring on an illness
 that nearly proved fatal.

 Another incident of this period, related in the History, is a miracle
 (a genuine one this time, if true) wrought by Ephraim on a paralytic.
 Seeing him as he sat and begged at the door of a church in Edessa, the
 holy man asked him:  "Wilt thou be made whole?"  "Yea, my Lord; lay thy
 hand on me," was the reply.  With the words, "In the Name of Christ,
 arise and walk," he was cured instantly; and departed, glorifying God.

 At the end of four years, messengers came to him from Basil, summoning
 him to come and receive consecration to the Episcopate, for some see
 unnamed (to which, as Sozomen relates, he had been elected;--Hist.
 Eccles. II. 16).  When he learned their errand, he feigned madness,
 going to and fro in the streets in unseemly fashion, in motley garb,
 eating bread as he went and letting his spittle run down.  Thus he
 succeeded in evading the undesired elevation:  the messengers, shocked
 at his behaviour, returned without him, and reported that they found
 him a madman.  "O hidden pearl of price" (cried Basil) "whom the world
 knows not!  Ye are the madmen, and he the sane."

 The city and the Mount of Edessa suffered in these days from an
 invasion of the Huns, who plundered, murdered, and ravished, without
 mercy,--not even sparing the cells and convents.  This calamity Ephraim
 is said to have recorded, in writings which have not reached us.

 9.  Persecution by Valens.--From another peril the Edessenes were saved
 by their faith and constancy.  In the days of their Bishop Barses
 (361-378), the Arian Emperor Valens (364-378), in the course of his
 persecution of the orthodox, approached the city and summoned the
 inhabitants to wait upon him in his camp and hear his pleasure there.
 They disregarded the command, and gathered into the great Church of St.
 Thomas, [268] where they and their Bishop continued unceasingly in
 prayer.  The historian Socrates, a trustworthy and early (fifth
 century) authority, confirms our History here; and explains that Valens
 had ordered their Church to be surrendered to the Arians, and was
 enraged against them for resisting his decree, and against his Prefect
 Modestus for failing to carry it out.  Valens then, finding them
 contumacious, ordered one of his generals (this same Modestus,
 according to Sozomen, who also relates the story) to enter the city and
 put the people to the sword.  As Modestus, who was a humane man, sought
 to persuade them to yield, he met a woman leading her two sons to the
 Church.  He strove to stop her, warning her of the danger she incurred;
 but her reply was, "I hear that they who fear God are to be slain, and
 I am in haste to win the crown with the rest."  "But what of these
 boys?" he asked.  "Are they thy sons?"  "They are," she answered, "and
 we pray, both I and they, that we may be made an oblation to the
 Lord."  Amazed at her resolve, he reported the matter to Valens, to
 convince him that the Edessenes were prepared to die rather than
 submit.  The Emperor was moved to relent; the people and their Bishop
 and priests came forth; he heard their plea, was ashamed of his cruel
 purpose, pardoned their disobedience, and departed.  This well-attested
 incident is to be assigned to 371, or to the preceding or ensuing year.
 [269]

 This victory of faith was celebrated by Ephraim in the following
 verses:--

 "The doors of her homes Edessa

 Left open when she went forth

 With the pastor to the grave, to die,

 And not depart from her faith.

 Let the city and fort and building

 And houses be yielded to the king;

 Our goods and our gold let us leave;

 So we part not from our faith!

 Edessa is full of chastity,

 Full of prudence and understanding.

 She is clad in discernment of soul;

 Faith is the girdle of her loins;

 Truth her armour all-prevailing;

 Love her crown, all-exalting.

 Christ bless them that dwell in her,

 Edessa, whose name is His glory,

 And the name of her champion her beauty!

 City that is lady over her fellows,

 City that is the shadow

 Of the Jerusalem in heaven!"

 After all was thus restored to peace and orthodoxy, Ephraim withdrew to
 his retreat on the Mount, which he is not recorded to have again
 quitted, save on one occasion, to be presently related.

 10.  Penitent sent to Ephraim by Basil:  Basil's Death.--The death of
 Basil (at the end of 378) is said by our author to have caused great
 grief to Ephraim, and to have been lamented by him in hymns.  But (as
 will be shown below) this is hardly possible, even if the latest date
 for Ephraim's death be accepted.

 Another miraculous incident connected with Ephraim's biography, belongs
 to the year of Basil's death.  A woman of high rank, but of evil life,
 in Cæsarea, being moved to penitence, wrote on a paper a full
 confession of her sins, and gave it to Basil, who at her entreaty laid
 it with prayer before the Lord.  Her repentance and his intercession
 prevailed so far, that the record of all her guilt disappeared from the
 paper, save of one sin, more heinous than the rest.  Disappointed thus
 of her hope of full pardon, she had recourse again to Basil,
 supplicating that this sin too might be wiped out.  He encouraged her
 to persevere in prayer, and advised her to repair to the Mount of
 Edessa, to Ephraim, and through him obtain her desire.  To Ephraim
 accordingly she made her way, and cried to him, saying, "Have pity on
 me, thou holy one of God."  When he heard Basil's advice and her
 petition, he disavowed all such power to prevail with God as Basil had
 ascribed to him, and advised her rather to hasten back and obtain her
 Archbishop's farther intercession.  She returned accordingly to
 Cæsarea; but, as it seemed, too late:  Basil had died before her
 arrival, and she met his corpse as it was carried to burial.  In
 despair, she prostrated herself in the dust, proclaimed her story to
 all that stood by, and upbraided the dead saint, "Woe is me, servant of
 God! why didst thou send me far away that I should return too late and
 meet thee borne to the grave!  The Lord judge betwixt me and thee, who
 hast sent me to another, when thyself couldst have absolved me!"  One
 of the attendant clergy, desiring to learn what was the sin for which
 pardon was so hard to win, took from her the paper she held, and
 opening found it blank.  The last and deadliest of her list had
 vanished like the rest:  and "thus, by the prayers of Basil and of
 Ephraim, and by the woman's faith and perseverance, her sins were all
 of them blotted out."

 After this occurrence, the History places the following narrative of
 Ephraim's last intervention in earthly concerns.  It is related
 likewise by Palladius (Ephraim's younger contemporary) and by Sozomen.

 11.  Exertions in Relief of Famine.--In a season of severe famine, he
 ascertained that grain was being hoarded in the stores of certain
 persons who gave nothing to the starving poor.  When he rebuked their
 inhumanity, they excused themselves on the plea that none was to be
 found of such probity as to guarantee fairness and honesty in the
 distribution of relief.  Ephraim at once offered his services, and was
 accepted as their agent throughout the famine season, to dispense large
 sums as the treasurer and steward of their bounty.  Among other things,
 he provided three hundred letters, partly for removing the sick to
 stations where they were duly tended, partly for carrying the dead for
 interment.  A body of helpers worked with him in administering relief,
 and their care extended not merely through the city, but to the country
 and villages adjacent.  The year of dearth ended, a year of plenty
 ensued; Ephraim retired to his cell,--this time to leave it no more.
 He died a month after the close of the charitable labours.  Of them his
 biographer, following for once the better instinct which recognizes
 higher worth in services of love than in ascetic practices or in
 miraculous pretensions, writes thus:--"God gave him this occasion that
 therein he might win the crown in the close of his life."

 12.  His Testament.--In his Testament, which professes to have been
 composed in immediate anticipation of his end, he laid on his disciples
 a solemn charge that his body should be buried humbly, covered with no
 garment save his tunic (cothênô).  Gregory of Nyssa adds that a rich
 friend who, though informed of his prohibition, had provided beforehand
 for this purpose a costly robe, was punished by the possession of an
 evil spirit, which tormented him until, on his confession, the dying
 saint relieved him, casting out the demon by prayer and laying on of
 hands.

 From the extant Syriac of this document [270] (which is metrical), the
 following have been selected as the most striking verses:

 "I Ephraim am at point to die:  and I write my testament;

 That I may leave for all men a memorial:  of whatsoever is mine,

 That though it be [but] for my words:  they that know me may remember
 me.

 Woe is me, for my times are ended:  and the length of my years is
 fulfilled;

 The spinning for me is shortened:  the thread is nigh unto cutting;

 The oil fails in the lamp:  my days are spent, yea, mine hours;

 The hireling has finished his year:  and the sojourner has fulfilled
 his season.

 Around me are the summoners:  on this side and that are they that lead
 me away.

 I cry aloud, [but] none hears me:  and I complain, [but] none delivers.

 "Woe to thee, Ephraim, for the judgment: when thou shalt stand before
 the Son's judgment-seat,

 And around thee they that know thee:  on the right hand and the left,

 Lo! there shalt thou be confounded:  woe to him who is put to shame
 there!

 Jesu, do Thou judge Ephraim:  nor give his judgment to another;

 For whoso has God for his Judge:  he finds mercy in judgment;

 For I have heard from the wise:  yea, I have heard from men of
 knowledge,

 That whoso sees the face of the King:  though he has offended, he shall
 not die.

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 "By him who came down on Mount Sinai:  and by him who spake on the
 rock,

 By that Mouth which spake the "Eli": [271] and made the bowels of
 creation tremble,

 By him who was sold in Judah:  and by him who was scourged in
 Jerusalem,

 By the Might which was smitten on the cheek:  and by the Glory which
 endured spitting,

 By the threefold Names of fire:  and by the one Assent and will,

 I have not rebelled against the Church:  nor against the might of God.

 If in my thought I have magnified the Father:  above the Son, let Him
 have no mercy on me!

 And if I have accounted the Holy Spirit less:  than God, let mine eyes
 be darkened!

 If as I have said, I confessed not:  let me go into outer darkness!

 And if I speak in hypocrisy:  let me burn with the wicked in fire!

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 "I adjure you my disciples:  with adjurations that may not be loosed,

 That my words be not set aside:  that ye loose not my commandments.

 Whoso lays me beneath the altar:  he shall not see the Altar of heaven;

 For it is not meet that foul stench:  should be laid in the Holy Place;

 Whoso has laid me within the temple:  he shall not see the temple of
 the Kingdom.

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 "Take nought from me as memorial: [272] my beloved, my brothers, my
 sons,

 For as much as ye have a memorial:  that which ye have heard of Jesus.

 For if ye take aught from Ephraim:  into reproach will Ephraim come;

 For He, my Lord, will say unto me:  More than in Me they have trusted
 in thee,

 For if they had relied on Me:  they had not sought a memorial from
 thee.'

 "Lay me not with the martyrs:  for I am a sinner and unworthy,

 And because of my unworthiness I fear:  to be brought beside their
 bones;

 For if stubble comes near to fire:  it will scorch it, yea, devour it.

 It is not that I hate their neigbourhood:  because of mine
 unworthiness, I fear it.

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 "Whoso carries me on his fingers:  may his hands be leprous as Gehazi!

 On your shoulders carry me:  and in haste conduct me [to the grave],

 And as a mean man bury me:  for I have worn out my days in sadness.

 Why glorify ye me, O men:  who before our Lord am ashamed?

 And why give ye me [the name of] Blessed':  who am disclosed in my
 works?

 Should one show you my transgressions:  ye would all of you spit in my
 face.

 For if the stench of the sinner:  could strike one that stood by him,

 Ye would all of you flee away:  from the loathsome stench of Ephraim.

 "Whoso lays with me a pall:  may he go forth into outer darkness!

 And whoso has laid with me a shroud:  may he be cast into Gehenna of
 fire!

 In my coat and cowl shall ye bury me:  for ornament beseems not the
 hateful,

 Nor does praise profit the dead:  who is laid and cast into the tomb.

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 "Arise, my brethren of Edessa:  my lords and my sons and my fathers!

 Bring whatsoever ye have vowed:  to lay along with your brother,

 Bring and set it before me:  whatsoever ye my brethren have vowed.

 While I have yet a little memory:  let me set on it a price;

 And let there be bought pure vessels:  and let there be hired workmen
 therewith,

 And distribution be made among the poor:  the needy and them that are
 in want.

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 "Blessed is the city wherein ye dwell:  Edessa, mother of the wise,

 Which from the living mouth of the Son:  was blessed by His Disciple.
 [273]

 This blessing shall abide in her:  until the Holy One shall be
 revealed.

 "Whoso withholds from me aught that he has vowed:  shall die the death
 of Ananias,

 Who sought to deceive the Apostles:  and was stretched [dead] before
 their feet.

 "Whoso carries before me a taper:  may his fire be kindled beside him!

 For to what end avails fire:  for him whose fire is from himself?

 For when the visible fire is kindled:  in it is consumed the secret
 fire.

 Sufficient for me is the pain without:  add ye not to me that which is
 within.

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 "Lay me not with sweet spices:  for this honour avails me not;

 Nor yet incense and perfumes:  for the honour benefits me not.

 Burn sweet spices in the Holy Place:  and me, even me, conduct to the
 grave with prayer.

 Give ye incense to God:  and over me send up hymns.

 Instead of perfumes of spices:  in prayer make remembrance of me.

 What can goodly odour profit:  to the dead who cannot perceive it?

 Bring them in and burn them in the Holy Place:  that they which enter
 in may smell the savour.

 Wrap thou not the fetid dung:  in silk that profits it not.

 Cast it down upon the dunghill:  for it cannot perceive honour [done to
 it].

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 "Lay me not in your sepulchres:  for your magnificence profits me not;

 For I have a covenant with God:  that I shall be buried with strangers.

 I am a stranger, as they were:  with them, O my brethren, lay me!

 For every bird loves its kind:  and man loves him that is like himself.

 In the cemetery lay me:  where are the broken of heart,

 That when the Son of God comes:  He may embrace me [274] and raise me
 among them."

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 [After blessing by name the five faithful disciples above mentioned
 (page 126), he leaves an anathema on the two, Paulinus and Urit, who
 had erred from the faith; and against]

 "Arians and Anomoeans:  Cathari and those of the Serpent, [275]

 Marcionites and Manichoeans:  Bardesanites and Kukites,

 Paulites and Vitalianites:  Sabbatarians and Borborites,

 With all the other doctrines:  of superstitious that are unseemly."

 * * * * *
 * * * * * *

 [The dying Saint recalls in the following lines the vision of his
 childhood, and praises God for its fulfilment.]

 "I swear by your lives I lie not:  in this thing that I tell.

 For when I was a little child:  and lay in my mother's bosom,

 I saw (I was as in a dream):  a thing which has come to pass in truth.

 There grew a vine-shoot on my tongue:  and increased and reached unto
 heaven,

 And it yielded fruit without measure:  leaves likewise without number.

 It spread, it stretched wide, it bore fruit:  all creation drew near,

 And the more they were that gathered:  the more its clusters abounded.

 These clusters were the Homilies; and these leaves the Hymns.

 God was the giver of them:  glory to Him for His grace!

 For He gave to me of His good pleasure:  from the storehouse of His
 treasures."

 This farewell strain has no doubt suffered interpolation, but the main
 part of what is above translated is confirmed as genuine by the
 references to it of Gregory, who had undoubtedly read it in a Greek
 version. [276] As it has reached us, it ends with a narrative, which
 at most can only claim to be an appendix added by a disciple, of the
 lamentations uttered at his deathbed by a maiden named Lamprotate,
 daughter of a man of rank in Edessa, who entreated permission to make a
 tomb for him and another at his feet for herself.  The narrative
 concludes with his consent to this petition, his parting commands to
 her, and her promise of obedience.

 His body was followed to the grave by all the people of the city and
 neighborhood, and by the Bishops, priests, and deacons of the province,
 with the monks, whether "anchorites, stylites, or
 coenobites"--solitary, or living in communities.  It was laid (as he
 had desired) in the strangers' burial-ground; but not long after, the
 citizens removed it thence, and made a grave for him, deacon as he was,
 among those of their Bishops,--probably in the monastery (now belonging
 to the Armenians) of St. Sergius on the Mount of Edessa, where his tomb
 is shown to this day, as we learn from the Reise in Syr. u Mesopot. of
 Dr. Sachau (p. 202).

 13.  Death and Burial.--His death occurred in Haziran (June), on the
 15th according to our History (Vat.), but other authorities differ,
 assigning it to the 9th, 18th, or 19th.  The shorter Syriac Life gives
 the year as 372,--thus contradicting the History which represents him
 as living in the year of Basil's death (378).

 Even in the time of Gregory of Nyssa, an annual commemoration of
 Ephraim had become customary in the Church, which gave occasion for the
 Encomium above referred to.  In the East, it was held on the 28th of
 January; but in the Roman Martyrology his name is recorded on the 1st
 of February.

 [251] The strong and ancient city...which, since the time of Lucullus
 had been deservedly esteemed the bulwark of the East.  Gibbon, Decline
 and Fall, ch. xviii.

 [252] Now called Jaghjagh,--an affluent of the Khabur (Chaboras) which
 joins the Euphrates at Circesium.

 [253] Not elsewhere named:  perhaps we ought to read Beth-Garme; for
 which see B. O. II., De Monophysitis, s.v.

 [254] So the Paris text:  the Vatican has "Origen."  The person meant
 is probably the Eugenius who came from Egypt with 70 disciples to
 Nisibis, to introduce the ascetic life into that region, and lived
 there from the time of the consecration of St. Jacob till the surrender
 in 363.  His life is related in the inedited ms. Ad'd. 12174 (Lives of
 Saints), of the British Museum.

 [255] This city lay quite out of the region of the Nitrian
 monasteries.  Possibly in the original form of this biography, the
 "Enaton" (i.e. the Ninth District) of Alexandria was named as the place
 of Ephraim's sojourn and subsequent transcribers changed the word into
 Antino.

 [256] As represented by Gregory Ephraim was a very Democritus among
 saints: "As with all men to breathe is a natural function unceasing in
 exercise, so with Ephraim was it to weep.  There was no day, no night,
 no hour, no moment however brief, in which his eyes were not wakeful
 and filled with tears, while he bewailed the faults and follies, now of
 his own life, now of mankind.  By groans he made a channel for the
 streams of his eyes or rather, by the outflow of the eyes he looked his
 groans....There was no interval of time between them, groans succeeding
 to tears and they again to groans, as in a sort of circle; so that it
 was impossible to distinguish which made the beginning and which was
 the cause of the other.  Any one who makes acquaintance with his
 writings will perceive this characteristic; for he will be found
 lamenting not only in his treatises on penitence, or morals, or right
 conduct, but even in his panegyrics, in which it is the habit of most
 writers to show an aspect of rejoicing.  But he was every where the
 same, and abounded perpetually in this gift of compunction."

 [257] For this monastery, see below, p. 143, note 1.  For the history
 of Pesoës, see Palladius, Hist. Lausiaca, XV.

 [258] Cæsarea, the see of Basil, lay far from the sea, in the heart of
 the inland province of Cappadocia.  The Cæsarea of the Acts of the
 Apostles (Stratonis), the metropolis of Palestine was a seaport.

 [259] The feast of St. Mamas (a Cappadocian martyr) falls in August,
 not in January.  A sermon of St. Basil for that feast is extant (Hom.
 XXIII.).  Probably the author of this History knew that sermon, and was
 thus led to mention the commemoration here, carelessly disregarding the
 time of year.

 [260] To the pseudo-Amphilochius.

 [261] Paroenesisxxvi. 11 (Opera Syr.), Tom. III. p. 467.  The word,
 however, is perhaps not to be taken literally.

 [262] Opera Syriaca, Tom. I., p. 8.

 [263] In Syriac, Bardaisan (son of Daisan), so called from his
 birthplace beside the river above mentioned.

 [264] See Bickell, Carmina Nisibena, p. 101.

 [265] Opera Syriaca, Tom. II., p. 554, see also Homily I.

 [266] The Seven Æons (or Beings) of Bardesan's heresy; see Opp. Syr.
 II., p. 550.

 [267] The heretic Apollinaris seems to have been a younger man than
 Ephraim, whom he survived by some years.  Possibly his father, the
 elder Apollinaris, is here intended.  But he is not recorded as having
 taught heresy.

 [268] To this church were translated the bones of St. Thomas the
 Apostle, from his burial place in India, in the time of Eulogius the
 successor of Barses (378-387),--as we learn from Barhebræus, Chronicon
 Eccles. I. 21 (p. 65 of Abbeloos and Lamy's edition).  But the above
 narrative, as confirmed by Socrates (IV. 18), shows that it had been
 built and was held in special reverence before that.  It is the church
 at which our History places the healing of the paralytic (above).
 Sozomen's account (VI. 17) in the main agrees; also Theodoret's (IV.
 17).

 [269] Baronius, Annales, IV. p. 308.  The Vatican Life reads Julian for
 Valens in this narrative, thus introducing inexplicable perplexity into
 the chronology.  Julian died before Ephraim became a resident of
 Edessa.

 [270] Printed in Overbeck's Ephræmi S. Opera Selecta, p. 137; also in
 the (Roman) Opera Græca, at the end of Tom. II., p. 395.

 [271] St. Matth. xxvii. 46.

 [272] i.e., as a relic.

 [273] The allusion is to the legend that Abgar, King of Edessa, hearing
 the fame of the Lord Jesus, sent a letter inviting him to his city, and
 received in reply a letter from Him conveying His blessing, and a
 promise to send a disciple to teach him and his people.  This promise
 was afterwards fulfilled by the mission of Thaddeus (Addae) to Edessa.
 (Eusebius, Hist. Eccles. I. 13.)

 [274] The Greek version has "may heal."  The Syriac may be brought to
 agree with this, by changing t into r in the verb used.

 [275] The sect of Ophites.

 [276] The Greek version that has reached us is paraphrastic, and
 interpolated; but on the whole represents the original with no great
 divergence.  See Opera Græca, Tom. II., p. 230; Ephraim Syr. Græce, p.
 365 (Oxford edition).

 IV.--Recapitulation of Authentic Facts of Life.

 The Life, whence the above narrative is mainly derived, though
 evidently put into its present form by compilers many generations later
 than the time of Ephraim, is in its leading outlines to be accepted as
 historically trustworthy, though it has no doubt been largely amplified
 by the incorporation of exaggerated or fictitious details.  Of its
 essential points, not a few are confirmed by his own writings; and many
 more (as has been said above, p. 121), by evidence of hardly later
 date,--especially by the Encomium of Gregory of Nyssa (d. 395), who
 assures us that he derives his account from Ephraim's written
 statements and from no other source. [277] This Father, as being
 brother of Basil with whom Ephraim was so closely associated in his
 later life, may well have known personally the man of whom he wrote,
 and was at least in a position to collect and verify with
 discrimination the facts of his life.  Further, the general historical
 framework of the biography is sufficiently attested as correct by the
 contemporary secular historians, non-Christian as well as
 Christian--notably (as will appear farther on), as regards the siege of
 Nisibis, by one whom Ephraim most abhorred, the Emperor Julian.

 It may be briefly affirmed that the external independent evidence
 covers all the facts included in the summary given above (pp. 120,
 121), at the opening of this Section.  It extends farther to many
 incidents related in the Life,--such as the attempt of Sapor to take
 Nisibis by turning the river against its walls, Ephraim's encounter
 with the woman who met him as he entered Edessa and her retort to his
 rebuke, his borrowing the music of the heretic in order to popularize
 the orthodox teaching of his own hymns, the call to the Episcopate and
 his evasion of it, the constancy of the faith of the Edessenes when
 threatened by the persecutor Valens, the famine and the work of relief
 organized by Ephraim in the last year of his life; also to a few of the
 details which belong to or verge on the supernatural,--the dream of the
 vine-shoot which foreshadowed his literary fertility, the vision of the
 Angel with the book who appeared to his brother-anchorite, and that of
 the dove, which he himself seemed to see, inspiring the discourses of
 Basil.  In these facts, greater and smaller taken together, we have
 sufficient data for the derivation of the main outlines of his life and
 the leading features of his character.

 [277] There is no ground for supposing that Gregory could read Syriac.
 It follows therefore that some of Ephraim's writings must have been at
 a very early date translated into Greek; and that one of these was the
 Testament which Gregory refers to no less than five times in the
 Encomium.

 V.--Historical Criticism of Mediæval Amplifications.

 But along with the genuine and trustworthy matter, the compiler has
 embodied much that is unattested and in many cases inherently
 improbable, and even some things that are demonstrably untrue.

 i.  The Miraculous Details.--To the category of the improbable--the
 fiction of hagiology or the growth of myth--belong the miracles so
 freely ascribed to Ephraim and the miraculous events represented as
 attending on his career.  It is noteworthy that Ephraim himself, though
 no doubt he believed that he was the recipient of Divine intimations in
 dream or vision, never lays claim to supernatural powers.  Nor does
 Gregory in the Encomium attribute to him any such--except in the case
 of the rich friend who for his mistaken zeal was given over to an evil
 spirit; and on his repentance relieved through Ephraim's intercession.
 [278] The voice that issued from his father's idol foretelling his
 future war against idolatry--the answer of the new-born babe that
 cleared him from calumny--the crowned phantom on the walls of Nisibis
 that scared the besiegers--the plague of insects that drove them into
 disastrous flight--the Angel sent to call him back to Edessa when he
 had fled thence--the storm hushed and the sea-monster slain by his word
 on the voyage to Egypt--the monk whom he delivered at once from
 demoniacal possession and from heresy--the sudden gift of tongues which
 enabled him to speak Coptic with Bishoi and Greek with Basil--the
 restoration to life of the youth who had died of a viper's bite at
 Samosata--the paralytic healed at the church door in Edessa--the
 disappearance of the record of guilt from the scroll on which the
 penitent of Cæsarea had written her confession--all these belong to the
 later growth of legend that springs up naturally over the tomb of a
 saint.  Some of them may be safely set aside as purely fictitious;
 others are probably due to metaphoric expressions mistaken for literal
 assertions, or to rhetorical amplification throwing a false coloring of
 the supernatural over ordinary events.  Most of them, moreover, bear
 evident signs of having been dressed by the compiler into spurious
 resemblance to the miraculous narrations in the Old and New Testaments,
 of the Divine dealings with Prophets and Apostles,--Elisha, Jonah, St.
 Peter, St. Paul, or even of the works of power which attested the
 mission of our Lord Himself on earth.  In reading these, one cannot
 fail to feel painfully--though the narrator seems quite unconscious
 of--the irreverence of the travesty.  It is noteworthy that some, even
 of the non-miraculous incidents of the Life appear to have been
 similarly handled.  Thus the account of the stoning of Ephraim outside
 of Edessa seems modelled after that of St. Paul at Lystra, (Acts xiv.
 19, 20):  and the simulated madness by which he evaded the call of the
 Episcopate is apparently borrowed from the history of David's behavior
 before Achish and his servants at Gath (1 Sam. xxi. 13-15).

 ii.  The Demonstrably Incorrect or Contradictory Statements.--Farther,
 even when we have laid aside all that is seemingly exaggerated,
 invented or mythical in the Life, there remains much in it that, when
 critically examined, proves to need correction or to deserve
 rejection.  We proceed to deal with some questions which arise
 affecting the historical credibility of its narrative.

 1.  Ephraim's Alleged Heathen Parentage.--The heathen parentage
 assigned to Ephraim, and consequently the whole narrative of his
 conversion to Christianity and his consequent troubles, may be without
 hesitation discredited.  They are irreconcilable with his own words
 [279] (Adv. Hæreses, XXVI.), "I was born in the way of truth:  though
 my boyhood understood not the greatness of the benefit, I knew it when
 trial came."  So again more explicitly (if we may trust a Confession
 which is extant only in Greek), "I had been early taught about Christ
 by my parents; they who begat me after the flesh, had trained me in the
 fear of the Lord....My parents were confessors before the judge:  yea,
 I am the kindred of martyrs."

 2.  The First and Third Sieges of Nisibis.--In the narrative of the
 siege of Nisibis, and especially of the presence and intercession of
 St. Jacob the Bishop, there is confusion and grave error.  It is
 certain that in the reign of Constantius (337-361), Nisibis was three
 times besieged by Sapor. [280] The siege in which St. Jacob was
 within the city took place in the year 338, and he died the same year.
 The attempt of Sapor to employ the intercepted waters of the Mygdonius
 for the destruction of its walls, belongs to a later siege--the third,
 of the year 350--twelve years after the death of Jacob.  These two
 sieges are expressly recorded in the "Paschal (otherwise Alexandrine
 Chronicle)," followed by Theophanes in his Chronographia (who also
 mentions briefly the intervening siege of 346); and the account given
 by the former of these chroniclers (who wrote in the seventh century)
 rests on the authority of an Epistle written by Valgesh, Bishop of
 Nisibis in 350, who is eulogized by Ephraim in five of the Nisibene
 Hymns contained in the present volume (XIII-XVII.).  Other contemporary
 evidence, fuller, and at first hand, to the same effect, is forthcoming
 from two widely different sources.--As already intimated, the Apostate
 is here alone with the champion of the Faith.

 In his second Oration [281] (addressed, probably in the year 358, to
 Constantius, then Emperor) Julian describes the siege with even more
 circumstantial detail than our biographer, placing it after the death
 of Constans, which took place in January 350, and thus confirming the
 date assigned by the Paschal chronicler and by Theophanes.  According
 to Julian's account, the embankment formed by Sapor, the work of four
 months, [282] was so constructed as to encompass the whole circuit of
 Nisibis, so that the river intercepted by it "formed a lake in the
 middle of which the city stood as an island," with "the battlements of
 its walls barely appearing above the surrounding waters"; and on the
 surface of this encircling lake, he launched armed vessels and floating
 war-engines.  By these the fortifications were ceaselessly battered for
 several days,--till of a sudden the river (then in flood) burst its
 barrier, and carried away not only the embankment but a hundred cubits
 of the city wall.  Through the breach thus made, Sapor pushed forward
 his cavalry to lead the advance upon the city which lay thus seemingly
 at his mercy.  But they proved unable to overcome the difficulties of
 the intervening ground--torn up and flooded as it was by the torrent,
 and traversed moreover by an ancient moat--while the Nisibenes in the
 energy inspired by their deadly peril, showered missiles upon their
 assailants as they strove to struggle onward.  The Persian next sent on
 his elephants; but their unwieldly bulk served only to enhance the
 panic and confusion, and to complete the disaster of his repulse.  And
 when, the next morning, he prepared to renew the assault, he found
 himself confronted by a new wall, hurriedly raised in the night, to
 fill the gap in the ramparts, reaching already the height of six feet
 and manned by fresh and well-armed defenders.  Despairing of success
 against a resistance so obstinate, he raised the siege on which he had
 in vain expended so much time, labour, treasure, and blood, and retired
 ignominiously.

 It is needless to add that of the miraculous incidents of the siege as
 related in the Life, no trace appears in Julian's account.  The only
 Providence he discerns in the successful defence of Nisibis, is that
 which he attributes to his imperial kinsman to whom his fulsome oratory
 is addressed.

 Of the leading facts, as related by Julian, ample corroboration will be
 found in the first three of the Nisibene Hymns above referred to.  In
 the first, Ephraim makes Nisibis herself tell the tale of her peril:
 she compares herself to the Ark of the Flood, compassed, not like it by
 waters merely, but by "mounds and weapons and waves" (I., 3); but (ib.,
 6, 8) the wall had not yet given way, for he still speaks of it as
 standing, and prays that it may continue to stand.  This Hymn was
 therefore written while the siege was still in progress.  In the second
 Hymn he celebrates her deliverance and the manner of it,--the very
 breach of her walls turned into triumph (II. 5, 7) by their
 reconstruction and the assault of the besiegers with their elephants
 (ib., 17, 18, 19), repulsed in disgrace, ending in immediate retreat.
 [283] In the third Hymn, he follows on similar lines; and adds a
 point, significant in his apprehension, that whereas the wall fell on
 the Sabbath, it was raised again on the Lord's day, the Day of the
 Resurrection (III. 6).  In all three Hymns, it is again and again
 implied or asserted that this was the third siege of Nisibis (I. 11;
 II. 5, 19; III. 11, 12)--and farther (as it seems) the third time that
 a breach had been effected in her walls (I. 11; II. 19).  In later
 Hymns also (XI. 14, 15; XIII. 17) the embanked river, bursting forth
 and breaking down the defences of the city, more than once appears.
 From one of these we learn incidentally that the Mygdonius flowed past,
 not through, Nisibis (XIII. 18, 19); [284] from which fact it follows
 that the description in the Life, of the manner in which the Persian
 engineers employed the river waters against the walls, is to be set
 aside in so far as it differs from Julian's account as confirmed by the
 Hymns.

 It is remarkable how closely these two accounts, both contemporary with
 the facts they treat of, agree in all essential points, though coming
 to us from sources not only independent, but even adverse, inter
 se,--and in forms so little favourable to exactness of statement as
 thanksgiving Hymns and encomiastic Orations.  When from Ephraim's
 strophes we omit his pious ascriptions of praise to God, and from
 Julian's periods, the fulsomeness of his panegyric on the Emperor, the
 residuum of material fact is in either case much the same; the main
 outlines of narrative (related or implied) are identical in both
 writers, each unconsciously attests the truthfulness of the other.
 Both are farther confirmed in great measure by the account of this
 siege embodied in the Pascha Chronicle above referred to, which (as
 already stated) rests on information drawn from a written record left
 by Valgesh who was Bishop of Nisibis at the time, and to whose prayers
 Ephraim (Hymn XIII. 17) [285] attributed the speedy restoration of the
 breach in the city wall.

 In confusing this siege (of 350, in the time of Valgesh), with the
 previous one (of 338, in the time of Jacob), our biographer, with most
 subsequent writers down to the eighteenth century, has been misled by
 following Theodoret's narration in his Ecclesiastical History (II. 30).
 [286] The account of the siege given in the Life is in fact a mere
 reproduction, somewhat abridged, and slightly varied, of Theodoret's,
 from which it derives also its computation of the time occupied by the
 siege as but twenty days,--a period obviously inadequate for the vast
 engineering works for which the four months assigned by Julian are
 certainly not too much,--as well as its description of the method and
 aim of those works.  In Theodoret likewise are found the two
 supernatural incidents of Sapor's discomfiture, both repeated in the
 Life,--neither of which is affirmed or even hinted at by Ephraim any
 more than by Julian; the appearance of the Imperial Phantom on the
 wall, and the plague of insects sent in answer to Jacob's, or, as the
 Life has it, to Ephraim's prayer.  Of these, the former, but not the
 latter, finds place in the Paschal Chronicle, and (in exaggerated form)
 in Theophanes.  Whether, in this instance, the chronicler's statement,
 which is guardedly expressed, [287] or any nucleus of it, was derived
 from the Epistle of Valgesh,--or whether he borrowed it from Theodoret
 or some one of Theodoret's sources, or some such authority--is matter
 of conjecture. [288]

 3.  Constantius and Constans.--The Life errs grossly (as already
 noticed) in making Constans, who died in 350, and never reigned in the
 East, the successor of his brother Constantius, who survived till 361.

 4.  The Alleged Sojourn in Egypt.--The sojourn of Ephraim for eight
 years in Egypt, after he had taken up his abode in Egypt, and before
 his visit to Cappadocia, is impossible.  It was in July, 363, that
 Nisibis was surrendered to Persia by Jovian, which court was the cause,
 as the Life (no doubt rightly) states, of Ephraim's final departure
 from that city to Beth-Garbaia, thence to Amid, and finally, "at the
 end of the year," to Edessa.  It follows, therefore, that he did not
 reach Edessa till 364.  In Edessa, or in his cell on the adjacent
 "Mount" according to the Life, he lived, worked, wrote commentaries and
 polemical discourses, taught, and formed a school of disciples, before
 his alleged journey to Egypt.  It is therefore implied that he spent
 years in or near Edessa before he set out on that journey, which cannot
 therefore be placed so early as 365.  Even if we assign to it the
 improbably early date of 366, the eight years in Egypt bring us to 374,
 or at earliest 373, for his visit to the Cæsarean Cappadocia.  Now
 there is a prevailing weight of testimony to the effect that Ephraim
 died in 373, which date, if accepted, leaves no time for the incidents
 of his life after his return to Edessa.  This, however, cannot be urged
 against our biographer, who (as will be shown) assumes that he lived
 till 379.  But the Life represents him as resident in or near Edessa
 during the persecution which that city suffered from the Emperor
 Valens, which (as stated above, p. 132) took place probably in 371;
 certainly not later than 372, at which date (according to the
 biographer) he was still in Egypt.  In fact, even without going into
 particulars, it is evident that between Ephraim's arrival in Edessa in
 364 and the persecution of Valens in 370-2, the eight years' sojourn in
 Egypt and the visit to Cappadocia would so fill the interval as to
 leave no time for the prolonged Edessa residence, before and after that
 sojourn, which the Life, in common with all other authorities,
 attributes to Ephraim, and in virtue of which his name is inseparably
 associated with the history of Edessa.

 If, with the Vatican recension of the Life, we read "Julian" for
 Valens, as the name of the persecutor of Edessa, the impossibility
 becomes yet more absurdly glaring.  For Julian died in 363, and before
 that year Ephraim had not migrated from Nisibis to Edessa.

 It is no doubt possible that Ephraim may have visited Egypt, [289] as
 the Life affirms, before proceeding to Cæsarea:  as an anchorite he
 would naturally be drawn to the land where the anchorite life had its
 origin and its greatest development.  Yet it is hardly probable that,
 eager as he was to see Basil at Cæsarea, he would, when setting out on
 his travels, have directed his course to Egypt first,--a country so
 distant, and lying in a direction so different, from Cappadocia.  This
 improbability would naturally fail to strike our biographer, who
 appears to have supposed Basil's Cæsarea (if indeed he had any definite
 idea of its situation) to have been the maritime city of that name in
 Palestine.  One can hardly avoid suspecting that this whole narrative
 of the visit to Egypt--unknown as it is to all authorities save our
 Life (in its twofold recension), and the shorter form of the same--may
 have been invented by some compiler or reviser, writing in, or for, one
 of the Egyptian monasteries of the Nitrian Desert, and seeking to
 gratify the Syrian ascetics who were numerous in that region, by making
 it the scene of an episode in the life of the most famous of Syrian
 ascetics.  It certainly has the air of an interpolation, coming as it
 does between the description of Ephraim's longing desire to see Basil,
 and the narrative of the fulfilment of that desire by his visit to
 Cæsarea.  More particularly, as regards the story of the visit of
 Ephraim to the Nitrian Saint Pesoës (or Bishoi), it is to be noted that
 it is mentioned, not in the Parisian recension of the Life, but only in
 that of the Vatican ms.  It is a significant fact that this ms., which
 is thus our only written authority for the alleged visit, was written
 (probably) about the year 1100, in the Nitrian monastery of "Amba
 Bishoi" (St. Pesoës). [290] On the other hand, it is to be added that
 a tradition of Ephraim's sojourn in Egypt, connecting him with Pesoës,
 lingered in quite recent times, and may probably still linger, among
 the monks, Syrian and Coptic, of the Nitrian region.  Travellers of the
 seventeenth, and even eighteenth, century, tell of a tamarind tree
 which was shown to them within the precincts of the Syrian monastery of
 the Theotokos in that region, reputed to have grown from Ephraim's
 staff which he set in the ground on his arrival there, as he was about
 to enter the cell of Pesoës. [291] It is probable that this legend of
 the staff (which reminds one of that of the staff of St. Joseph of
 Arimathea and the Glastonbury thorn tree) may have grown out of the
 belief that Ephraim once visited the monastery,--which belief again may
 have been originated by the pious fiction of the compiler or
 interpolator of the Life in its Vatican form.  It is easy to imagine
 how gladly a community of Syrian monks in this Egyptian solitude would
 listen to what professed to be a record of the greatest of Syrian
 monks, a recluse like themselves, the author of the Sermons to Ascetics
 which they had read or listened to, and of the many hymns which
 enriched their offices and quickened their devotions;--and how ready
 they would be to welcome as fact the story of his sojourn in their
 valley, and to imagine that a memorial of it survived among the trees
 of their garden.

 5.  Interval between Visit to Basil and Persecution by Valens.--The
 interval of four years or more, which the Life seems to place between
 Ephraim's return from Cæsarea to Edessa, and the persecution of the
 Edessenes by Valens, is likewise impossible.  For at Cæsarea all agree
 that Ephraim found Basil Archbishop.  But Basil was consecrated late in
 370, and therefore Ephraim's first meeting with him, which was on the
 Feast of the Epiphany, cannot be placed earlier than January, 371.  But
 the persecution took place probably in 371, or at latest in 373--thus
 reducing the possible length of interval to two years at most--probably
 to a few months.  It may be said, however, that the biographer, though
 he relates the persecution after mentioning the four years' interval,
 does not mean to imply that it was subsequent in time to that
 interval.  But it will be shown farther on (under next head) that the
 four years' interval is inadmissible, independently of the date of that
 persecution; inasmuch as Ephraim survived only three years after his
 visit to Basil.

 6.  Death of Basil before that of Ephraim.--The story of the lady who
 was sent by Basil to Ephraim, and by Ephraim back to Basil, only in
 time to see his corpse,--and of Ephraim's grief for Basil's death,
 cannot be accepted unless we set aside the consent of the chronologers,
 who agree that Ephraim died in 373, [292] --whereas Basil survived to
 1st January, 379.  It is true that there is extant among the Greek
 works ascribed to Ephraim, an encomium on Basil, [293] which seems to
 be genuine.  This, however, is not to be regarded as an eulogium
 pronounced after Basil's death; but rather as a panegyric in which the
 living man is apostrophized. [294] We may safely conclude that the
 story, which rests on a basis of erroneous chronology, is itself a
 fiction.

 But the story of Ephraim's helpful intervention and activity in a time
 of famine, which is undated, having early attestation, may well be
 accepted as true, and assigned to the winter of 372-3.  The authorities
 who attest the date of his death as 373, place it in the month of
 Haziran (June); [295] and we may reasonably conjecture that the
 exertions and anxieties of the season of famine had told too heavily on
 a frame already wasted by years and by excessive austerities, and had
 thus hastened his end.

 [278] This is related also in the Greek version of the Testament, but
 is an evident interpolation.  It is not in the Syriac.

 [279] This has been pointed out by Dr. Payne Smith (Dict. of Christian
 Biography, Vol. II., p. 137), who cites the passages here adduced, from
 Opp. Syr. II. 499; Opp. Gr. I. 129.

 [280] This was first clearly established by Spanheim (Observationes in
 Julianum, pp. 183 ff.; 188 ff.; 1696) in part anticipated by Petave
 (Petavius) and de Valois (Valesius).  He has been followed in this by
 nearly all historians, including Gibbon (Decline and Fall. chap.
 xviii).

 [281] Juliani Orationes, ed. Spanheim (1666), Orat. II., pp. 62 ff.;
 see also pp. 26 ff. (Orat. I.).

 [282] The Life gives but seventy days as the whole duration of the
 siege--a period quite insufficient for the construction of the
 embankment.

 [283] Ephraim seems to convey that Sapor, when repulsed, at once
 withdrew:  Julian represents his withdrawal as gradual.  The former
 probably has in view the raising of the siege; the latter, the retreat
 from the invaded territory.

 [284] Compare Sachau's description, Reise, pp. 390, 391.

 [285] That Valgesh is the "third" Bishop here meant, appears by
 comparison with Hymn XVII. 2, where the three are named, Jacob, Babu
 (not elsewhere mentioned), and Valgesh.

 [286] So (e.g.) Baronius, Annales (s. q. 338); Acta Sanctorum, Febr.
 (I. p. 51).  A few quite recent writers follow these.  This error of
 Theodoret thus ascribing to the first siege the events which belong to
 the history of the third, is easily accounted for.  His narrative of
 the siege and the breaching of the walls, the apparition, and St.
 Jacob's prayer answered by the plague of mosquitoes, originally
 appeared in his earlier work, the Religious History--a collection of
 lives of miracle-working saints of whom St. Jacob stands first--from
 which (as he himself notes) he has transferred it with little change,
 to his Ecclesiastical History.  As the biographer of this, the greatest
 Bishop of Nisibis, Theodoret would naturally associate with his name
 all that history or tradition reported of Divine protection extended to
 the city in her perils--especially in those of her last and most signal
 siege which ended in her most signal deliverance.  He probably knew
 that a siege of Nisibis had occurred in St. Jacob's time, and would
 readily overlook the brief interval of twelve years by which the
 saint's death preceded the later siege. One of the Nisibene Hymns
 (XIII. 18, 19, 21) suggests a further explanation how this third siege
 came to be attached to the legend of St. Jacob.  His body was treasured
 reverently in the city, and to its presence her deliverance was
 attributed.  Thus, he was still (in Ephraim's words) "the fountain
 within her," "the fruit in her bosom," "the body laid within her that
 became for her a wall without."  The traditions of that dead presence
 in the last siege, and of his living presence in the first, would soon
 blend together; and the expression of pious gratitude for the
 protection ascribed by the besieged of 350 to the virtue of his
 remains, would be mistaken as evidence that the man himself was among
 them to help them by his prayers and exhortations in the struggle by
 which the fall of their city was so narrowly averted.

 [287] In the Chronicle, we read that Sapor saw, in the daytime, "a man
 running to and fro on the walls," in the likeness of the Emperor; but
 again, we are told of "the angel that appeared."  In Theodoret's
 narratives the apparition wears the royal "purple and diadem," and is
 described as "divine" (Hist. Relig.), and "incorporeal" (Hist.
 Eccles.).  In the Chronography, "an angel stands on the tower, in
 shining raiment, holding by the hand the Emperor Constantius"; a
 duplication of the vision which seemingly arose from a misunderstanding
 of the Chronicle. That Constantius was not in Nisibis during this
 siege, is a point on which all authorities are agreed.  Julian, while
 lavishing on the Emperor unmeasured praises for the repulse of Sapor,
 attributes it not to his personal presence, but to his foresight in
 previous preparations made a year before.  He is known, however, to
 have sojourned in the city in May, 345,--see Cod. Theodosianus, (XI. 7,
 5) for a law issued thence by him on the 12th of that month (Lex. 5 de
 exactionibus).

 [288] The Nisibene Hymns, only recovered some fifty years ago from the
 Nitrian Monastery of the Theotokos, and first printed in 1866, yielding
 as they do authoritative and contemporary confirmation of the accounts
 of the siege given by Julian and by Valgesh, come in as decisive
 evidence to prove that the Chronicler of the seventh century and the
 Chronographer of the ninth had better fortune or better judgment in
 their choice of authorities than Theodoret in the fifth.  It is,
 moreover, a signal instance of the true historical instinct that guided
 Gibbon in his great work, that in relating this history (ch. xviii.),
 he followed Julian and the Chronicle, and refused to be misled (as our
 biographer was) by Theodoret--except as regards St. Jacob whom he
 supposed to have been still Bishop in 350. The first to point out this
 error as to St. Jacob, was Valesius in his note on the passage in
 Theodoret (H. E. II. 30), as above.  He remarked that "the Alexandrine
 (Paschal) Chronicle makes Vologeses (Valgesh), not Jacob, Bishop of
 Nisibis in 350."  It was replied (and with justice) that the Chronicle,
 though it records the siege, and cites the Epistle of Valgesh, Bishop
 of the city, does not say that he was Bishop at the time of the siege.
 Another Chronicle, the Edessene (a relic of the sixth century), first
 printed by Assemani in 1719 (Biblioth. Orient. I., pp. 388 ff.)
 determines 338 as the date of Jacob's death, and 361 as that of
 Valgesh.  Our Nisibene Hymns (see above, note 4) make it plain that
 Valgesh was bishop in 350, as Valesius rightly (though on insufficient
 grounds) laid down.

 [289] The shorter Syriac Life agrees in affirming the fact of his visit
 to Egypt, but says nothing of its duration.  No other authority,
 earlier or contemporary, hints at it.

 [290] Assemani, Biblioth. Orient., I., p. 46, note 1.

 [291] It is mentioned by Huntington (afterwards Provost of Trinity
 College, Dublin, and finally Bishop of Raphoe) who visited the place,
 1678-9 (see his Epistolæ, XXXIX., p. 69):  again by J. S. Assemani in
 1715 (see reference in note 6).  More recent visitors (Lord de la
 Zouche in 1837, and Archdeacon Tattam in 1839) do not speak of it. Of
 the Nitrian monasteries (reputed to have once numbered fifty, or even
 more), the principal one, that of the Theotokos, whence the libraries
 of the Vatican and of the British museum have derived their most
 precious acquisitions of Syriac mss., belongs to the Syrian Jacobites,
 whose Church has always been in full communion with that of the Copts.
 A second belongs to the Copts; a third to the Greeks.  The fourth (that
 of St. Pesoës) does not appear to be specially appropriated, but to be
 mainly Coptic, though (as appears above) not to the exclusion of
 Syrians.

 [292] See Professor Lamy's edition of Ephraim, II., coll. 94ff., for
 the authorities on this point,--of which the chief are:--The Edessene
 Chronicle (sixth century) and Jacob of Edessa (seventh century--cited
 by Elias of Nisibis), both of whom give 373 as the date, as does also
 the early Chronicle contained in the "Book of the Caliphs."  Jerome (De
 Viris. Illustr. cxv.) merely says that Ephraim died in the reign of
 Valens,--i.e. not later than 378, and therefore before Basil.

 [293] Opp. Græc.,II., 289 ff.

 [294] See Lamy as above, coll. 84 ff.

 [295] On the 9th, according to Chron. Edes. and the shorter Life; the
 Vatican Life says the 15th; the Book of the Caliphs (see Land's
 Anecdota, Tom. I., p. 15 [Syr. text]) and most other authorities, the
 18th; Dionysius, in his Chronicle, the 19th (ap. Assemani, B. O. II.,
 p. 54).

 VI.--Rectification of the Vatican Text of the Life.

 If the Life had reached us in its Vatican form only, it would have been
 necessary to correct one or two farther errors:

 1. Date of his Baptism Mistaken.--According to the Vatican Life,
 Ephraim was baptized at the age of 28, after the surrender of Nisibis
 by Jovian.  The surrender was in 363, and the age assigned to him would
 therefore make 334 the earliest admissible date for his birth--ten
 years after the Council of Nicæa, at which the Life records that he was
 present!  The Parisian Life corrects this absurdity and shows how the
 mistake arose.  The statement, in this version of the story, is that
 after quitting Nisibis, "he retired to Beth-Garbaia, where he had
 received baptism at the age of 18."  By omitting the auxiliary "had"
 (which in Syriac, as in English, expresses the pluperfect) the Vatican
 scribe or editor introduces this blunder about the date of the
 baptism.  It is probable that, without having any distinct knowledge of
 the date of the departure from Nisibis, he felt that Ephraim must have
 been more than 18 at this stage of the narrative, and strove to make
 the age cohere better with the time required for the events related, by
 changing 18 into 28.

 2.  Julian substituted for Valens.--The substitution of the name of
 Julian for that of Valens as the persecutor of Edessa, has been already
 noticed.  That the story (with the incident of the martyr-mother with
 her two sons) belongs to the time of Valens, is established by the
 united testimony of Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret.  The whole
 history is clear, and coherent with itself and with chronology, in the
 Parisian Life; whereas the Vatican version of it, by bringing Ephraim
 to Edessa in the reign of Julian, makes hopeless confusion. [296] It
 is to be noted that the names Julianus and Valens, so distinct as
 written in Latin, differ but little when transliterated (without
 vowel-points) into Syriac.

 [296] It is to be regretted that neither the Parisian Life, nor the
 Nisibene Hymns, was before the writer of the article Ephraim in Smith
 and Wace's Dictionary of Christian Biography.  The former would have
 warned him from being misled by the Vatican Life into the error of
 ascribing to Julian the persecution under Valens; the latter would have
 shown him that both versions of the Life confuse the first siege of
 Nisibis with the third.

 VII.--Chronology of the Life of Ephraim.

 Thus the fixed points for determining the chronology of Ephraim's life
 are:

 1.  The death of his patron, St. Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis, in 338,
 after the first siege of that city.

 2.  The third siege, in which he was among the defenders of the city,
 in 350.

 3.  The surrender of Nisibis by Jovian, and its abandonment by its
 Christian inhabitants, 363; followed by Ephraim's removal to Edessa.

 4.  The consecration of Basil to the see of Cæsarea, late in 370,
 followed by Ephraim's visit to him there.

 5.  The deliverance of the Edessenes from the persecution of Valens
 (370-372), celebrated by Ephraim in a hymn.

 6.  Ephraim's death, 373.

 To this list it would be right to prefix the meeting of the Council of
 Nicæa in 325, if the evidence of Ephraim's presence at it, along with
 St. Jacob, were sufficient.  But it has no early attestation; and no
 writer prior to Theodoret (Hist. Eccles. II. 30) associates the name of
 Jacob with any incident in Ephraim's life.

 The date of Ephraim's birth is nowhere directly stated, but it is
 usually assumed to have been early in the reign of Constantine
 (306-337), on the authority of the Vatican Life, which says, "In the
 days of the victorious Constantine, true believer, was born the holy
 man Ephraim."  But the statement of the Parisian Life is less explicit,
 and is capable of a different meaning:--"He was in the days of the
 victorious Constantine."  This merely implies that Ephraim (if the
 pronoun represent him) lived in the reign of that emperor.  But it
 rather appears that Ephraim's father is meant, inasmuch as he is the
 subject of the immediately preceding sentence which describes him as a
 heathen priest; and the purport of the passage is, that the saint was
 the son of a man who not merely had been one of an idolatrous
 priesthood, but continued to be so after Constantine had acknowledged
 the Christian religion. [297]

 The earlier authorities give no express statement on this point; but a
 late tenth-century Greek menologium, that of the Emperor Basil
 (Porphyrogenitus), says that he "continued from the reign of
 Constantine to that of Valens," [298] --implying as it seems that he
 was born, as the Vatican Life represents, after Constantine's accession
 in 306.

 Considering, however, that the Life in both its forms affirms that
 Ephraim was brought by St. Jacob to the Council of Nicæa in 325--in
 which it is borne out by Gregory Barhebræus in his Ecclesiastical
 Chronicle [299] (who though a very late writer (1226-1286) had access
 to early authorities and judgment in using them)--it is hard to
 reconcile the chronology, for the improbability of the admission of a
 lad of nineteen, in any capacity, to that venerable assembly, is very
 great.  If we accept it as a fact that he was chosen by Jacob to
 accompany him, and was permitted to be present among the Fathers at
 Nicæa, it seems almost necessary to place his birth before Constantine
 became emperor. [300]

 Farther:  the menologium above cited adds that he died "in extreme old
 age;" and the tone and tenor of his testament go far to confirm the
 truth of these words.  But as he died in 373, he cannot have been more
 than 67 years old in that year if he was born in 306.  No doubt 67 is a
 ripe age, but hardly sufficient to warrant the strong expression of the
 menologium.  Without pressing its language unduly, we may surely take
 it as implying that he had passed the "threescore years and ten" of the
 Psalmist at the time of his death--in other words that he was born not
 later than the first or second year of the fourth century.

 Thus by rectifying the text and rendering of the opening sentences of
 the Life, we relieve ourselves of the supposed necessity of placing his
 birth in or after 306.  And his presence in the Council of 325, and his
 extreme old age in 373, concur in pointing to the beginning of the
 fourth century--if not to the later years of the third--as the probable
 time of that event.

 However this may be, whether he was born in 306 or earlier, it is
 certain that by far the greater part of the long life of the "Deacon of
 Edessa"--all of it save its last ten or eleven years (363-373) was
 passed in his native Nisibis; and that he did not even attain the
 diaconate till he was considerably over sixty years of age, and within
 three years of his end.

 [297] The passage is as follows:  "Ephraim was a Syrian by birth.  His
 father was of Nisibis, and his mother of Amid.  And his father was
 priest in Nisibis of an idol named Abizal, which afterwards the
 victorious Emperor Jovian broke.  He [or it, scil., the idol] was in
 the days of the victorious Emperor Constantine, true believer.  But his
 father had this famous son, of whom is our narrative."  The meaning may
 be that the idol was suffered to exist during Constantine's reign and
 after, till Jovian destroyed it:  but it is now natural to understand
 it, as above, of Ephraim's father.  The Vatican editor seems to have
 misunderstood his original, which the Parisian transcriber has
 preserved faithfully,--and to have altered it into accordance with his
 misunderstanding, by recasting the passage and substituting "was born"
 for "was."

 [298] In Migne's Patrologia Græca, CXVI I., p. 254.

 [299] I., 23 (Abbeloos and Lamy's edition).

 [300] Gregory Barhebr. (Chron. Eccles., II., 10) mentions, but
 doubtfully, a tradition that Ephraim wrote a letter circ. 334 in which
 he took the part of Papas, the Catholicus, against "the Bishops of the
 East" who accused him of neglect and misconduct.  If this be accepted,
 it is additional evidence for the early date of Ephraim's birth.

 VIII.--His Writings:  Their Characteristics.

 Of the innumerable writings--controversial, expository, hortatory,
 devotional--which were for Ephraim the fulfilment of his dream in
 childhood, the fruit of the many years of literary activity that
 exercised his full heart and busy brain, enough remains to give an
 adequate idea of his powers and to amaze us by its variety and
 abundance.  The exaggeration of Sozomen who reckons the number of lines
 written by him at "three hundred myriads" (three millions) is not to be
 taken as more than a rough guess at the probable total; but it is
 evidence of the impression made on the men of the generations to whom
 his works were transmitted by his fertility.  That he himself was
 conscious of this gift appears in the fact that he records the dream
 and claims for his hymns and sermons that in them is to be found its
 interpretation.  His faculty of speech, as Gregory informs us in a
 remarkable passage, though adequate to utter the thoughts of any other
 mind, was sometimes overborne by the rapid rush and abounding throng of
 the ideas with which his inspiration filled him, in such measure that
 he was forced to pray for the intermission of its flow, "Restrain, O
 Lord, the tide of Thy grace!" [301] Copiousness is the
 characteristic, and its excess is the chief fault, of Ephraim as an
 author.  The Syriac language has great capacity for condensation; and
 the parallelism of balanced clauses which Syriac literature affects,
 conduces to brevity.  But on the other hand, the Syrian mind has a
 tendency to amplify; amplification is the besetting sin of Syriac
 writers,--of Ephraim not least.  And thus, while each sentence has the
 severe precision of an epigram, the manifold reiteration of
 epigrammatic clauses amounts to verbosity:  one and the same thought or
 fact is presented in a long-drawn series of slightly varied aspects,
 with change of expression or at most of illustration, till the
 recurrence becomes tedious.  This criticism is meant primarily for his
 hymns; but it applies also to too many of his metrical homilies (to be
 described presently).  In all his writings, metrical or otherwise, this
 habit of amplification leads him, in handling the narrations of
 Scripture, to fill out their simple outline with elaborate detail that
 wrongs their beauty and dignity.  Of such treatment, examples will be
 found in this volume, in some of the hymns (such as the XIV^th and
 XV^th On the Epiphany, and in the Discourse on the Woman who was a
 Sinner).

 His extant works (some of which are known to us only in a Greek
 version), and those of his lost works of which the titles are recorded,
 divide themselves into three classes;--Commentaries on Scripture,
 Homilies (mimre), and Hymns (madrashe).

 1.  Commentaries.--His Commentaries belonged (if we may trust the Life)
 to his later years, after his migration to Edessa, when he was past
 middle life.  There he is related to have begun his exposition (still
 extant) of Genesis, in the preface to which he refers to the homilies
 and hymns which he had previously produced (Opp. Syr. Tom. I., p. 1).
 He seems to have commented on almost all the canonical books of the Old
 Testament.  His expositions of the Pentateuch, the chief historical
 books, [302] the Prophets (including Lamentations), and Job, survive,
 and have been printed (in the Roman edition of 1732-43, supplemented by
 that of Professor Lamy, of Louvain, Tom. II., 1886); [303] but those
 which he is recorded to have written on the Psalms and Proverbs, the
 books which may be presumed to have most influenced the religious
 spirit and literary form of his works, have not been preserved.  None
 of the above, however, have reached us in a complete form, but rather
 as a series of extracts, apparently abridged, from the Commentaries as
 originally issued by their author.  In commenting on the New Testament,
 he treated of the Gospels, not in their separate form, but in the
 continuous narrative known as the "Diatessaron" compiled from them by
 Tatian in the second century.  This work, long lost, has been lately
 recovered in an Armenian version.  His Commentary on the Epistles of
 St. Paul has likewise been preserved for us in Armenian.  Both have
 been published by the Mechetarist Fathers of St. Lazaro; first in
 Armenian, afterwards in a Latin version. [304] In the present volume
 it has been judged best to include none of the Commentaries, inasmuch
 as the method and spirit of Ephraim's treatment of Scripture are shown
 adequately, and in a more interesting form, in his Homilies and Hymns.

 2.  Homilies.--The Homilies are very varied in character.  Many are
 controversial,--directed against the Jews, against heathenism in the
 person of the Emperor Julian, against the heresies of Manes, of
 Marcion, of Bardesan, of the Anomoean followers of Arius.  Others set
 forth articles of the Faith--the Creation, the Fall, Redemption by the
 Passion and Crucifixion of Our Lord, His Descent into Hades, His
 Resurrection, the Mission of the Holy Spirit, the Rest of Paradise, the
 Second Coming, the End of the World.  Others are expository, treating
 of narratives from the Old and the New Testaments, such as the life of
 Joseph, the Repentance of Nineveh, or the story of "the woman who was a
 sinner" of St. Luke vii.--Others again are hortatory--calling to
 repentance, warning against sin, threatening future retribution,
 extolling virginity.  Of the Homilies two--one doctrinal, of Our Lord;
 one expository, of the sinful woman, are given in this selection.  It
 is to be noted that the Homilies are usually metrical in form, being
 written in regular stichoi (lines of uniform length).  And some of
 them--for example, a series of nine for the "Rogation Days," [305] and
 another of eight for the "Passion Week" (week before Easter), and the
 vigil of "New Sunday" (first after Easter)--were and still are
 regularly read as lessons, as part of the offices of the Church; [306]
 a singular mark of reverence--extended, it seems, to the sermons of no
 other divine.

 3.  Hymns.--But it is in his Hymns that Ephraim lives,--for the Syrian
 Churches, and indirectly for the Christian world, of the East if not of
 the West. [307] Throughout Syrian Christendom, divided as it has been
 for ages--in the Malkite, Nestorian, Jacobite, and Maronite
 communities, from the Mediterranean to the Tigris, and beyond, even to
 the Malabar remnant of the Syro-Indian Church, all of which retain
 Syriac as the language of their ritual,--the whole body of public
 worship is shaped by his hymnody and animated with his spirit.  It is
 literally the fact that the Hymns of Ephraim go with every member of
 every one of these Churches from the first to the last of his Christian
 life, from the font to the grave.  The Epiphany Hymns (included in the
 present selection) are interwoven into the Baptismal Office; among the
 Funeral Hymns (which Dr. Burgess has made accessible to English
 readers) [308] are to be found dirges proper for the obsequies of each
 and all, lay and cleric, young and old, male and female.  Nor is it to
 be doubted that it was from these Syriac offices that those of the
 Greek-speaking Churches derived this characteristic, common to both, by
 which both are differentiated from those of the West,--"hymns occupying
 in the Eastern Church" (as Dr. Neale observes) [309] "a space beyond
 all comparison greater than they do in the Latin," so that "the body of
 the Eastern breviary is ecclesiastical poetry."  That the Syrian
 Church, and not the Greek, took the initiative in the development of
 ritual, appears from the facts that, though there is evidence of the
 use of Psalms and Canticles from Scripture throughout Christendom from
 the first, it is only with Ephraim's contemporary, Gregory Nazianzen,
 that Greek sacred poetry can be said to have taken shape,--and that his
 verses failed to gain a place in public worship.  He wrote in the
 metres of the heathen classics; and it was not until a later day, and
 from the hands of other writers, working on other lines, that the hymns
 appeared which won their way into the Greek ritual,--hymns written in
 rhythmic prose, in what seems to be conscious imitation of the Syriac
 model. [310]

 The imitation, however, is by no means complete; it is apparent in the
 general tone and manner, but does not extend to the form:  just as the
 Greek version of Ephraim's Hymns, though faithfully reproducing his
 thoughts and literary method, makes no attempt to retain his metrical
 system; but is a rendering into what in form is prose of an original
 which is in verse.  That this should be so is unavoidable, for Syriac
 metres are incapable of adaptation to the Greek language.  Syriac
 literature, in all else imitative, here and here only has found out for
 itself an independent course.  Elsewhere it leans on one side to the
 Hebrew model to which it was drawn by affinity of language and by the
 influence of the Old Testament; on the other to the Greek, as found in
 the New Testament and in the writings of the great Divines of the
 Alexandrian and Antiochian patriarchates, who were the leaders of
 religious thought for Eastern Christendom.  In hymnody alone it struck
 out a line of its own; it set an example for the Greek-speaking
 Churches to follow, so far as was possible for them under the
 conditions above indicated.  The Syriac Hymnody is constructed on the
 Hebrew principle of parallelism, in which thought answers to thought in
 clauses of repetitive or antithetical balance:  but, unlike the Hebrew,
 its clauses are further regulated by strict equivalence of syllabic
 measure.  But though in this latter respect it seems to approach to the
 forms of Western verse, ancient or modern, yet the resemblance is but
 superficial:  Syriac verse is not measured by feet--whether determined
 by syllable quantity, as in Greek and Latin, or by accent, as in
 English and other modern languages.  Thus the metre of Syriac poetry is
 substantially the "thought-metre" (as it has been well called) of
 Hebrew, reduced to regularity of form by the rule that each of the
 lines into which the balanced clauses fall, shall consist of a fixed
 number of syllables.  There is no systematic rhyme; but the nature of
 the language which by reason of its uniformity of etymological
 structure abounds in words of like terminations, often causes
 correspondences of sound amounting to rhyme, or at least to assonance.
 The lines are very short; not exceeding twelve syllables, sometimes
 confined to four.  Ephraim, though not the actual inventor, was the
 first master of this metrical system, the first to develop it into
 system and variety. [311] His favorite metres are the five-syllabled
 and the seven-syllabled.  In his more elaborate poems, such as the
 Nisibene series, which are rather Odes than Hymns, the strophes or
 stanzas into which the lines are arranged are often long and of
 complicated structure, each strophe consisting of many lines (ranging
 from four up to fourteen or more) of various lengths according to a
 fixed scheme rigidly adhered to throughout the poem--sometimes
 throughout a group of cognate poems.  In other poems, especially in
 Hymns intended for popular or ecclesiastical use, where simplicity of
 structure is suitable, the lines which compose each strophe, whatever
 their number, are of uniform length.  So easily do the Syriac tongue,
 and the genius of Syriac literature, lend themselves to this scheme of
 short, syllabically equal clauses, that (as has been already stated)
 many even of the Homilies are metrical; arranged not indeed in
 strophes, but in continuous succession of brief stichoi, all of one and
 the same length--usually of seven syllables; a sort of blank verse, but
 a blank verse with no animating accents, no varying pauses.  A Homily
 so constructed would fatigue the ear of a modern audience by its
 monotony:  but inasmuch as some portions of Ephraim's Homilies were
 used in certain ecclesiastical Offices, probably recited in a sort of
 chant, it may be that in such use we have the explanation of their
 quasi-versified structure.

 In point of literary value as poems, a high place cannot be claimed for
 these Hymns.  Some of them indeed have much of the devotional fervor,
 and not a little of the human pathos, of the Psalms of David:  others
 show something of the antithetic point and epigrammatic terseness of
 the Proverbs of Solomon.  Yet the devout aspirations and confessions of
 the poet are too often forced and artificial in their utterance; in his
 funeral dirges we seem here and there to detect the false note of the
 professional mourner in the effort to exhaust all possible topics of
 grief; in all his poems he tends to prolong the series of his
 parallelisms to a wearisome length and with an iteration that, though
 laboriously varied, is tedious,--an iteration that has no precedent in
 the poetry of the Old Testament, save in one or two of the latest
 Psalms, such as the CXXXVI^th with its recurring burden "For His mercy
 endureth for ever," or the CXIX^th with its artificial arrangement
 (often emulated in Syriac Hymnody) by which each of the twenty-two
 letters of the alphabet in turn is made to head each one of eight
 consecutive verses in praise of the Law of the Lord.  On the whole, it
 must be admitted that the greater qualities of poetry, such as abound
 everywhere in nearly every writer of the Hebrew Scriptures,--of truth
 in rendering the inmost feelings of man's heart in words of absolute
 simplicity, of aspiration that rises without effort to the highest
 things of God--to these Ephraim's Hymns have no claim.

 For these shortcomings in his poetry, two main causes may be assigned.

 One is in the man himself,--or rather, in his mode of life.  Naturally,
 he was prone to feel for and with his fellow-men; for the sorrows of
 the bereaved, the cares of the toiling poor whose lot (as he proved in
 the last and best episode of his history) moved him to sympathy and
 active succour.  He can be simple accordingly when he deals with the
 homely facts of life.  But the main tenor of his course was ascetic; he
 looked on this life and the life beyond--on man and to God--with a
 vision clouded by the gloom of unnatural solitude and
 self-mortification.  An assiduous student of Scripture, he had an ear
 for its threatenings rather than its promises and consolations; dread
 and dismay entered into his heart more deeply than hope; the "Stand in
 awe and sin not" of the Psalmist was more familiar to his spirit than
 the "Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous."  The perpetual proneness to
 tears on which his biographers dwell with admiration, and which he
 seems to have thought it right to foster, has its reflex in his
 writings, in the hysterical overflow of his fears, his lamentations and
 his self-reproach.  He had lived as an anchorite till his nature became
 morbid, and its moral fibre was weakened.  But to reach the highest
 levels in religious literature, whether in prose or in poetry, a man
 must be sane, his mind healthy and strong,--with a health and strength
 sustained and exercised by wholesome daily contact with the lives of
 other men.

 The second cause is to be found in the method, above described as
 his--developed though not actually invented by him, and made his
 own--which he chose as the vehicle of his thoughts and emotions.  The
 "thought-metre" of the Hebrew poets was regulated (as we have seen) by
 balance of sense, not of sound--member answering to member, verse by
 verse, in equivalence or contrast of substance merely, not of verbal
 form:  and in this metre, which has been happily likened to the
 alternating beat of a bird's wings as it mounts aloft, they had shown
 it to be possible to attain the highest reach of sublime expression of
 the utmost that man's spirit can conceive of God and Heaven.  The
 Syriac Hymnists had the unhappy idea of effecting a compromise between
 their two contrasted models, the Hebrew and the Greek; and to this end
 they compelled their verses into conformity by syllabic measure, of
 sound, as well as of sense.  This artificial structure has an
 effectiveness of its own, and is suited to the popular ear; but it is
 incapable of the elevation which the earlier and simpler method
 attained without effort.  As its Semitic parallelism of substance
 excluded Syriac poetry from the variety in topic and largeness in
 conception of the Greek, so this grecized regularity of form hampered
 its efforts to rise to the upper regions where the Hebrew is at home.
 The wings are free and ample by whose regulated stroke Hebrew poetry is
 borne, and they carry it to the supreme height:  in Syriac poetry the
 flight is too commonly low and feeble, because its wings are clipped.
 In the former we are conscious of a uniformity as of the unconstrained
 waves of the sea, following in a succession of endless change--a
 uniformity that is majestic:  in the latter we detect the uniformity of
 the water-wheel, that with artificial movement draws up and dispenses
 the waters of the well in vessels of fixed measure--a uniformity that
 is mechanical and monotonous.

 [301] This passage is mistranslated in the Latin version of the
 Encomium, by P. F. Linus of Verona (in his Divina S. Ephraem Opera,
 Dillingen, 1562), from whom it has been borrowed by Gerard Voss for his
 Latin version of Ephraim (Cologne, 1603), and by the editors of
 Gregory's Works.

 [302] Not including Ruth, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther.  It is not known
 whether he commented on Ecclesiastes and Canticles, or on the
 deutero-canonical books (commonly called "Apocrypha").

 [303] Lamy has supplied the Commentaries on Jonah, Nahum, Habakkuk,
 Zephaniah, and Haggai, with part of Isaiah and Lamentation--which was
 wanting from the Roman edition.

 [304] Both in the Armenian edition of Ephraim (Vol. II., Diatessaron;
 Vol. III., St. Paul), Venice, 1836:  also in Latin,--the Diatessaron,
 in 1876; St. Paul 1893.

 [305] Of these the most complete copy is in ms. B. 5.18, Trinity
 College, Dublin (formerly the property of Archbishop Ussher), which has
 been used by Professor Lamy in his edition of three homilies (Tom. III.
 of his Ephraim, 1889.).

 [306] This remarkable distinction dates from the fourth century; it is
 noticed by St. Jerome (De Viris Ill., CXV.), writing within twenty
 years after Ephraim's death.

 [307] St. Hilary of Poitiers (d. 368) is reputed (see Isidore of
 Seville, De Off. Eccl.) the earliest writer of Latin Hymns, and some
 extant Hymns are ascribed to him.  But St. Augustine tells us (Confess.
 IX. 7) that at Milan hymns were first used, "after the manner of the
 Eastern Church," in the time when the Empress Justina was persecuting
 St. Ambrose (386).

 [308] Metrical Hymns of Ephraim, 1853.

 [309] Hymns of the Holy Eastern Church, pp. 34, 35, 49 (1870).  Note
 the contrast between the wide acceptance of Ephraim's Hymns, through
 the East, and the scanty survival of those of his contemporary, in the
 West.

 [310] A few exceptional Greek hymns may be pointed out of earlier date
 (e.g., that mentioned by St. Basil, De Spiritu S., XXIX; but the
 statement above made is in the main accurate.  Anatolius, Patriarch of
 Constantinople (449-458) seems to have been the first to devote himself
 to the composition of hymns of the type above described.  See Neale (as
 above).

 [311] Probably the earliest extant Syriac poem is the Hymn of the Soul
 (printed by Dr. Wright in Apocryphal Acts, p. 174; also by Mr. Bevan in
 Texts and Studies, V. 3).  Its metre, though less regular, is
 substantially the seven-syllabled of Ephraim.  Whether Bardesan (or
 Harmonius) wrote in metres like those of Ephraim has been questioned;
 but if it is true that Ephraim's hymns were adapted by him to the tunes
 of Harmonius, it seems to follow that his metres were those of the
 hymns to which those tunes belonged.

 IX.--The Selections Included in the Present Collection.

 The specimens of Ephraim's compositions offered in these selections
 are:--

 (1) The Nisibene Hymns, (2) The Hymns of the Nativity, (3) The Hymns
 for the Epiphany, (4) Three Homilies (i., On our Lord; ii., On Reproof
 and Repentance; iii., On the Sinful Woman).

 Of (2) the Nativity Hymns, the first thirteen are reprinted from the
 version by the Rex. J. B. Morris (Oxford, 1847), made from the Roman
 Edition of the Syriac Works of Ephraim.  The rest of the series as
 translated (six [312] in number, making nineteen in all) were unknown
 when that edition was completed in 1743.  These latter, and also (3)
 the Epiphany Hymns (with one exception) [313] have since come to light
 in the Nitrian collection of the British Museum, and were printed by
 Professor Lamy in his St. Ephraim (Tom. I, cc. 1-144; Tom. II., cc.
 427-504), 1882-1889.  In the same edition (Tom. I., cc. 145-274;
 311-338) were first printed (4) the three Homilies. [314] Our
 translations of these follow Lamy's text, with here and there a slight
 variation where errors seem to exist.  These two series of Hymns belong
 to the ecclesiastical class:  their titles appropriate them to two
 great Festivals of the Church, and portions of these are embodied in
 Syriac Rituals still in use.  Of the two Homilies, the former was
 written for the Feast of the Epiphany, like the Hymns which precede it.

 The Nisibene Hymns (1) are translated from the text as first printed by
 Dr. Bickell (1866), whose edition, like that of Dr. Lamy, rests upon
 mss. of the Nitrian collection. [315] They also were unknown to the
 Roman editors of the last century, and to the English translator of
 1847; and they have not till now appeared in English.  The series when
 complete consisted of 77 Hymns.  Of these the first division
 (I.-XXXIV.) treat of the fortunes of the Church in Nisibis, Carrhena
 [Haran], and an unnamed city (probably Edessa). [316] The remainder
 (XXXV. to end) deal with the topics of Death and the Resurrection.  The
 present selection comprises 46 of these, namely:--of the first
 division, the first 21, those which relate to Nisibis and which are the
 Nisibene Hymns proper; of the second division, two series--one of 8
 hymns (XXXV.-XLII.) in which Death and Satan hold monologue or
 dialogue,--the other of 17 (LII.-LXVIII.), similar in character, but
 with Man as a third interlocutor.

 [312] From the Nitrian ms., 14506.

 [313] Hymns 1-14 from mss., 14506, 14572; No. 15 from the Maronite
 Breviary.

 [314] From mss. 14570, 14651, 17266; and a fragment from 14654 (printed
 in Tom. II., pp. xx-xxiii.).

 [315] mss. 14572, 17141 chiefly; with a few others of secondary value.
 Five Hymns are lost (viii. and xxii.-xxv.), and part of two others (ix.
 and xxvi.).

 [316] Note the mention of Edessa in Hymn xlii. 1.

 X.--Probable Dates of His Works.

 Of the compositions contained in this volume, none yields internal
 evidence of its date, except the Nisibene Hymns of the first division.
 Hymns XXXV.-XLII. (not included here), apparently belong to the later
 (or Edessene) period of Ephraim's life, and to the reign of
 Valens,--i.e., they are later than the year 363.  The 21 Hymns which
 stand first in our collection may confidently be assigned to the year
 of the third siege (350) and the thirteen following years.  Hymn I. was
 indubitably composed while the siege was still urgent; Hymns I. and
 III. immediately after the deliverance; Hymns IV.-XII. deal with the
 fortunes of the city and country in a troubled time of invasion that
 succeeded; the rest (XIII.-XXI.) treat of the four successive Bishops
 of Nisibis under whom Ephraim lived--Jacob, Babu, Valgesh, and
 Abraham.  The last-named is not elsewhere recorded except by Elias of
 Nisibis, but the death of Valgesh is known to have occurred in 361.
 [317] The Hymns therefore which celebrate the accession of Abraham to
 the See (XVII.-XXI.) must be placed in the interval, 361-363, the
 latter being the year when Ephraim with all the Christian population of
 the city was driven out by Sapor.  Hymns XIII.-XVI., being written
 while Valgesh was Bishop--for they compare him with his two
 predecessors--fall into the interval between the year of the siege
 (350) which they speak of as past,--and the year of the death of
 Valgesh (361).  Bickell assigns IV.-XII. to the months of Sapor's
 invasion in 359; XIII.-XVI. to 358 and 359; XVII.-XXI. to 363, in the
 short space between Julian's death and the surrender of Nisibis.

 It is probable that most of his Hymns that are definitely controversial
 belong, like most of his controversial writings, to the years of his
 later life, at Edessa.  And as we have seen, the earliest of them that
 can be confidently dated, is not earlier than 350.  But it would be
 hasty to conclude that he had composed no Hymns before that date, and
 that in the Nisibene Hymns of the siege we have the first fruits of the
 vine of his vision.  In 350 he must have been over forty--perhaps over
 fifty years of age; and it is highly improbable that a fertility which
 proved to be so abundant, did not begin to manifest itself at a much
 earlier age; or that a literary offspring of such bulk and importance
 was all produced in the last five and twenty years of a long life.  The
 earlier authorities concerning his life give no definite information on
 this head; and the Syriac Life is vague in its statements and
 untrustworthy in its chronology.  The account given of Barhebræus, a
 well-informed but very late writer (thirteenth century), can hardly be
 accepted as embodying any genuine tradition, but has probability in its
 favor:--"From the time of the Nicene Council (he writes [318] ),
 Ephraim began to write canticles and hymns against the heresies of his
 time,"--for few of his hymns are without a polemic spirit, though (as
 has been said) those that are purely controversial seem to be of a
 later period.  A much later author indeed, Georgius "Bishop of the
 Arabians" (writing in 714) warns us that there is no evidence to assign
 any of Ephraim's writings to the twenty years' interval between the
 Nicene Council and the year 345--"especially (he adds) to the years
 before 337." [319] This writer, however, is here arguing in support
 of the claim of Aphrahat to be an independent author, against those who
 regarded him as a disciple of Ephraim; and he rests his case on the
 ground that whereas the Demonstrations of Aphrahat are (as we shall see
 presently) dated from 337 to 345, no composition of Ephraim's can be
 shown to have been written so early.  And it must be admitted that the
 earliest date (as above noted) that can be fixed with certainty for any
 of Ephraim's innumerable productions in 350,--thirteen years later than
 Aphrahat's earlier Demonstrations.  Against this is to be set the
 tradition of Ephraim's presence at Nicæa, implying as it does that even
 in 325 he had made himself a notable person,--and the probability that
 one who has left such ample proof of the copiousness of his literary
 gift, must have begun to exercise it before a date at which he would
 have passed his thirtieth year (supposing his birth to have been in
 306), or even have entered middle life (if we place it at the beginning
 of the century).  The two writers were unquestionably contemporary, and
 as yet no sufficient data have been discovered to determine to which of
 them seniority belongs.

 [317] Chron. Edess., as above; Chronol. of Elias Nisib.

 [318] Ap. Assemani, B. O. I. 116.

 [319] Ap. Forget, De Vita Aphraatis, lntroductio, p. 22; see also pp.
 121-126 of Forget's Dissertation which follows; also p. 5 of Introd.

 Second Part

 Aphrahat the Persian Sage.

 1.  Name of Author of Demonstrations long Unknown.--The author of the
 Demonstrations, eight of which appear (for the first time in an English
 version) in the present volume, has a singular literary history.  By
 nationality a Persian, in an age when Zoroastrianism was the religion
 of Persia, he wrote in Syriac as a Christian theologian.  His writings,
 now known to us as the works of Aphrahat, were remembered, cited,
 translated, and transcribed for at least two centuries after his death;
 but his proper name seems to have been for a time forgotten, so that in
 the mss. of the fifth and sixth centuries the Demonstrations are
 described as composed by "the Persian Sage," or "Mar Jacob the Persian
 Sage;" and a writer of the eighth century, who had made a minute study
 of these writings and ascertained their date, admits that he has been
 unable to find out "who or what he was, his rank in the Church, his
 name or abode."  Not only so, but the name Jacob assigned (rightly or
 wrongly) to him has led to a confusion of identity.  His works have
 been ascribed for many hundred years--from a date not long after their
 composition down to quite recent times, to an earlier Jacob, the famous
 and saintly Bishop of Nisibis in the days of Constantine the Great.  It
 is not until the tenth century that the true name of "the Persian Sage"
 emerges to light as Aphrahat, by which he is unhesitatingly designated
 by several well informed and accurate authorities of that and the three
 succeeding centuries., and under which he is known to modern scholars.

 2.  Their Subjects, and Arrangement.--The Demonstrations are twenty-two
 in number, after the number of the letters of the Syriac alphabet, each
 of them beginning with the letter to which it corresponds in order.
 The first ten form a group by themselves, and are somewhat earlier in
 date than those which follow:  they deal with Christian graces, hopes,
 and duties, as appears from their titles:--"Concerning Faith, Charity,
 Fasting, Prayer, Wars, Monks, Penitents, the Resurrection, Humility,
 Pastors."  Of those that compose the later group, three relate to the
 Jews ("Concerning Circumcision, the Passover, the Sabbath"); followed
 by one described as "Hortatory," which seems to be a letter of rebuke
 addressed by Aphrahat, on behalf of a Synod of Bishops, to the clergy
 and people of Seleucia and Ctesiphon; after which the Jewish series is
 resumed in five discourses, "Concerning Divers Meals, The Call of the
 Gentiles, Jesus the Messiah, Virginity, the Dispersion of Israel."  The
 three last are of the same general character as the first
 ten,--"Concerning Almsgiving, Persecution, Death, and the Latter
 Times."  To this collection is subjoined a twenty-third Demonstration,
 supplementary to the rest, "Concerning the Grape," under which title is
 signified the blessing transmitted from the beginning through Christ,
 in allusion to the words of Isaiah, "As the grape [320] is found in the
 cluster and one saith, Destroy it not" (lxv. 8).  This treatise
 embodies a chronological disquisition of some importance.

 3.  Dates of Composition.--Of the dates at which they were written,
 these discourses supply conclusive evidence.  At the end of section 5
 of Demonstr. V. (Concerning Wars), the author reckons the years from
 the era of Alexander (b.c. 311) to the time of his writing as 648.  He
 wrote therefore in a.d. 337--the year of the death of Constantine the
 Great.  Demonst. XIV. is formally dated in its last section, "in the
 month Shebat. in the year 655" (that is, a.d. 344).  More fully, in
 closing the alphabetic series (XXII. 25) he informs us that the above
 dates apply to the two groups--the first ten being written in 337; the
 twelve that follow, in 344.  Finally, the supplementary discourse
 "Concerning the Grape" was written (as stated, XXIII. 69) in July,
 345.  Thus the entire work was completed within nine years,--five years
 before the middle of the fourth century,--before the composition of the
 earliest work of Ephraim of which the date can be determined with
 certainty.

 4.  Extent and Limits of their Circulation.--These Demonstrations,
 though they fell far short of attaining the unbounded popularity which
 was the lot of the countless Hymns and Homilies of Ephraim, appear to
 have won for themselves a recognized place in Syriac literature.  It is
 true that, in striking contrast with the overwhelming numbers of mss.
 containing portions, great or small, of Ephraim's works, which are to
 be met with in nearly every collection of Syriac written remains, one
 complete and two incomplete copies are all that have reached us of this
 series of twenty-three treatises; and extracts or quotations from them
 very rarely occur. [321] Yet it is clear that compositions which were
 thought worthy at an early date of translation into at least one
 foreign tongue, must have had some considerable reputation in the
 country of their origin; and it may be presumed that these two or three
 mss. (of the fifth and sixth centuries), are the survivors of a fairly
 large number of which the majority have perished.

 The Armenian translation is probably the earliest evidence now extant
 of the circulation (though under a wrong ascription of authorship) of
 the Demonstrations, of which it comprises nineteen.  Armenian scholars
 seem to agree in the belief that it was made in the fifth century,
 before its original was more than a hundred years in being.  An
 Ethiopic translation of the discourse "On Wars" is extant, but there is
 no evidence that it formed part of a version extending to all or any of
 the remaining twenty-two, nor is its date even approximately
 determinable.

 The manuscript evidence hardly reaches so far back as that of the
 Armenian version.  The oldest extant ms. of these discourses (Add.
 17182 of the British Museum) contains the first ten, and is dated 474.
 With it is bound up (under the same number) a second, dated 512,
 containing the remaining thirteen.  A third (Add. 14619) of the sixth
 century likewise, exhibits the whole series.  A fourth (Orient, 1017),
 more recent by eight centuries, will be mentioned farther on.  Of the
 three early mss., the first designates the author as "the Persian Sage"
 merely, as does also the third:  the second prefixes his name as "Mar
 Jacob the Persian Sage."

 Among Syriac authors, the first to show an acquaintance with these
 treatises, at a date prior to that of the earliest of these mss., is
 Isaac of Antioch, known as "the Great," whose literary activity belongs
 to the first half of the fifth century.  In his works passages have
 been pointed out [322] which are evidently borrowed with slight change
 from the Demonstrations,--especially from that Concerning Fasting, and
 (though less distinctly) from that Concerning Faith.  The imitation,
 however, is tacit, and Isaac nowhere names the work (or its author)
 whence he derived the illustrations and even the expressions he uses in
 treating of these topics.

 Before the close of the same century, we find evidence that they were
 known--by repute, though apparently no farther--to a Latin writer of
 Western Europe, Gennadius of Marseilles, the continuator of St.
 Jerome's work De Viris Illustribus, who wrote about the year 495.
 Though mistaken (as will presently be shown) about their parentage, and
 incorrectly informed as to their number (which he supposes to be
 twenty-six), Gennadius states their titles with such an approach to
 accuracy, as to leave no room for doubt that the discourses he
 describes are those of which we now treat.  He shows himself aware that
 they are in Syriac, but gives no hint that he has ever seen them, or
 that he is able to read them. [323]

 In the seventh century, or (however) early in the eighth, tokens appear
 of a revival of interest in them.  Georgius, "Bishop of the Arabs,"
 [324] a Jacobite prelate, having been applied to by one Joshua an
 anchorite for information concerning the "Epistles" (as he styles them)
 of "the Persian Sage" and their authorship, wrote (in Syriac) in the
 year 714 a very full and elaborate reply, in which he cites at length
 passages from several of them, including those (above referred to) in
 which the dates of writing are stated with precision,--and he infers
 from these dates, that the author, of whose name he professes himself
 to be ignorant, wrote too early to be a disciple of Ephraim.  To this
 inference we may safely assent, even though we hold that Ephraim wrote
 and taught earlier in the century than Georgius endeavours to place
 him.  The point to be noted is, that this learned and acute writer,
 though he had by careful study made himself familiar with the
 Demonstrations, neither knows, nor can guess at, the name of their
 author, nor can he record any tradition concerning his identity.  He
 can only tell what he has learned from their contents, that they were
 written from 337 to 345, by one who was a monk, and a cleric; and that
 they were characterized by certain peculiarities of doctrine.

 5.  Ascribed to Jacob of Nisibis.--Thus it appears that the series of
 discourses now known as the Demonstrations of Aphrahat, were imitated,
 and transcribed, and translated, into Armenian, and their titles cited
 by a Latin biographer, and their contents minutely investigated by an
 able critic, within the four centuries that followed the time of their
 composition; while through all that long period the name of Aphrahat
 had passed out of memory, and the "Persian Sage" simply, or else with
 the addition of an ambiguous and misleading name, "Jacob, the Persian
 Sage," was the designation by which their author was usually known.  As
 we have seen, the scribes of two mss., of the fifth and sixth
 centuries, and Georgius in the early eighth, confine themselves to the
 former; and the scribe of the sixth, thirty-eight years later than the
 earlier of the other two, uses the latter.  Misled by it, the Armenian
 translator, and Gennadius in his biographical work, fell into the error
 of identifying the Jacob who wrote the Demonstrations with a namesake,
 the earlier and more conspicuous Jacob of Nisibis, of whom we have had
 occasion to speak in treating of the life of Ephraim.  But of this
 celebrated personage no writings are recorded, nor was he a Persian,
 [325] but a native of Nisibis (in his time a city of the Roman Empire),
 in 338, seven years before the completion of the treatises in
 question.  As Jacob of Nisibis is thus too early to be the author of
 them, so, on the other hand, Jacob of Sarug, whom Assemani suggested in
 correcting the mistake of Gennadius, [326] is too late; for he was not
 born till more than a century after the date of the last Demonstration.

 6.  Reappearance of the Name of Aphrahat.--It is not until some years
 after the mid-die of the tenth century, that the "Persian Sage" first
 appears under his proper name,--of which, though as it appears
 generally forgotten in the Syriac world of letters, a tradition had
 survived.--The Nestorian Bar-Bahlul (circ. 963) in his Syro-Arabic
 Lexicon, writes thus:--"Aphrahat [mentioned] in the Book of Paradise,
 is the Persian Sage, as they record."--So too, in the eleventh century,
 Elias of Nisibis (Barsinæus, d. 1049), embodies in his Chronography, a
 table, compiled from Demonstr. XXIII., of the chronography from the
 Creation to the "Era of Alexander" (b.c. 311), which he describes as
 "The years of the House of Adam, according to the opinion of Aphrahat,
 the Persian Sage." [327] --To the like effect, but with fuller
 information, the great light of the mediæval Jacobite Church, Gregory
 Barhebræus (d. 1286), in Part I. of his Ecclesiastical Chronicle, in
 enumerating the orthodox contemporaries of Athanasius, mentions, after
 Ephraim, "the Persian Sage who wrote the Book of Demonstrations;" [328]
 and again in Part II., supplies his name under a slightly different
 form, as one who "was of note in the time of Papas the Catholicus,"
 "the Persian Sage by name Pharhad, of whom there are extant a book of
 admonition [al., admonitions] in Syriac, and twenty-two Epistles
 according to the letters of the alphabet." [329] Here we have not
 only the name and description of the personage in question, but a
 fairly accurate account of his works, under the titles by which the
 mss. describe them, Epistles and Demonstrations;--and moreover a
 sufficient indication of his date, in agreement with that which the
 Demonstrations claim:  for one who began to write in 337 must have
 lived in the closing years of the life of Papas (who died in 334), and
 in the earlier years of the life of Ephraim.  So yet again, a
 generation later, the learned Nestorian prelate, Ebedjesu, in his
 Catalogue of Syrian ecclesiastical authors, [330] writes, "Aphrahat,
 the Persian Sage, composed two volumes with Homilies that are according
 to the alphabet."  Here once more the name and designation are given
 unhesitatingly, and the division of the discourses into two groups is
 correctly noted; but the concluding words appear to distinguish these
 groups from the alphabetic Homilies.  Either, therefore, we must take
 the preposition rendered "with" to mean "containing,"--or we must
 conclude that Ebedjesu's knowledge of the work was at second-hand and
 incorrect.  Finally, in a very late ms., [331] dated 1364, is found the
 first or chronological part of Demonstration XXIII., headed as
 follows:--"The Demonstration concerning the Grape, of the Sage
 Aphrahat, who is Jacob, Bishop of Mar Mathai."  Here (though the prefix
 "Persian" is absent) we have the author's title of "Sage"; and the
 identification of the "Aphrahat" of the later authorities with the
 "Jacob" of the earlier is not merely implied but expressly affirmed.
 Here, moreover, we have what seems to account for the twofold name.  As
 author, he is Aphrahat; as Bishop, he is Jacob--the latter name having
 been no doubt assumed on his elevation to the Episcopate. [332] Such
 changes of name, at consecration, which in later ages of the Syrian
 Church became customary, were no doubt exceptional in the earlier
 period of which we are treating.  But the fact that Aphrahat was a
 Persian name, bestowed on him no doubt in childhood--when he was still
 (as will be shown presently) outside the Christian fold--a name which
 is supposed to signify "Chief" or "Prefect," and which may have seemed
 unsuited to the humility of the sacred office--supplies a reason for
 the substitution in its stead of a name associated with sacred history,
 both of the Old and of the New Testament.  Here finally we have the
 direct statement of what Georgius had justly inferred from the opening
 of Dem. XIV., that the writer was himself of the clergy, and in this
 Epistle writes as a cleric to clerics.

 We have now brought together all the known authorities who yield
 information concerning this collection of treatises, and its author.
 It remains that we should put into a connected form the facts to which
 they testify, and point out the inferences yielded by their notices,
 and by the treatises themselves.

 7.  His Nationality Persian, and Probably Heathen.--That the author was
 of Persian nationality, is a point on which all the witnesses agree,
 except the fourteenth-century scribe of the ms. Orient. 1017, who
 however is merely silent about it.  The name Aphrahat is, as has been
 already said, Persian--which fact at once confirms the tradition that
 he belonged to Persia, and helps to account for what seems to be the
 reluctance [333] of early writers to call him by a name that was
 foreign, unfamiliar, unsuited to his subsequent station in the Church,
 and superseded by one that had sacred associations.  As a Persian, he
 dates his writings by the years of the reign of the Persian King:  the
 twenty-two were completed (he says) in the thirty-fifth, the
 twenty-third in the thirty-sixth of the reign of Sapor. [334] --Again:
 as a Persian of the early fourth century, it is presumable that he was
 not originally a Christian.  And this is apparently confirmed by the
 internal evidence of his own writings; for he speaks of himself as one
 of those "who have cast away idols, and call that a lie which our
 father bequeathed to us;" and again, "who ought to worship Jesus, for
 that He has turned away our froward minds from all superstitions of
 vain error, and taught us to worship one God our Father and Maker."
 [335] --But it is clear that he must have lived in a frontier region
 where Syriac was spoken freely; [336] or else must have removed into a
 Syriac-speaking country at an early age; for the language and style of
 his writings are completely pure, showing no trace of foreign idiom, or
 even of the want of ease that betrays a foreigner writing in what is
 not his mother-tongue.  It is clear also that, at whatever age or under
 whatever circumstances he embraced Christianity, he must have taken the
 Christian Scriptures and Christian theology into his inmost heart and
 understanding as every page of his writings attests.

 8.  Evidence that he was a Cleric, and a Bishop.--We have already seen
 that Georgius in his study of the Demonstrations perceived the
 indications which prove the writer to be of the Clergy.  He goes
 farther, and notes that the sixth (Concerning Monks) is evidently
 written by a monk.  He might have added, what is yet more important,
 that the fourteenth (which he rightly fixes on as evidently written by
 a cleric) can hardly have been written by one of lower rank than that
 of Bishop.  The translation of the opening sentence of this discourse
 (which is an Epistle to the Bishops, Clergy and people of the Church of
 Seleucia and Ctesiphon) is disputed; for "we being gathered together
 have taken counsel to write this Epistle to our brethren...the Bishops,
 Priests, and Deacons, and the whole Church" (XIV. 1) may be read so as
 to make the "Bishops, Priests, etc.," either, the "we" who write,--or,
 the "brethren" who are written to. [337] Whichever construction is
 adopted, the fact remains that Aphrahat here writes on behalf of a body
 of men assembled in council, who through him admonished their "dear and
 beloved brethren" whom they designate (farther on) as "the Bishops,
 Priests and Deacons...and all the people of God who are in Seleucia and
 Ctesiphon."  It is not conceivable that any body of men but a synod of
 Bishops (with their clergy and people present and assenting) would, in
 that age of the Church, have taken upon itself to meet and consult and
 address such an epistle of admonition and implied rebuke to that great
 see, the seat of the "Catholicus of the East," [338] the prelate who in
 the oriental hierarchy was inferior in dignity to the Antiochian
 Patriarch alone, and in authority almost coequal with him.  And it may
 be safely assumed that the writer of the Epistle was one--probably the
 chief--of the Bishops in whose name it is written.  If we accept the
 late, but internally probable, statement of the Scribe of ms. Orient.
 1017 (above mentioned), that "the Persian Sage" was "Bishop of the
 monastery of Mar Mathai," we arrive at a complete explanation of the
 circumstances under which this Epistle was composed.  For the Bishop of
 Mar Mathai was Metropolitan of Nineveh, and ranked among the Bishops of
 "the East" only second to the Catholicus; and his province bordered on
 that which the Catholicus (as Metropolitan of Seleucia) held in his
 immediate jurisdiction.  The Bishop of Mar Mathai therefore would
 properly preside in a Synod of the Eastern Bishops, met to consider the
 disorders and discussions existing in Seleucia and its suffragan sees.
 It thus becomes intelligible how an Epistle of such official character
 has found a place in a series of discourses of which the rest are
 written as from man to man merely.  The writer addresses the Bishops,
 Clergy, and people of Seleucia and Ctesiphon in the name of a Synod
 over which he was President, a Synod probably of Bishops suffragan to
 Nineveh, and perhaps of those of some adjacent sees.  Thus the
 admonition comes officially from "Mar Jacob Bishop of Mar Mathai;" but
 the thoughts, and language, and literary form are the production of
 Aphrahat personally, and he accordingly embodies it as fourteenth in
 his alphabetic series of twenty-two treatises, in which it is duly
 distinguished by its initial letter nun, the fourteenth of the Semitic
 alphabet.  It certainly breaks the sequence of subjects, coming after
 and before treatises relating to Judaism:  but for the alphabetic
 sequence it is essential.--This alphabetic arrangement was overlooked
 or ignored (as it seems) by the Armenian translator, who has omitted
 four of the twenty-two and transposed others, placing the fourteenth
 apart from the rest,--although in Demonstr. XXII. (which however is not
 included in the Armenian version) the author recites all their titles,
 arranging them in their order, and noting that it is the order of the
 alphabet. [339] In the Syriac original the fact is beyond question
 that Demonstr. XIV. is an integral part of the series; and we may rely
 with confidence on the internal evidence it yields of the high
 ecclesiastical rank of the writer [340] --evidence confirmed by, and in
 its turn confirming, the statement of the fourteenth-century scribe who
 makes him Bishop of the second see of the East. [341]

 Reverting to the subject of the Persian nationality of Aphrahat, we
 note that this monastery of Mar Mathai was on the eastern, that is, the
 Persian, side of the Tigris, not far from what once was Nineveh and is
 now Mosul, on the precipitous mountain Elpheph (now Maklob) where it
 still stands, though ruinous, and is known by the name of Sheikh Matta,
 and is occupied by the Metram (or Metropolitan) and a few monks.

 9.  His Writings little Concerned with Current Controversies.--To the
 remoteness of his see, and probably of the place of his obvious origin
 and abode, from the centres of religious thought and controversy, is
 probably due the notable absence from these discourses of all reference
 to the great theological questions that had employed, and in his time
 were engrossing, the leading minds of Christendom.  He began to write
 within ten years after the Nicene Council and the Arian controversy,
 and the disputations that grew out of it were still ripe, and continued
 to abound long after.  The writings of Ephraim show how vehemently in
 Aphrahat's lifetime, or possibly a few years later, the theologians of
 Nisibis and of Edessa deemed themselves bound to strive for the Faith
 against Arians, Anomoeans, Apollinarians,--and not less against the
 surviving or revived heresy of home-grown production--that of Bardesan.
 [342] But in Seleucia and Ctesiphon it is not heresy, but strife,
 self-seeking, and neglect of duty, that are censured by the Synod
 through the letter which we know as Demonstr. XIV., and the errors
 which the Bishop of Mar Mathai combats for the benefit of those whom he
 addresses are the errors of the Jews who refused and resisted the creed
 and the customs of the Church.  There is in one place (Demonstr. III.
 9) a passing reference to the heresiarchs of the second and third
 centuries, Valentinus, Manes, and Marcion; but it merely amounts to a
 brief statement in which the false teaching of each is summed up in a
 sentence, each followed by the question, Can one who holds such
 doctrine find acceptance before God by his fasting?  No later heresy is
 even mentioned.

 These facts not only confirm the tradition which places him at Nineveh,
 but they go far to account for the obscurity in which his name and his
 writings lay so long.  In an age of excited controversy, these quiet
 hortatory discourses, marked by no striking eloquence of style or
 subtlety of reasoning, dealing with no burning question of the time,
 nor with any disputes more recent than those of the two previous
 centuries, or those between Jew and Christian, would hardly attain to
 more than a local circulation; and when they penetrated to Edessa or
 other such centres of Syriac theological life, would awaken but a
 languid interest.  That they did so penetrate is certain; for of the
 existing mss. whence we derive their text, one (the oldest) was written
 in Edessa in 474, and Isaac of Antioch, who knew and imitated them,
 before that time, was a disciple of Zenobius of Edessa.  But the
 paucity of such mss., and still more the oblivion which so long covered
 the name of Aphrahat, prove, either, that the work failed to attain
 popularity--or, that it provoked some prejudice which led to its
 practical suppression.  It would be difficult, however, to point out
 anything in it to which exception could be so seriously taken as to be
 a bar to its acceptance.  None of the errors which so keen a critic as
 Georgius detected in its theology--even if we admit the justice of his
 censure--is such as to shock the orthodoxy of the fourth or fifth
 century.

 10.  Possibly Suspected of a Nestorian Tinge.--Yet it is possible that
 theological prepossession may indirectly have brought about the
 disfavour or at least disuse into which the Demonstrations fell.  In
 Edessa there was an institution known as the "School of the Persians,"
 to which as it seems disciples from Persia resorted for theological
 instruction.  From Ibas, Bishop of Edessa (435-457), who was infected
 with Nestorianism, the Nestorian taint passed to Maris, a Persian (and
 through him to Persia generally), and likewise to Maro, a teacher in
 the school.  After the death of Ibas, the Persian and others who had
 followed him were expelled from Edessa, by Nonnus his orthodox opponent
 and successor; and the school was finally closed by the next Bishop,
 Cyrus, in the reign of Zeno [343] (who died 491).  These facts may well
 be supposed to have raised a prejudice against all writings coming from
 a Persian source; and the works of "the Persian Sage," absolutely free
 though they are from any thought or phrase which could be construed as
 favouring or tending in the direction that led to the errors of
 Nestorius, may have come undeservedly under the ban issued against the
 School of the Persians and all that was connected with it, by the
 orthodox zeal of Cyrus.  It is probable that his writings were read in
 that school, and that he himself may have studied them in early life.
 Prescribed in Edessa, the centre of Syriac theology, these discourses
 would be effectually checked in their circulation in all churches of
 Syriac-speaking Christendom that were anti-Nestorian. [344]

 11.  Their Popularity in the Armenian Church.--How the book made good
 and held its footing in the Armenian Church is perhaps more difficult
 to explain.  It is not indeed the only instance in which an author, of
 whom no works are extant in their original tongue, has survived and
 been widely known in a translation.  A notable example is that of
 Irenæus, of whose great work on Heresies, so well known in its early
 Latin dress, but a few fragments have reached us, through citations, in
 Greek.  There is no obvious ecclesiastical channel through which the
 knowledge of the writings of Aphrahat can be supposed to have reached
 Armenia, unless by way of Edessa, before they fell (as above suggested)
 into discredit in that city.  But it is to be borne in mind that from
 and after the close of the fourth century "greater (i.e. Eastern)
 Armenia was ruled as a dependency of Persia, by Persian Kings." [345]
 Of these the earlier at least were Christians, and their policy led
 them to promote the Syriac language and literature, as against the
 Greek, among their people; until, under the Catholicus Isaac (d. 441),
 the Armenian tongue was reduced to writing (in the characters then
 invested by Mesrob), and a beginning made of an Armenian sacred
 literature by the translation of the Scriptures into Armenian from the
 Syriac.  Versions of the works of Syriac divines would naturally follow
 before long.  That among these Ephraim's Commentaries were conspicuous
 we have already mentioned (p. 147):  that those of a Syriac Divine of
 Persian nationality should be passed over is unlikely--a Divine too of
 such repute as to have won the honourable title of "the Persian Sage,"
 and who as occupant of a great Persian see was also known as Jacob of
 Mar Mathai, metropolitan of Nineveh.  How readily his assumed name
 would lead to his being confused with his far more widely known
 namesake of Nisibis, we have already pointed out; and it is obvious
 that the name, once attributed and accepted, would lend fictitious
 vogue to the book.

 12.  First Printed in an Armenian Version.--The mistake of the Armenian
 translator became, in later times, the means of first making the
 work--though not the name--of Aphrahat known to European scholars.  The
 Armenian version, containing nineteen of the Demonstrations (XX. being
 omitted), was printed at Rome in 1756, edited, with a Latin version, by
 Antonelli.  Its text is derived from a transcript made in 1719, after
 an ancient copy in the Armenian Monastery at Venice, by order of the
 Abbot Peter Mechitar, and presented by him to Pope Clement XI. for the
 Vatican Library.  In this edition, entitled S. Patris Jacobi Episcopi
 Nisibeni Sermones, the discourses are not merely ascribed to Jacob of
 Nisibis, but the theory is advanced by the editor, that the Armenian
 text is the original.  It is hardly necessary to point out that the
 alphabetic arrangement of the twenty-two discourses--which is not and
 could not be reproduced in Armenian, [346] a language with an alphabet
 of thirty-eight letters--is alone sufficient to expose the
 impossibility of this idea.

 13.  Recovery of the Post-Syriac Original.--The Syriac text, so long
 forgotten, was first discovered among the mss. of the great Nitrian
 collection in the British Museum, by Dr. Cureton, whose name is so
 honourably known as a great Syriac scholar, and editor of Syriac
 documents.  He did not live, however, to accomplish his desire of
 publishing it, but bequeathed that task to his still more eminent
 successor, in the leadership of Syriac studies in England, the late Dr.
 William Wright, then assistant keeper of mss. in the British Museum,
 and afterwards Professor of Arabic in the University of Cambridge.  To
 him is due the admirable editio princeps of the Syriac text of all the
 twenty-three Demonstrations (from the mss. 14617 and 17182), issued in
 London, 1869.  He did not, however, carry out his intention of adding
 to this work a second volume, containing an English translation of the
 whole.

 Since then, another edition of the series of twenty-two has been
 published in Paris (Firmin-Didot, 1894), as the first volume of a
 Patrologia Syriaca, under the general editorship of Dr. R. Graffin,
 lecturer in Syriac in the Theological Faculty of the Catholic Institute
 of Paris.  This excellent work includes a Latin Version, and is
 preceded by a learned and copious Introduction, in which all questions
 relating to Aphrahat and his writings are fully treated,--both of which
 are the work of Dom Parisot, Benedictine Priest and Monk.

 14.  Was Aphrahat Prior to Ephraim?--In thus placing Aphrahat first as
 their projected series of Syriac Divines, the learned editors follow
 the opinion which, ever since Wright published his edition, has been
 adopted by Syriac scholars--that Aphrahat is prior in time to Ephraim.
 This is undoubtedly true (as pointed out above) in the only limited
 sense, that the Demonstrations are earlier by some years (the first ten
 by thirteen years, the remainder by five or six) than the earliest of
 Ephraim's writings which can be dated with certainty (namely, the first
 Nisibene Hymn, which belongs to 350).  It is then assumed that Ephraim
 was born in the reign of Constantine, therefore not earlier than 306,
 and that Aphrahat was a man of advanced age when he wrote (of which
 there is no proof whatever), and must therefore have been born before
 the end of the third century--perhaps as early as 280.  It has been
 shown above (p. 145) that even if we admit the authority of the Syriac
 Life of Ephraim, we must regard the supposed statement of his birth in
 Constantine's time as a mistranslation or rather perversion of the
 text.  Thus the argument for placing Ephraim's birth so late as 306
 disappears, while for placing Aphrahat's birth no argument has been
 advanced, but merely conjecture; and the result is, that the two may,
 so far as evidence goes, be regarded as contemporary.  It is true that
 Barhebræus, in his Ecclesiastical History, reckons Aphrahat as
 belonging to the time of Papas, who died 335; but it is to be noted
 that in the very same context he mentions that letters were extant
 purporting to be addressed by Jacob of Nisibis and Ephraim to the same
 Papas,--and though he admits that some discredited the genuineness of
 these letters, he gives no hint that Ephraim was too young to have
 written them.  In fact he could not do so, for in the earlier part of
 this History he had already named Ephraim as present at the Nicene
 Council in 325, and had placed his name before that of Aphrahat in
 including both among the contemporaries of the Great Athanasius. [347]

 15.  His Use of Holy Scripture.--Concerning the canon and text of the
 Books of the Bible as used by Aphrahat,--a subject hardly within the
 scope of this Introduction--a few words must suffice.

 In citing the Old Testament, he shows himself acquainted with nearly
 all the Books of the Jewish Canon, and with some, but not all, of the
 deutero-canonical books commonly called Apocrypha--with Tobit,
 Ecclesiasticus (and perhaps Wisdom), and Maccabees, but not Judith,
 Susanna, Bel and the Dragon, or Baruch.  He follows the Peshitto rather
 than the Greek, but not seldom departs from both; and he shows a
 knowledge of the Chaldee Paraphrase.

 His New Testament Canon is apparently that of the Peshitto;--that is to
 say, he shows no signs of acquaintance with the four shorter Catholic
 Epistles, and in the one citation which seems to be from the
 Apocalypse, it has been shown to be probable that he is really
 referring to the Targum of Onkelos on Deut. xxxiii. 6. [348] But he
 omits all reference also to the longer Catholic Epistles, except 1
 John.  He also passes over (of St. Paul's Epistles) 2 Thessalonians,
 Titus, and Philemon.  But as regards the last, its shortness accounts
 for the omission; and as to the former two, he can hardly have been
 unacquainted with them, inasmuch as he knew 1 Thessalonians and 1 and 2
 Timothy.  He designates the writer of Hebrews as "the Apostle,"
 probably meaning to ascribe it to St. Paul.

 In citing the Gospels, he seems sometimes to follow the Diatessaron,
 which, as we have said, was in the hands of his contemporary Ephraim,
 and which is known to have circulated largely in the East until far on
 in the following century.  Sometimes, however, his references seem to
 be to the separate Gospels as commonly read.  It cannot be claimed for
 the Peshitto that he always or even usually follows its text; nor yet
 does he uniformly agree with the Curetonian, or with the probably
 earlier form of the Syriac Gospel recently discovered by Mr. Lewis.
 With each of these last, however, his text has many points of
 coincidence.  In the rest of the New Testament, we can only say that he
 must have had before him a text which diverged not seldom from the
 Peshitto. [349]

 16.  Literary and Theological Value of his Writings.--From the
 Demonstrations, eight have been selected for the present volume, viz.:
 I. Of Faith (with Letter of an Inquirer prefixed); V. Of Wars; VI. Of
 Monks; VIII. Of the Resurrection of the Dead; X. Of Pastors; XVII. Of
 Christ the Son of God; XXI. Of Persecution; XXII. Of Death and the
 Latter Times.  Of these, one only (XVII.) is controversial,--directed
 against the Jews:  it is painfully inadequate in the treatment of its
 great theme,--so inadequate as to suggest the surmise that doubts may
 have arisen about the orthodoxy of the writer, such as to discredit his
 works, and to account for the neglect in which they lay (as we have
 seen) for centuries.  But in all his writings his mastery of the
 Scriptures, of the Old Testament especially, is conspicuous; and in
 many of them, especially in those of a hortatory character, there is
 much force of earnest persuasiveness, rising at times into eloquence.

 [320] So in Peshitto; "unripe grape," in LXX.; "new wine," in A.V. and
 R.V., with the Hebrew; but the Latin Vulgate agrees with Peshitto.

 [321] In Rosen-Forshall's and Wright's Catalogues of Syriac mss.,
 British Museum, while but few mss. (Add. 14619, Add. 17182, Orient.
 1017. Rich. 7197) contain any portion of Aphrahat, the list of mss. of
 Ephraim's works and fragments nearly fills three columns.

 [322] Forget, De Vita e Scriptis Aphraatis (1882), pp. 139-148; also
 (cited by him S. Isaaci Antiocheni Opp. (ed. Bickell, 1873).

 [323] The titles given by Gennadius do not number 26; some titles he
 omits; others he divides, treating as two what is really one, in
 several instances.

 [324] See the text in Wright's Aphraatis, pp. 29 ff.; in Lagarde's
 Analecta Syr., pp. 108 ff.; or Forget (as above) pp. 8 ff.

 [325] The Armenian Menologium, subjoined by Antonelli to the Armenian
 version, as printed by him, makes Jacob to have been sister's son to
 Gregory the Illuminator, the Apostle of Armenia, to whom that version
 (impossibly) ascribes the letter prefixed to Demonstr. I.  But this
 statement is probably an invention, devised in order to connect Jacob
 with the Armenian Church.

 [326] Biblioth. Orient. I., p. 5.  A note in ms. Orient. 1017, suggests
 Jacob of Tagrit,--ignorantly, for he was of the 13th century.

 [327] For this extract, see Wright's Aphraates, pp. 38, 39.

 [328] The ms. of Barhebræus which Wright (Aphraates, pp. 2, 3), follows
 in treating of this notice, seems to identify the "Persian Sage," with
 one "Buzitis," who is mentioned immediately before; and he conjectured
 therefore that "Buzitis" was a scribe's error for Parhatis
 (=Aphraates).  But other mss. insert the copulative particle so as to
 distinguish "the Persian Sage" from the "Buzitis," whose name precedes.

 [329] Part I., s. 26, c. 83; Part II., s. 10, c. 33.

 [330] Ap. B. O. III. i. (see p. 95).

 [331] British Museum, Orient. 1017.

 [332] The alternative explanation has been suggested that Jacob was the
 name received by Aphrahat at baptism.  This is refuted by Wright's
 objection, that, if the name Jacob had been given so early, the name
 Aphrahat would have been entirely disused or forgotten.

 [333] Basil (Homil. in Hexaem. II. 6) shows alike avoidance of the name
 of the foreigner Ephraim, and designates him as "the Syrian."  See
 above, p. 128.

 [334] Demonstr. XIV. 50; XXII. 25; XXIII. 69.

 [335] Ib. XVI. 7; XVII. 8.

 [336] Philoxenus of Mabug, likewise a Persian, and a writer of pure
 Syriac, came from the border-region of Beth-garme (B. O. II. p., 10).

 [337] Some prefer the latter construction; but Wright (Aphr., pp. 8,
 9), Forget (pp. 82 ff.), and Parisot (Patrologia Syr. I., Tom. I., p.
 xix) seem to be right in maintaining the former.  Another passage of
 Dem. XIV. (25) is translated by Wright (Ib.), Parisot, and Antonelli
 (Opp. S. Jacobi Nis., p. 423), "The laying on of hands which certain
 men receive of us;" but by Forget (pp. 100, 101)...."which certain men
 of us receive."  If the former are right, the writer speaks as a
 Bishop; but Forget's seems the true rendering.

 [338] This ancient title is still borne by the Head of the Nestorian
 Church:  the Jacobites from the sixth century downwards have
 substituted that of "Maphrian" (Maphrino-fructificator), i.e.
 propagator of the Episcopal succession; which continues in use to the
 present day.

 [339] The Roman Editor (Antonelli) of the Armenian text (1756) was
 misled by the displacement of Demonstr. XIV., and its omission from the
 list of Gennadius, as well as by its synodical character, to reject it
 as spurious.  Had he known Demonstr. XXII., or had he been aware of the
 alphabetical arrangement of the series, he would have been guarded
 against this error.  The Synod however in whose name Demonstr. XIV. is
 written cannot have been (as Wright supposed) that of 334; for it was
 written in 344.

 [340] See also Demonstr. X. (below); especially s. b., where he exhorts
 "pastors" (evidently Bishops) as one set over them, in other words,
 their Metropolitan.

 [341] An examination of this ms. leads to the conclusion that its
 scribe was probably well informed in this matter.  Its principal
 contents are, the "Book of Rays" of Gregory Barhebræus and three of his
 minor works.  Between the first named and that which follows is
 inserted the extract from Demonstr. XXIII., above specified (p. 156),
 headed as we have seen with the author's names and
 additions,--"Aphrahat, the Sage, who is Jacob Bishop of Mar Mathai."
 Now Gregory himself, as Maphrian, was Bishop of Mar Mathai, and died
 and was buried in that monastery in 1286.  It may be conjectured that
 this ms., written in 1364 (not 80 years after his death), may have
 obtained this passage of Aphrahat, and the heading which assigns his
 see, from some collection made by Gregory, among whose writings it here
 finds place.  If so, the statement that he was Bishop of Mar Mathai
 rests on the authority of Gregory, who would no doubt have within his
 reach authentic lists of the names of his predecessors in that see. For
 the monastery of Mar Mathai, see Rich, Koordistan, Vol. II., ch. xv.,
 pp. 73 ff.; Badger, Nestorians, Vol. I., ch. ix., pp. 95 ff.  The
 former visited it in 1820; the latter in 1843 and 1850; and his account
 is illustrated with an engraving of the monastery, and a plan of the
 Church.  He found the Metran residing there, with two monks; and five
 villages, with some 350 families, formed his diocese.  In 1880 Sachau
 visited Mosul, and records (Reise, ch. iv., p. 352) that a Bishop still
 resided in this monastery.

 [342] See Ephraim's words, cited above, pp. 129, 136.

 [343] Simeon of Beth-Arsam, ap., Assem, B. O. I. 346, is our authority
 for this narrative.

 [344] Note that the authorities who know the author as Aphrahat are of
 "the East" (in the ecclesiastical sense--namely, the regions beyond the
 Tigris).  Bar-Bahlul and Ebedjesu are Eastern, as being Nestorians.  Of
 the Jacobites, Elias Barsinneus was of Mosul originally, and Gregory
 Barhebræus as Maphrian had his see in Mosul and the whole East under
 his rule.  The scribe of the ms. Orient. 1017 wrote indeed in the
 Jacobite convent of Kartamin, but he was merely the copyist of a ms. of
 the works of Barhebræus, obtained no doubt from Mosul.  On the other
 hand, of the three scribes of the earlier mss., who knew him only as
 "the Persian Sage," or as "Mar Jacob," one was of Edessa, and all were
 presumably Jacobites of the same regions; as likewise Georgius (also
 connected with Edessa), and his correspondent (Joshua, of Anab).  Isaac
 of Nineveh was Eastern, and Nestorian; but as he nowhere mentions the
 author of the works with which he was evidently acquainted, he does not
 come here into consideration.  Nor does Ennadius; inasmuch as we have
 no means of discovering how he came to hear of their existence, or to
 attribute them to Jacob of Nisibis:  we can only conjecture that his
 informant may have been an Armenian. As to Barhebræus, the significant
 fact is farther to be noted that in Part I., where he treats of the
 Patriarchs and the western provinces, presumably drawing from Western
 documents, he only speaks of "the Persian Sage:"  and the name Aphrahat
 first appears in Part II., where the writer records, as Maphrian, no
 doubt, from the tradition of his own church at Mosul, the names of the
 notable persons of the time of his predecessor, Papas the Catholicus of
 the East.

 [345] See Gibbon, Decline and Fall, ch. xxxii. (p. 392, Vol. III. of
 Prof. Bury's edition; also his Appendix 25, p. 504).

 [346] In the Armenian alphabet the number of letters is 38.

 [347] Cp. Eccles. Hist. II. 10, cc. 31, 33, with I. 26, cc. 83, 85.

 [348] See Demonstr. VIII, 19 (also VII. 25), and cp. Apoc. II. 11.
 (Parisot, Introduction, p. xliii.)

 [349] It is important to note that he quotes in full three (16, 17, 18)
 of the disputed "Last Twelve Verses" of St. Mark's Gospel.  (Demonst.
 I. 17.)
