Teutonic Mythology, Vol. II (Jacob Grimm (trans. James Steven Stallybrass), 1882; public domain)
===============================================================================
Vol. II of Grimm's Teutonic Mythology in Stallybrass's translation. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/teutonicmytholo01unkngoog).

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/



B 439464


IfaiMtyif


Mi? s m -* \

AITSS SC1ENTIA VB&lTAt


Digitized by VjOOQIC



North Campn
itoragt


?so



*i63


Digitized by



Google



Digitized by VjOOQIC



TEUTONIC MYTHOLOGY.



JACOB GRIMM.



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



TEUTONIC MYTHOLOGY



BT



JACOB GRIMM.



TRANSLATED FEOM THE FOUBTH EDITION.

WITH

NOTES AND APPENDIX

BT

JAMES STEVEN STALLTBRASS.



VOL. II.


i



LONDON: GEORGE BELL & SONS, YORK STREET,

COVENT GAKDEN.
1883.



Digitized by



Google



ButUr * Tanner.

TU Bchnod Printing Works,

Frome, and London,



Digitized by



Google


CHAPTER XVII.
WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Apart from deified and semi-divine natures there stands a
whole order of other beings distinguished mainly by the fact
that, while those have issued from men or seek human fellowship,
these form a separate community, one might say a kingdom of
their own, and are only induced by accident or stress of circum-
stances to have dealings with men. They have in them some
admixture of the superhuman, which approximates them to gods;
they have power to hurt man and to help him, at the same time
they stand in awe of him, being no match for him in bodily
strength. Their figure is much below the stature of man, or else
mis-shapen. They almost all have the faculty of making them-
selves invisible. 1 And here again the females are of a broader
and nobler oast, with attributes resembling those of goddesses
and wise- women ; the male spirits are more distinctly marked off,
both from gods and from heroes. 8

The two most general designations for them form the title of
this chapter; they are what we should call spirits nowadays.
But the word spirit (geist, ghost), 8 like the Greek Salpwv, is
too comprehensive; it would include, for instance, the half-
goddesses discussed in the preceding chapter. The Lat. genius
would more nearly hit the mark (see Suppl.).

The term vriht seems remarkable in more than one respect, for
its variable gender and for the abstract meanings developed from

1 But so have the gods (p. 325), goddesses (p. 268) and wise-women (p. 419).

* Celtic tradition, which runs particularly rich on this subject, I draw from
the following works: Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland,
by Crofton Croker, Lond. 1825 ; 2nd ed., parts 1, 2, 3, Lond. 1828. The Fairy
Mythology, by Th. Eeightley, vols. 1, 2, Lond. 1828. Barzas-Breiz, chants popu-
lates de la Bretagne, par Th. de la Villemarqufi, 2e eel., 2 vol., Paris 1810.

* OHG. heist, AS. gfat % OS. gist (see root in Gramm. 2, 46) ; Goth, ahma,
0HG. atum for ahadum, conn, with Goth, aha (mens), ahjan (meminisse, cogitare),
as sun (homo), maiwuka, and manni, ntirmi belong to munan, minnen (pp. 59.
344.433).

VOL. II. m



Digitized by



Google



440 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

it. The Gothic vaihts, gen. vaiht&is, is feminine, and Ulphilas
hardly ever uses it in a ooncrete sense ; in Lake 1, 1 he translates
by it irpaypa, and much oftener, when combined with a negative,
ovBiv (Gramm. 8, 8. 784). This, however, does not exclude the
possibility of vaihts haying at other times denoted to the Goths
a spirit regarded as female ; and in 1 Thess. 5, 22 the sentence
airo iravrb^ elSov? irovrjpov aweyecOe is rendered: af allamma
vaihtd ubildizd afhab&ij? izvis, where the Volg. has : ab omni
specie mala abstinete vos ; the use of the pi. ' valhteis ubilds ' of
itself suggests the notion of spirits. The other Teutonic tongues
equally use the word to intensify and make a substantive of the
negative, and even let it swallow up at last the proper particle
of negation ; * but in all of them it retains its personal meaning
too. The OHG. writers waver between the neut. and masc. ; the
Gothic fern, is unknown to them. Otfried has a neut. wiht, with
the collective pi. wihtir,* and likewise a neut. pi. wihti, which
implies a sing, wihti ; thus, armu wihtir, iv. 6, 28 ; armu wihti,
ii. 16, 117; krumbu wihti, iii. 9, 5; meaning 'poor, crooked
creatures/ so that wiht (derivable from wthan facere, creare)
seems altogether synonymous with being, creature, person, and
can be used of men or spirits : * in demo mere sint wunderllcliiu
wihtir, diu heizent sirenae/ HofFm. Pundgr. 19, 17. In MHG.
sometimes neut. : unreinez wiht, Diut. 1, 13 ; Athis H. 28 ;
triigehaftez wiht, Barl. 867, 11; vil tumbez wiht, 11, 21; some-
times masc. : boeser wiht, Barl. 220, 15 ; unrehter bcesewiht, MS.
2, 147 a , Geo. 8508 ; kleiner wiht, Altd. bl. 1, 254 ; der wiht,
Geo. 8518-36; der tumbe wiht, Pragm. 42*; and often of in-
determinable gender: bcese wiht, Trist. 8417; helle wiht, Geo.
3531 ; but either way as much applicable to men as to spirits.
Ghostly wights are the 'minuti dii' of the Romans (Plant*
Gasina, ii. 5, 24). In Mod. Germ, we make wicht masc,
and use it slightingly of a pitiful hapless being, fellow, often
with a qualifying epithet: 'elender wicht, bosewicht (villain)/
If the diminutive form be added, which intensifies the notion of
littleness, it can only be used of spirits : wichtlein, wichtelmann ; s

1 Aught — A- wiht, any wight or whit ; naught — n' A- wiht, no wight, no whit.

Trans.

8 So : thin diufilir, iii 14, 53, by the side of ther diofal, iii. 14, 10S.

* In Hesse wichtelm&nner is the expression in vogue, exeept on the Diemel in
Saxon Hesse, where they say 'gate holden.'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



WIGHTS. 441

MHG. din wihtel, 1 MS. 1, 157* ; bcBsez wihtel, Elfenm. cxviii. ;
kleinez wilitelin, Ls. 1, 878, 380, Wolfdietr. 788, 799; OHG.
wihUlin penates ; wihtelen vel helbe {i.e. elbe), lemnres, dcemones,
61. Florian. The dernea wihti, occulti genii, in Hel. 31, 20. 92, 2
are deceitful demonic beings, as 'thie demo' 164, 19 means
the devil himself; letha wihti, 76, 15; wreda wihti 76, 1. In
Lower Saxony wicht is said, quite in a good sense, of little
children : in the Minister country ' dat wicht ' holds especially
of girls, about Osnabruck the sing, wicht only of girls, the pi.
wichter of girls and boys ; ' innocent wichte ' are spoken of in
Sastrow, 1, 351. The Mid. Nethl. has a neut. wicht like the
H. German : quade wicht, clene wicht (child). Huyd. op St. 3, 6.
370; arem wiht, Reinh. 1027; so the Mod. Dutch wicht, pi.
wichteren : arm wicht, aardig wicht, in a kindly sense. The AS.
language agrees with the Gothic as to the fern, gender : wiht,
gen. wihte, nom. pi. wihta; later wuht, wuhte, wnhta; seo wiht,
God. Exon. 418, 8. 419, 3. 5. 420, 4. 10. The meaning can be
either concrete: yfel wiht (phantasma), leas wiht (diabolus),
Cttdm. 310, 16; scewiht (animal marinum), Beda, 1, 1; or
entirely abstract = thing, affair. The Engl, wight has the sense
of our wicht. The ON. vcett and vcettr, which are likewise fern.,
have preserved in its integrity the notion of a demonic spiritual
being (S®m. 145*) : allar vcettir, genii quicunque, Seem. 93 b ;
hollar vcettir, genii bqnigni, Seem. 240 b ; ragveettir or meinvcettir,
genii noxii, 2 landvcettir, genii tutelares, Fornm. sog. 3, 105.
Isl. sog. 1, 198, etc. In the Faroes they say: 'fear t& tfiar
til mainvittis (go to the devil) ! ' Lyngbye, p. 548. The Danish
vette is a female spirit, a wood-nymph, meinvette an evil spirit,



1 Swer weiz and doch nxht wizzen wil, Whoso knows, yet will not know,
dor slffit rich mit sin selbes hant ; Smites himself with his own hand ;

des wtsheit aht ich zeime tpil, His wisdom I value no more than a play

daz man diu wihtel h&t genannt : That they call * the little wights ' :

er lit mis sohoawen wanders vil, He lets ns witness much of wonder,

der ir da waltet. Who governs them.

The passage shows that in the 13th cent, there was a kind of puppet-show in which
ghostly beings were set before the eyes of spectators. 'Der ir waltet/ he that
wields them, means the showman who pats the figures in motion. A fall confir-
mation in the Wachtelmare, line 40 : ' rihtet zu mit den tnileren (strings) die
tatermanne 1 ' Another passage on the wihUUtpil in Haapt's Zeitsohr. 2, 60 :
•spilt mit dem wihtelin ul dem tisch amb gaoten win.'

1 BiSrn supposes a masc. (fern.?) meinvattr and a neat, meinvatti ; no doubt
net* is noza, malum ; nevertheless I call attention to the Zendio mainyus t damon^
and agramainyus, daemon mains.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



442 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Thiele 3, 98. The Swedish tongue, in addition to vatt (genius)
and a synonymous neut. vattr, has a wikt formed after the German,
Ihre, p. 1075. Neither is the abstract sense wanting in any of
these dialects.

This transition of the meaning of wight into that of thing on
the one hand, and of devil on the other, agrees with some other
phenomena of language. We also address little children as
' thing/ and the child in the marchen (No. 105) cries to the
lizard : * ding, eat the crumbs too I ' Wicht, ding, wint, teuf el,
vfilant (Gramm. 3, 734. 736) all help to clinch a denial. 0. French
males choses, mali genii, Ren. 30085. Mid. Latin bonce re*=boni
genii, Vine. Bellov. iii. 8,27 (see Suppl.).

We at once perceive a more decided colouring in the OHG.
and MHG. alp (genius), AS. celf, ON. alfr ; a Goth, albs may
safely be conjectured. Together with this masc,, the OHG.
may also have had a neut. alp, pi. elpir, as we know the MHG.
had a pi. elber ; and from the MHG. dat. fem. elbe (MS. 1, 50 b )
we must certainly infer a nom. diu elbe, OHG. alpia, elpia, Goth.
albi, gen. albj&s, for otherwise such a derivative could not occur.
Formed by a still commoner suffix, there was no doubt an OHG.
elpinna, MHG. elbinne, the form selected by Albrecht of Halber-
stadt, and still appearing in his poem as remodelled by Wikram; 1
AS. elfen, gen. elfenne. Of the nom. pi. masc. I can only feel
sure in the ON., where it is alfar, and would imply a Goth,
albos, OHG. alp&, MHG. albe, AS. aalfas ; on the other hand an
OHG. elpi (Goth, albeis) is suggested by the MHG. pi. elbe
(Amgb. 2 b , unless this comes from the fem. elbe above) and by
the AS. pi. ylfe, gen. pi. ylfa (Beow. 223) .* The Engl, forms

1 Wikram 1, 9. 6, 9 (ed. 1631, p. 11» 199b). The first passage, in all the editions
I have compared (ed. 1545, p. S»), has a faulty reading: ' anch viel ewinnen and
freyen,' rhyming with * zweyen.' Albrecht surely wrote * vil elbirmen und feien.'
I can make nothing of ' freien ' but at best a very daring allusion to Frigg and
Frea (p. 301) ; and * froie ' — fraulein, as the weasel is called in Beinh. elxxii., can
have nothing to say here.

* Taking AS. y [as a modified a, a, ta } ] as in yldra, ylfet, yrfe, OHG. eldiro,
elpiz, erpi. At the same time, as y can also be a modified o (orf, yrfe » pecus), or
a modified u (wulf, wylfen), I will not pass over a MHG. vlf, pi. ittve, which seems
to mean much the same as alp, and may be akin to an AS. ylf : ' von den (liven
entbunden werden,' MS. 1, 81*-, ' Ulfheit ein sunt ob alien siihten,' MS. 2, 185*;
* der rich iilfet in der jugent,' Helbl. 2, 426 ; and oonf. the Up quoted from H.
Sachs. Shakspeare occasionally couples elves and goblins with similar beings called
ouphes (Nares sub v.). It speaks for the identity of the two forms, that one
Swedish folk-song {Arwidsson 2, 278) has Ulfver where another (2, 276) has Elfvtr.



Digitized by



Google



ELVES. 443

elf, elves, the Swed. elf, pi. masc. elfvar (fern, elfvor), the Dan.
elv, pi. elve, are quite in rule ; the Dan. compounds ellefolk, elle-
honer, elleskudt, ellevild have undergone assimilation. With us
the word alp still survives in the sense of night-hag, night-mare,
in addition to which our writers of the last century introduced
the Engl, elf, a form untrue to our dialect ; before that, we find
everywhere the correct pi. elbe or elben. 1 H. Sachs uses dip ;
( du dip I du dolp ! ' (i. 5, 525 b ), and olperisch (iv. 3, 95 c ) ; conf.
olpern and olpetriltsch, alberdrutsch, drelpetriitsch (Schm. 1, 48) ;
elpentrotsch and tolpentrotsch, trilpentrisch (Schmid's Swab. diet.
162) ; and in Hersfeld, hilpentrisch. The words mean an awkward
silly fellow, one whom the elves have been at, and the same thing
is expressed by the simple elbisch, Fundgr. 365. In Gloss. Jun.
340 we read elvesce wehte, elvish wights.

On the nature of Elves I resort for advice to the ON. authori-
ties, before all others. It has been remarked already (p. 25),
that the Elder Edda several times couples cesir and dlfar together,
as though they were a compendium of all higher beings, and
that the AS. es and ylfe stand together in exactly the same way.
This apparently concedes more of divinity to elves than to men.
Sometimes there come in, as a third member, the vanir (Sawn.
83 b ), a race distinct from the sesir, but admitted to certain
relations with them by marriage and by covenants. The Hrafna-
galdr opens with the words : Alfofcr orkar (works), dlfar skilja,
vanir vita," S»m. 88* ; Allfather, i.e. the as, has power, alfar
have skill (understanding), and vanir knowledge. The Alvismal
enumerates the dissimilar names given to heavenly bodies,
elements and plants by various languages (supra, p. 332) ; in
doing so, it mentions cesir, dlfar, vanir, and in addition also
god', menu, ginregin, iotnar, dvergar and denizens of hel (hades).
Here the most remarkable point for us is, that dlfar and dvergar
(dwarfs) are two different things. The same distinction is made
between dlfar and dvergar, S»m. 8 b ; between dvergar and
dochdlfar, Seem. 92 b ; between three kinds of norns, the as-kungar,
alf-kungar and doetr Dvalins, Seem. 188% namely, those descended
from ases, from elves and from dwarfs; and our MHG-. poets,
as we see by Wikram's Albrecht, 6, 9, continued to separate elbe

1 BeaolcL sub v. elbe ; Ettner's Hebamme, p. 910, alpen or elben.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



444 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

from getwerc. 1 Some kinship however seems to exist between
them, if only because among proper names of dwarfs we find an
Alfr and a Vinddlfr, Ssem. 2. 3. Loki, elsewhere called an fts,
and reckoned among ftses, but really of iotun origin, is neverthe-
less addressed as alfr, S»m. 110 b ; nay, Volnndr, a godlike hero,
is called ' alfa licSi/ alforum socius, and 'vtsi alfa, 9 alforam
princeps, Seem. 135*» b - I explain this not historically (by a
Finnish descent), bnt mythically : German legend likewise makes
Wielant king Elberich's companion and fellow smith in Mount
Grloggensachsen (otherwise Gougelsahs, Caucasus ?). Thus we
see the word alfr shrink and stretch by turns.

Now what is the true meaning of the word albs, alp = genius ?
One is tempted indeed to compare the Lat. albus, which according
to Festus the Sabines called alpus; a\<j>6s (vitiligo, leprosy)
agrees still better with the law of consonant-change. Probably
then albs meant first of all a light-coloured, white, good spirit, 8
so that, when dlfar and dvergar are contrasted, the one signifies
the white spirits, the other the black. This exactly agrees with
the great beauty and brightness of ftlfar. But the two classes
of creatures getting, as we shall see, a good deal mixed up
and confounded, recourse was had to composition, and the elves
proper were named liosalfar?

The above-named dockdlfar (genii obscuri) require a counter-
part, which is not found in the Eddie songs, but it is in Snorri's
prose. He says, p. 21 : 'In Alfheim dwells the nation of the
liosalfar (light elves), down in the earth dwell the dockdlfar
(dark elves), the two unlike one another in their look and their
powers, liosalfar brighter than the sun, dockdlfar blacker than
pitch/ The liosalfar occupy the third space of heaven, Sn. 22.
Another name which never occurs in the lays, and which at
first sight seems synonymous with dock&lfar, is svartdlfar (black

1 In Norway popular belief keeps alfer and dverge apart, Faye p. 49.

3 The word appears in the name of the snowclad mountains (alpes, see Snppl.),
and that of the clear river (AVbi$ t Elbe), while the ON. elf elfa, Swed. elf, Dan.
tlv = fluvius, is still merely appellative ; the ghostly elvish swan (OHG. alpiz,
MHG. elbez, AS. slfet, ON. alpt, p. 429) can be explained both by its colour and its
watery abode ; likewise the Slav, labud, lebed, from Labe.

* Vanir also may contain the notion of white, bright ; consider the ON. vann
(pulcher), the Ir. ban (albas), ben, bean (femina), Lat. Venus , Goth, qind, AS. even.
To this add, that the Ir. banshi, ban- tig he denotes an elvish being usually regarded
as female, a fay. The same is expressed by *ia, tight alone, which is said to mean
properly the twilight, the hour of spirits (see Suppl.).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES. 445

elves) ; l and these Snorri evidently takes to be the same as
dvergar, for his dvergar dwell in Svart&lfaheim, (Sn. 84. 180.
136). This is, for one thing, at variance with the separation
of dl/ar and dvergar in the lays, and more particularly with
the difference implied between dockalfar and dvergar in S»m.
92 b 188*. That language of poetry, which everywhere else im-
parts such precise information about the old faith, I am not
inclined to set aside here as vague and general. Nor, in con-
nexion with this, ought we to overlook the nair, the deadly pale
or dead ghosts named by the side of the dvergar, Seem. 92 b ,
though again among the dvergar themselves occur the proper
names N&r and N&inn.

Some have seen, in this antithesis of light and black elves, the
same Dualism that other mythologies set up between spirits good
and bad, friendly and hostile, heavenly and hellish, between angels
of light and of darkness. But ought we not rather to assume
three kinds of Norse genii, liosalfar, dockalfar, evartdlfar ? No
doubt I am thereby pronouncing Snorri' s statement fallacious :
' dock&lfar eru svartari en bik (pitch)/ Dockr * seems to me not so
much downright black, as dim, dingy ; not niger, but obscurus,
foscus, aquilus. In ON. the adj. iarpr, AS. eorp, fuscus, seems to
be used of dwarfs, Haupt's Zeitschr. 8, 152 ; and the female name
Irpa (p. 98) is akin to it. In that case the identity of dwarfs
and black elves would hold good, and at the same time the Old
Eddie distinction between dwarfs and dark elves be justified.

Such a Trilogy still wants decisive proof ; but some facts can
be brought in support of it. Pomeranian legend, to begin with,
seems positively to divide subterraneans into white, brown, and
black ; 8 elsewhere popular belief contents itself with picturing
dwarfs in gray clothing, in gray or brown cap-of-darkness ;
Scotch tradition in particular has its brownies, spirits of brown
hue, i.e. dock&lfar rather than svart&lfar (see Suppl.). But here
I have yet another name to bring in, which, as applied to such
spirits, is not in extensive use. I have not met with it outside

1 Thorlac. spec. 7, p. 160, gives the lios&lfar another name kvUdlfar (white
elves) ; I have not found the word in the old writings.

* Conf . OHG. tunehal, MHG. tunkel (our dunkel), Nethl. donker.

1 E. M. Arndt's Marohen und Jugenderinnerungen, Berl. 1818, p. 159. In Phil,
▼on Steinau's Volkasagen, Zeitz 1888, pp. 291-3, the same traditions are given,
bat only white and black (not brown) dwarfs are distinguished.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



446 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

of the Vogtland and a part of East Thuringia. There the small
elvish beings that travel especially in the train of Berchta, are
called the heimchen (supra, p. 276) ; and the name is considered
finer and nobler than querx or erdmannchen (Borner p. 52). It
is hardly to be explained by any resemblance to chirping crickets,
which are also called heimchen, OHG. heimili (Graff 4, 953) ;
still less by heim (domns), for these wights are not home-sprites
(domestici) ; besides, the correct spelling seems to be. heinchen
(Variscia 2, 101), so that one may connect it with i Friend
Hem/ the name for death, and the Low Sax. heinenkhed
(winding-sheet, Strodtmann p. 84) , 1 This notion of departed
spirits, who appear in the ' furious host ' in the retinue of former
gods, and continue to lead a life of their own, may go to support
those navr of the Edda; the pals hue may belong to them,
and the gray, brown, black to the coarser but otherwise similar
dwarfs. Such is my conjecture. In a hero-lay founded on
thoroughly German legend, that of Morolt, there appear precisely
three troops of spirits, who take charge of the fallen in battle
and of their souls : a white, a pale, and a black troop (p. 28 b ),
which is explained to mean € angels, kinsmen of the combatants
coming up from hades, and devils/ No such warlike part is ever
played by the Norse Wfar, not they, but the valkyrs have to do
with battles ; but the traditions may long have become tangled
together, and the offices confounded. 8 The liosalfar and svartulfar
are in themselves sufficiently like the christian angels and devils ;
the pale troop ' uz der helle ' are the dock&lfar that dwell e ni&ri
i iorSiiy nay, the very same that in the Alvism&l are not expressly
named, but designated by the words c i heljo.' Or I can pat it in
this way : lios&lfar live in heaven, dock&lfar (and nfiir f ) in hel,
the heathen hades, svart&lfar in SvartaJfaJieim, which is never
used in the same sense as hel (see Suppl.). The dusky elves
are souls of dead men, as the younger poet supposed, or are we
to separate dock&lfar and n&ir ? Both have their abode in the
realms of hades, as the light ones have in those of heaven. Of
no other elves has the Edda so much to tell as of the black,



1 'Hrtnerikleed is not conn, with Friend Hein, but means a Atinenkleed
(eh. XVIIL) ; conf. also the hiinnerskes, and perhaps the haunken, or aunken in
the Westph. sgonaunken.'—Extr. from Suppl.

8 The different races of elves contending for a corpse (Ir. Elfenm. 68).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWABPS. 447

who have more dealings with mankind ; svart&lfar are named in
abundance, lios&lfar and dock&lfar but fitfully.

One thing we must not let go : the identity of svartdlfar and
dvergar.

Dvergr, Goth, dvairgs ? AS. dweorg, OHG. tuerc, MHG. tvcrc,
oar zwerg, 1 answer to the Lat. nanus, Gr. vdwo? (dwarf, puppet),
Ital. nano, Span, enano, Portug. anao, Prov. nan, nant, Fr. nain,
Mid. Nethl. also naen, Ferg. 2243-46-53-82. 3146-50, and nane,
3086-97 ; or Gr. irvy/taio?. Beside the masc. forms just given,
OHG. and MHG. frequently use the neut. form gituerc, getwerc.
Nib. 98, 1. 335, 3. MS. 2, 15*. Wigal. 6080. 6591. Trist.
14242. 14515. daz wilde getwerc, Ecke 81. 82. Wh. 57, 25.
Getwerc is used as a masc. in Eilhart 2881-7. Altd. bl. 1, 253-6-8 ;
der twerk in Hoffm. fundgr. 237. Can Oeovpyo? (performing
miraculous deeds, what the MHG. would call wunderare) have
anything to do with it ? As to meaning, the dwarfs resemble
the Idffian Dactyls of the ancients, the Cabeiri and irdraiKoi : all
or most of the dvergar in the Edda are cunning smiths (Sn. 34.
48. 130. 354). This seems the simplest explanation of their
black sooty appearance, like that of the Cyclopes. Their forges
are placed in caves and mountains : Svarialfahevmr must there-
fore lie in a mountainous region, not in the abyss of hell. And
our German folk-tales everywhere speak of the dwarfs as forging
in the mountains : ' von golde wirkent si diu spcehen were ' says
the Wartburg War of the getwerc Sinnels in Palakers, whereas
elves and elfins have rather the business of weaving attributed to
them. Thus, while dwarfs border on the smith-heroes and smith-
gods (Wielant, Vulcan), the functions of elves approach those of
fays and good- wives (see Suppl.).*

If there be any truth in this view of the matter, one can easily
conceive how it might get altered and confused in the popular
belief of a later time, when the new christian notions of angel
and devil had been introduced. At bottom all elves, even the
light ones, have some devil-like qualities, e.g. their loving to

1 In LansitB and E. ThuringU querx, in Thttringerwald querUch. Jac. von
Konigshofen, p. 89, has quercfu In Lower Saxony sometimes tm&rm, for twarg.

* In Bretagne the korr, pi. korred answers to our elf, the korrigan to our elfin ;
and she too is described like a fay : she sits by the fountain, combing her hair, and
whoever catches her doing so, must marry her at onoe, or die in three days (Ville-
marqu6 1, 17). Tbo Welsh cawr means a giant.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



448 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

teaze men ; bat they are not therefore devils, not even the black
ones, but often good-natured beings. It appears even that to these
black elves in particular, i.e. mountain spirits, who in various
ways came into contact with man, a distinct reverence was paid,
a species of worship, traces of which lasted down to recent
times. The clearest evidence of this is found in the Kormaks-
saga pp. 216-8. The hill of the elves, like the altar of a god,
is to be reddened with the blood of a slaughtered bull, and of
the animal's flesh a feast prepared for the elves : ' H6U einn er
heSan skamt i brott, er dlfar bua i (cave that elves dwell in) ;
gr&S&ng ]?ann, er Kormakr drap (bull that K. slew), skaltfi f&, ok
ri6$a bloS gr&Sftngsins & hdlinn titan, en gera dlfum veizlu (make
the elves a feast) af sl&trinu, ok mun }?er batna.' An actual
dlfablot. With this I connect the superstitious custom of cooking
food for angels, and setting it for them (Superst. no. 896). So
there is a table covered and a pot of food placed for home-smiths
and kobolds (Deut. sagen, no. 37. 38. 71) ; meat and drink for
domina Abundia (supra, p. 286) ; money or bread deposited in
the caves of subterraneans, in going past (Neocorus 1, 262. 560). l
There are plants named after elves as Well as after gods : alpranke,
alpfranke, alfsranke, alpkraut (lonicera periclymen., solanum dul-
cam.), otherwise called geissblatt, in Denmark troldbar, in Sweden
trullbar; dweorges dwosle, pulegium (Lye), Mone's authorities
spell dwostle, 822* ; dvergeriis, ace. to Molbech's Dial. Lex. p. 86,
the spartium scoparium. A latrina was called dlfrek, lit. genios
fugans, Eyrb. saga, cap. 4 (see Suppl.).

Whereas man grows but slowly, not attaining his full stature
till after his fifteenth year, and then living seventy years, and a
giant can be as old as the hills ; the dwarf is already grown up
in the third year of his life, and a greybeard in the seventh ; 2
the Elf-king is commonly described as old and white-bearded.

1 The Old Pruss. and Lith. parstuk (thumbkin) also has food placed for him,
conf. Lasicz 64. The Lett, behrstuhki is said to mean a child's doll, Bergm. 145.

3 Emp. Ludwig the Bavarian (1847) writes contemptuously to Markgraf Carl of
Moravia : * Reoollige, quia nondum venit hora, at pigmei de Judea (1. India) statura
cubica evolantes fortitudine gnauica (1. gnanioa, i.e. nanica) terras gygantium de-
trahere debeant in ruinas, et ut pigmei, id est homines bicubitales, qui in anno
tercio cresount ad perfectam quantitatem et in septxmo anno senescunt et morion-
tur, imperent gygantibus.' Pelzel'e Carl IV. 1 urk. p. 40. Conf. Bbhmer's Font.
1, 227. 2, 570. Yet this description does not look to me quite German ; the more
the dwarfs are regarded as elves, there is accorded to them, and especially to elfins
(as to the Greek oreads), a higher and semi-divine age ; conf. the stories of change-
lings quoted farther on. Laartn, ace. to the poems, was more than 400 years old.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



BLVES, DWARFS. 449

Accounts of the creation of dwarfs will be presented in chap.
XIX. ; but they only seem to refer to the earthly form of the
black elves, not of the light.

The leading features of elvish nature seem to be the follow-
ing :—

Man's body holds a medium between those of the giant and
the elf; an elf comes as much short of human size as a giant
towers above it. All elves are imagined as small and tiny, but
the light ones as well-formed and symmetrical, the black as ugly
and misshapen. The former are radiant with exquisite beauty,
and wear shining garments: the AS. celfsciene, Cffidm. 109, 23.
165, 11, sheen as an elf, bright as angels, the ON. 'MSsem
alfkona,' fair as elfin, express the height of female loveliness.
In Rudlieb xvii. 27 a dwarf, on being caught, calls his wife out
of the cave, she immediately appears, 'parva, nimis pulchra,
sed et auro vesteque compta.' Fornald. sog. 1, 887 has : ' ]>at er
kannigt i ollum fornum fr&sognum nm }?at folk, er dlfar hdtu,
at J?at var miklu frtSara enn onnur mankind/ The Engl, elves
are slender and puny : Palstaff (1 Henry IV. i. 4) calls Prince
Heniy ' you starveling, you elf shin 1 ' l The dwarf adds to his
repulsive hue an ill-shaped body, a humped back, and coarse
clothing ; when elves and dwarfs came to be mixed up together,
the graceful figure of the one was transferred to the other,
yet sometimes the dwarfs expressly retain the black or grey
complexion : ' wart i synen/ p. 457 ; ' a little black mannikin/
Kinderm. no. 92 ; 'grey mannikin/ Busching's Woch. nachr. 1,
98. Their very height is occasionally specified : now they attain
the stature of a four years' child, 8 now they appear a great deal
smaller, to be measured by the span or thumb: 'kume drier
spannen lane, gar eislich getanf Elfenm. cxvi. ; two spans high,
Deut. sag. no. 42 ; a little wight, ' reht als ein dumelle lane,' a
thumb long, Altd. bl. 2, 151; 'ein kleinez weglin (1. wihtZin)

1 In Denmark popular belief pictures the eUekone as young and captivating
to look at in front, but hollow at the back like a kneading-trough (Thiele 1, 118) ;
which reminds one of Dame Werlt in MHG. poems.

9 Whether the OHG. pusilln is said of a dwarf as Graff supposes (8, 352 ; oonf.
8wed. pyuling), or merely of a child, like the Lat. pusus, pusio, is a question. The
Mid. Age gave to its angels these small dimensions of elves and dwarfs : * Ein
iegelich engel sehtnet alsd gestalter als ein kint in jdren vieren (years 4) in der
jogende,' Tit. 5895 (Hahn); 'juncllche gemalet als ein kint daz d& vtinf j&r (5
year) alt isV Berth. 184. Lanrm is taken for the angel Michael; Elberioh (Otnit,
Bttau 24) and AntUois (Ulr. Alex.) are compared to a ohild of four.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



450 WIGHTS AM) ELVES.

ddmeln lane/ Ls. 1, 378. In one Danish lay, the smallest trold
is no bigger than an ant, D.V. 1, 176. Hence in fairy tales
daumling (thumbiing, petit poucet) indicates a dwarfish figure ;
the Sd/crvKo? T&uo? is to be derived from Sa/cn/X.09 (finger) ;
Trvyfiaios pigmraas from irvyfuj (fist) ; the O. Pruss. parstuci,
perstuck, a dwarf, from Lith. pirsztas, Slav, perst, prst (finger) ;
and a Bohem. name for a dwarf, |?/diww2jffc = span-mannikin, from
pjd y (span). 1 In Sansk. bdlakhil y a = gomorum genus, pollicis
magnitudinem aequans, sixty thousand of them sprang out of
Brahma's hair, Bopp's Gloss. Skr. p. 122* (ed. 2, p. 288 b ) ; b&la,
b&laka=puer, parvulus, the 'ilya' I do not understand. There
are curious stories told about the deformity of dwarfs' feet, which
are said to be like those of geese or ducks; * conf. queen Berhta,



1 When we read in a passage quoted by Jungmann 4, 652 : * mezi pjdimuzjky
kraluge trpasljk ' (among thumblings a dwarf is king), it is plain that a trpatljk is
more than a pjdimuzjk. Can this trp- (Slovak, krpec, krpatee) be conn, with our
knirps, knips, krips, gribs (v. infra), which means one of small stature, not quite a
dwarf ? Finn, peukalo, a thumbling, Kalew. 13, 67 ; mies peni, pikku mie$, little

man three fingers high 13, 63-8. 24, 144. For dwarf the MHG. has also ' der

hurze man,' Wigal. 6693. 6686. 6710 ; ' der wenige man,' Er. 7442. Ulr. Alex, (in
Wackern.'s 8as. Ms., p. 29 b ), in contrast with the 'miohel man 1 or giant. One
old name for a dwarf was ckurziboU, Pertz 2, 104, which otherwise means a short
coat, Hoff. GL 36, 13. Both. 4676. Conf. urkinde (nanus), Gramm. 2, 789.

2 Deutsche Sagen, no. 149 ; I here give a more iaithful version, for which I am
indebted to Hr. Hieron. Hagebuch of Aarau. Vo do h&rdm&ndlene uf der Barns-
flue. Hinder der Arlisbacher egg, zwusohenem dorfle Hard und dem alte Lorenze-
kapallele, stoht im ene thale so ganz eleigge e grtlsle vertraite flue, se eagere
dBamsflue. uf der hindere site isch se hohl, und dhole het numme e online igang.
Do 8ind denn emol, me weiss nid axaot i wele johrgange, so rarige mtindle gsi, die
Bind i die hohle us und i gauge, hand ganz e so es eiges lfibe gefuehrt, und en
apartige hushaltig, und sind ganz bsunderig derhar cho, so warklich gestaltet, und
mit eim wort, es isch halt kei mdnsoh usene cho, wer se denn au Beige, wohar se
cho eeige, und was se tribe, fimel gekochet hand se nut, und wurzle und beeri
ggasse. unde a der flue lauft es bachle, und i dem bachle hand die mtindle im sum-
mer badet, wie table, aber eis vonene het immer wacht gha, und het pfiffe, wenn
b'pper derhar oho isoh, uf dem fnesswag: denn sind se ame gsprunge, was gisch
was hesch, der barg uf, dass ene kei haas noh oho wer, und wie der sehwick in
ehre hdhle gtchloffe. dernabe hand se kem monsch niit zleid tho, im gagetheil,
gfalligkaite, wenn se hand chonne. Einisch het der Hardpur es fiiederle riswalle
glade, und wil er elei gsi isoh, het ers au fast nid moge. E sones mandle gsehts vo
der flue obenabe, und ohunt der durab zhopperle fiber driese, und hilft dem pur,
was es het moge. wo se do der bindbaum wand ufe thue, so isoh das mandle ufem
wage gsi, und het grichtet, und der pur het uberunde azoge a do bindohneble. do
het das mandle sseil nid racht ame gliret,und wo der pur azieht, schnellt der baum
los und trif t smandle ane finger und nets wiirst blessiert ; do foht der pur a jom-
mere und seit ' o heie, o heie, wenns numenau mer begegnet wer 1 * do seit das
mandle * abba, das macht niit, salben tho, salben gha.'* mit dene worte springts
vom wage nabe, het es ohrti tie abbroche, bets versohaflet und uf das bluetig fin-

* Swab. • sell thaun, sell haun,' Schmid p. 628. More neatly in MHG., ' selbe
tffite, selbe habe/ MS. 1, 10 b . 89%



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWABFS. 451

p. 280, and the swan-maidens, p. 429. One is also reminded
of the blateviieze, Bother 1871. Ernst 3828; conf. Haupt's
Zeitschr. 7, 289.

The Mid. Nethl. poem of Brandaen, but no other version of the
same legend, contains a very remarkable feature. 1 Brandan met
a man on the sea, who was a thumb long, and floated on a leaf,
holding a little bowl in his right hand and a pointer in his left :
the pointer he kept dipping into the sea and letting water drip
from it into the bowl ; when the bowl was fall, he emptied it out,
and began filling again : it was his doom to be measuring the
sea until the Judgment-day (see Suppl.). This liliputian floating
on the leaf reminds us of ancient, especially Indian myths. 2

The ftlfar are a people, as the Edda expressly says (Sn. 21), and

gerle gleit, und das het alles ewag puzt. do springts wider ufe wage, und het zum
pur gBeit, er soil sseil nume wider ume ge. Mangisch, wenn rachtsohafne ltlt darn
tag gheuet oderbnnde hand nnd se Bind nit fertig worde bis zobe, nnd abet oppe
welle eho ragne, so sind die h&rdm&ndle cbo, nnd hand geschaffet und gewarnet
drnf ine, bis alles im schSrme gsi isch. oder wenns dart dnaoht isch eho wattere,
hand se shen nnd sehorn, wo dasse glage isch, de lfite zum tenn zue trait, nnd am
morge het halt alles gross ange gmacht, nnd se hand nid gwtisst, wers tho het. den
band erst no die m&ndXe kei dank begehrt, numenan dass me se gern hat. Amenim
whiter, wenn alles stei nnd bei gfrore gsi isch, sind die mctndle is oberst has oho
zArhspach : se hand shalt gar gaet chbnnen mit dene lute, wo dert gwohnt hand,
and Bind ame dnrt dnaoht nfem ofe glage, und am morge vortag hand se se wieder
dros gmacht. was aber gar gspassig gsi isch, si h&nd ehre fUessle nie vdre glo, hand
t% eharlachroihs m&nUU tr&it, vom halt bis ufe bode nabe. Jetzt nets im dorf so
gwunderige meitle nnd buebe gha, die sind einisoh znaoht vor das hus go gen asche
streue, dass se gsache, was die h&rdm&ndle ftir filesale hebe. nnd was handse
gfunde ? sisch frile wunderle : dnte und geissfBess sind in der asche abdruckt gsi.
Aber vo salber stand a isch keis mandle meh eho, und se sind au niimme uf der
Bamsflue bliebe, i dkrachehand se se verschloffe t tief id geissflue hindere, und hand
keis zeiche me von ene ge, nnd chomme niimme, so lang dltit eso boshaft sind

(see Suppl.). [Substance of the above. Earth-mannikins on the Bamsflue :

lived in a care with a narrow entrance ; cooked nothing, ate roots and berries ;
bathed in a brook like doves, set one to watch, and if he whistled, were up the hills
faster than hares, and slipt into their cave. Never hurt men, often helped : the
farmer at Hard was alone loading, a dwarf oame down, helped to finish, got on the
waggon, did not properly run the rope over the bind-pole, it slipped off, the pole
flew up and hurt him badly. Farmer : * I wish it had happened to me.' Dwarf :
* Not so ; self do, self have.' Got down, picked a herb, and cured the wound in-
stantly. Often, when honest folk cut hay or tied corn, dwarfs helped them to
finish and get it under shelter ; or in the night, if rain oame ou, they brought in
what was lying cut, and didn't the people stare in the morning ! One severe winter
they came every night to a house at Arlisbach, slept on the oven, departed before
dawn; wore scarlet cloaks reaching to the ground, so that their feet were never seen;
bat some prying people sprinkled ashes before the house, on which were seen the
next morning marks of duck's and goose's feet. They never showed themselves
again, and never will, while men are so spiteful.]

1 Blommaert's Oudvlaemsche gedichten 1, 118 b . 2, 26*.

* Brahma, sitting on a lotus, floats musing across the abysses of the sea. Vishnu,
when after Brahma's death the waters have covered all the worlds, sits in the shape
of a tiny infant on a leaf of the pipala (fig-tree), and floats on the sea of milk,
Bucking the toe of his right foot. (Asiat. Bes. 1, 845.)



Digitized by VjOOQIC



452 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

as the AlvismM implies by patting Wfar, dvergar, and helbftar (if
I may use the word), by the side of men, giants, gods, foes and
vanir, each as a separate class of beings, with a language of its
own. Hence too the expressions 'das stille volk; the good
people (p. 456) ; hvl&u-fdlk ; ' in Lausitz ludki, little folk (Wend,
volksl. 2, 268), from lud, liud (nation), OHG. lint, Boh. lid; and
in Welsh y teitlu (the family), y tylwyth teg (the fair family, the
pretty little folk, conf. Owen sub v. tylwyth, and Diefenbach's
Celtics ii. 102. Whether we are to understand by this a histo-
rical realm situate in a particular region, I leave undecided here.
Dvergmal (sermo nanorum) is the ON. term for the echo : a very
expressive one, as their calls and cries resound in the hills, and
when man speaks loud, the dwarf replies, as it were, from the
mountain. HerrauSssaga, cap. 11, p. 50: 'SigurSr stilti sv&
hatt horpuna, at dvergmal qvafi f hollunni/ he played so loud
on the harp, that dwarf's voice spoke in the hall. When heroes
dealt loud blows, ' dvorgamdl sang uj qvorjun hamri/ echo
sang in every rock (Lyngbye, p. 464, 470) ; when hard they
hewed, f dvorgamdl sang uj fiodlun/ echo sang in the mountains
(ibid. 468). ON. € qveftr vi&l klettunum/ reboant rupes. Can
groeti dlfa (ploratus nanorum) in the obscure Introduction to
the Hamdismal (Seam. 269*) mean something similar ? Even our
German heroic poetry seems to have retained the same image :

Dem fehten allez n&ch erhal, To the fighting everything

resounded,
d6 beide berg und ouch diu tal then both hill and also dale
gahen ir slegen stimme. gave voice to their blows.

(Eckev ed. Hagen, 161.)

Daz d& beide berg und tal

vor ir slegen wilde wider einander allez hal. (ibid. 171.)

The hills not only rang again with the sword-strokes of the
heroes, but uttered voice and answer, i.e. the dwarfs residing in
them did. 1

This nation of elves or dwarfs has over it a king. In Norse
legend, it is true, I remember no instance of it among a\lf*r
or dvergar; yet Huldra is queen of the huldrefdlk (p. 272), as

1 The Irish for echo ia similar, though less beautiful ; muc aUa^ awine of the rook.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWARFS. 453

Berohta is of the heinchen (p. 276), and English tradition tells
of an elf-queen, Chaucer's C. T. 6442 (the fairy queen, Percy
3, 207 seq.) ; I suppose, because Gallic tradition likewise made
female fairies (tees) the more prominent. The OPr. fable of
Huon of Bordeaux knows of a roi Oberon, i.e. Auberon for
Alberon, an alb by his very name : the kingdom of the fays
(royaume de la f 6erie) is his. Our poem of Orendel cites a dwarf
Alban by name. In Otnit a leading part is played by kunee
Alberich, Elberich, to whom are subject " manec berg und tal ; "
the Nib. lied makes him not a king, but a vassal of the kings
Schilbung and Nibelung ; a nameless king of dwarfs appears in
the poem of Ecke 80 ; and elsewhere king Qoldem&r (Deut. held-
ensage p. 174. Haupt's Zeitschr. 6, 522-3), king Sinneh and
Laurin (MS. 2, 15 a ); 'der getwerge kunec Bilei,' Er. 2086.
The German folk-tales also give the dwarf nation a king (no.
152) ; king of erdmannchen (Kinderm. 3, 167). Qubich (Gibika,
p. 137) is in the Harz legends a dwarf-king. Heiling is prince of
the dwarfs (no. 151). 1 These are all kings of black elves, except
Oberon, whom I take to be a light alb. It appears that human
heroes, by subduing the sovereign of the elves, at once obtain
dominion over the spirits ; it may be in this sense that Volundr
is called visi Sulfa (p. 444), and Siegfried after conquering Elbe-
rich would have the like pretensions (see Suppl.).

The ON. writings have preserved plenty of dwarfs' names
which are of importance to the study of mythology (loc. princ.
S»m. 2 b 3 a ). I pick out the rhyming forms Vitr and Litr, Fili
and Kilij Fialcurr and Qalarr, Skirvir and Ftmr, Anar and Onar,
Finnr and Omnr, as well as the absonant Bivor and Bavor.
Nar and Ndinn are manifestly synonymous (mortuus), and so
are Thrdr and Thrainn (contumax, or rancidus?). With Ndmn
agrees Dainn (mortuus again) ; with Oinn (timidus) Moinn ;
Dvalinn, Durinn, Thorinn, Fundinn, shew at least the same

1 A curious cry of grief keeps recurring in several dwarf-stories : * the king is
dead! Urban is dead! old mother Pumpe is dead! 1 (BOsching's Wftoh. naohr. 1,
99. 101) ; the old sehumpe is dead ! (Legend of Bonikaa), MHG. schumpfe, Fragm.
80 s ; conf. Bange's Thar, chron. 49% where again they say * king Knoblauch
(garlic) is dead ! ' Taking into account the saying in Saxony, * de gaue fru ist nu
al dot ! ' with evident allusion to the motherly goddess (p. 258), and the similar
phrase in Scandinavia, * nu eru dantfar allar dltir I * (p. 402) ; all these exclama-
tions seem to give vent to a grief, dating from the oldest times, fox the death of
■one superior being (see SuppL),

Digitized by VjOOQIC



454 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

participial ending. Alfr, Qandalfr, and Vinddlfr place the con-
nexion of elves and dwarfs beyond doubt. Ai occurs twice,
and seems to mean avus, as in Saem. 100* ; Finnr and Billing r
are like the heroes' names discussed on pp. 373, 380. Nyr, and
Nidi, Nyr and NyraSr have reference to phases of the moon's
light ; a few other names will be touched upon later. In Seam.
45 b and Sn. 48. 130 all dwarfs are said to be ' Ivalda synir/
sons of IvahU, and he seems identical with the elvish Ivaldr,
father of ISunn, Sam. 89% just as Folkvaldr and Folkvaldi (AS.
Folcwealda), Domvaldr and D6mvaldi=Domaldi, are used in-
differently. Ivaldr answers to the Dan. Evald and our Ewald,
a rare name in the older documents : we know the two St.
Ewalds (niger et albus) who were martyred in the elder Pipings
time (695) and buried at Cologne, but were of English origin.
Beda 5, 10 spells it H&wald, and the AS. transl. Hedwold (see
Suppl.).

Of the dwellings of light elves in heaven the folk-tales have
no longer anything to tell; the more frequently do they de-
scribe those of dwarfs in the rifts and caves of the mountains.
Hence the AS. names bergcelfen, dunoBlfen, muntcelfen. ON. ' bf
ec for ior& neftan, a ec undr steini staS/ I dwell underneath
the earth, I have under stone my stead, Seam. 48 a . 'dvergr sat
undir steininum,' Yngl. saga, cap. 15. 'dvergar bda % iorffu oc
i steinum,,' Sn. 15. Elbenstein, Elphinstone, are names of noble
families, see Elwenstein, Weisth. 1, 4. In the Netherlands
the hills containing sepulchral urns are vulgarly denominated
alfenbergen (Belg. mus. 5, 64). Treasures lie hidden in graves
as they do in the abodes of elves, and the dead are subterraneans
as these are. And that is why dwarfs are called erdmannlein,
erdmanneken, in Switzerland h&rdmandle, sometimes even unter-
irdische, Dan. tmderjordishe. 1 They scamper over moss and fell,
and are not exhausted by climbing steep precipices : 'den wilden

1 I cannot yet make out the name arweggert, by which the earth-men are called
np in Einderm. 2, 168-4. [erd-wihte? v. ar- for erd-, p. 467, 1. 8 ; and wcrjhn, p. 449] .
The ON. Arvakr is hardly the same (see Suppl.). In Pruss. Samogitia * de under-
h»rd$chkes'\ the tales about them carefully oolleoted by Benson, no. 48-69. The
Wends of Liineburg called subterranean spirits gdrtoni (hiU-mannikins, fr. gora,
hill), and the hills they haunted are stQl shown. When they wished to borrow
baking utensils of men, they gave a sign without being seen, and people plaoed
them outside the door for them. In the evening they brought them back, knocking
at the window and adding a loaf by way of thanks (Jugler's Worterb.). The Es-
thonian mythology also has its subterraneans (ma aUuud t under ground).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWARFS. 455

gettoergen w&re ze sttgen da genuoc/ enough, climbing for wild
dwarfs, says Wh. 57, 25, speaking of a rooky region. 1 The popu-
lar beliefs in Denmark about the Uergmand, biergfolk, biergtrold,
are collected in Molbech's Dial. lex. p. 35-6. The biergmand's
wife is a biergekone. These traditions about earth-men and
mountain-sprites all agree together. Slipping * into cracks and
crevices of the hills, they seem to vanish suddenly, 'like the
schwick/ as the Swiss tale has it, and as suddenly they come up
from the ground ; in all the places they haunt, there are shown
such dwarfs holes, quer lick's holes. So the ludki in Lausitz make
their appearance out of underground passages like mouseholes ;
a Breton folk-song speaks of the horred's grotto (Villemarqul
1, 86). In such caves they pursue their occupations, collecting
treasures, forging weapons curiously wrought ; their kings fashion
for themselves magnificent chambers underground, Elberich,
Laurin dwell in these wonderful mountains, men and heroes at
times are tempted down, loaded with gifts, and let go, or held
fast (see Suppl.). Dietrich von Bern at the close of his life is
fetched away by a dwarf, Deut. heldens. p. 300 ; of Etzel, says
the Nibelungs' Lament 2167, one knows not 'ob er sich ver-
sluffe in locher der steinwende/ whether he have slipped away
into holes of the rocks 8 : meaning probably, that, like Tann-
hauser and faithful Eckart, he has got into the mount wherein
Dame Venus dwells. Of this Dame Venus's mount we have no
accounts before the 15-16th centuries; one would like to know
what earlier notions lie at the bottom of it : has Dame Venus
been put in the place of a subterranean elf -queen, or of a goddess,
such as Dame Holda or Prikka? Heinrich von Morunge sings
of his beloved, MS. 1, 55* :

Und dunket mich, wie si ge zuo mir dur gauze rrvwren,

ir tr&st und ir helfe lazent mich niht trAren;

swenne si wil, so vuereb sie mich hinnen

mit ir wizen hant hohe uber die zinnen.

ich w»ne sie ist ein Venus h6re.

* Other instances are collected in Ir. Elfenm. lxxvi * den here buten wUdiu
getwerc,' wild dwarfs inhabited the hill, Sigenot IIS.

' 8Uefen is said of them as of the fox in Beinh. xxxi.; oorsubst schlucht
stands for $lu/t (beschwiohtigen, luoht, kracht, for swiften, loft, kraft), hence a hole
to slip into.

9 Conf. Deutsche sagen, no. 383, on Theoderic's soul, how it is conveyed into
Vulcan's ab?s&,

VOL. II.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



456 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

(Methinks she comes to me through solid walls, Her help, her
comfort lets me nothing fear ; And when she will she wafteth me
from here With her white hand high o'er the pinnacles. I ween
she is a Venus high.) He compares her then to a Venus or
Holda, with the elvish power to penetrate through walls and
carry you away over roof and tower (see chap. XXXI., Tann-
hauser; and Suppl.). Accordingly, when a Hessian nursery-
tale (do. 13) makes three haule-mannerchen appear, these are
henchmen of Holle, elves in her retinue, and what seems espe-
cially worthy of notice is their being three, and endowing with
gifts : it is a rare thing to see male beings occupy the place of
the fortune-telling wives. Elsewhere it is rather the little earth-
wives that appear; in Hebel (ed. 5, p. 268) Eveli says to the
wood- wife : ' God bless you, and if you're the earth-mannikin's
vrife, I won't be afraid of you/ l

There is another point of connexion with Holda: the ex-
pressions 'die guten holden' (p. 266), ' guedsholden' penates
(Teutonista), or holdichen, holdeken, holderchen seem perfectly
synonymous with 'the good elves;' holdo is literally a kind,
favourably disposed being, and in Iceland Uuflingar (darlings)
and huldufolk, huldumenn (p. 272) are used for alfar. The form
of the Dan. hyldemand is misleading, it suggests the extraneous
notion of hyld (sambucus, elder- tree), and makes Dame Holda
come out as a hyldemoer or hyldeqvind, viz., a dryad incorporated
with that tree (Thiele 1, 132) ; but its real connexion with the
huldre is none the less evident. Thus far, then, the elves are
good-natured helpful beings ; they are called, as quoted on p.
452, the stills volk (Deut. sagen, No. 30-1), the good people, good
neighbours, peaceful folk (Gael, daoine shi, Ir. daoine maitb, Wei.
dynion mad). When left undisturbed in their quiet goings on,
they maintain peace with men, and do them services when they
can, in the way of smith-work, weaving and baking. Many a
time have they given to people of their new-baked bread or cakes
(Mone's Anz. 7, 475). They too in their turn require man's
advice and assistance in certain predicaments, among which are

i One winter Hadding was eating his supper, when suddenly an earth-wife
pushed her head up through the floor by tfieflreride, and offered him green vege-
tables. Saxo, p. 16, calls her cicutarum gtrula, and makes her take Hadding into
the subterranean land, where are meadows covered with grass, as in our nursery-
tales which describe Dame Holla's underground realm. This grass- wife resembles
a little earth-wife.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWARFS. 457

to bo reckoned three cases in particular. In the first place, they
fetch goodwivesj midwives, to assist she-dwarfs in labour ; l next,
men of understanding to divide a treasure, to settle a dispute ; 3
thirdly, they borrow a hall to hold their weddings in ; 8 but they
requite every favour by bestowing jewels which bring luck to the
man's house and to his descendants. They themselves, however,
have much knowledge of occult healing virtues in plants and
stones. 4 In Budlieb xvii. 18, the captured dwarf retorts the
taunt of treachery in the following speech :



1 Ranzan, Alvensleben, Hahn. (Dent. sag. no. 41, 68-9) ; Mtillenh. Schlesw.
hoist, sag. no. 443-4. Asbiorn Norw. s. 1, 18. Irish legends and fairy tales 1,
249-250. Mone's Anz. 7, 475 ; conf . Thiele 1, 86.— Htilpher's Samlingen om

Jamtland (Westeras 1776, p. 210) has the following Swedish story: *ar 1660, da

jag tillika med min hnstrn var g&ngen til faboderne, som ligga f mil ifran Bagnnda
prastegard, och der sent om qvallen suttit ooh talt en stand, kom en liten man
ingaende genom dozen, ooh bad min hnstrn, det ville hon hjelpa nans hustru, som
di lag och qvaldes med banu karlen var eljest liten til v&xten, svart i synen, ooh
med gamla gra klader forsedd. Jag ooh min hnstrn sntto en stund ooh undrade
pa denne mannen, emedan vi understodo, at han var et troll, ooh hort berattas, det
sadane, af bondfolk vettar kallade, sig altid i fabodarne uppehalla, sedan folket om
hosten sig derifran begifvit. Men som han 4 a 5 ganger sin begaran payrkade, och
man derhos betankte, hvad skada bondfolket beratta sig ibland af vettarne lidit,
dA de antingen svurit pa dem, eller eljest vist dem med vranga ord til helvetet ;
ty fattade jag da til det radet, at jag laste ofver min hnstrn nagre boner, valsignade
henne, och bad henne i Guds namn folja med honom. Hon tog sa i hastighet nagre
gamla linklader med sig, och fdlgde honom at, men jag blef qvar sittande. Sedan
liar hon mig vid aterkomsten berattat, at da hon gatt med mannen ntom porten,
tykte hon sig liksom foras ndi vadret en stund, och kom sa uti en stnga, hvarest
bredevid var en liten mork kammare, das nans hnstrn lag och v&ndades med barn
i en sang, min hnstrn har sa stigit til henne, ooh efter en liten stnnd hjelpt henne,
di hon fodde barnet, ooh det med lika atborder, som andra menniskor plaga hafva.
Karlen har sedan tilbudit henne mat, men som hon dertil nekade, ty tackade han
henne och fdlgde henne at, hvarefter hon ater likasom farit i vadret, ooh kom efter
en stnnd til porten igen vid passklockan 10. Emedlertid voro en hoper gamla
rilfvertkedar lagde pa en hylla i stngan, och farm min hnstrn dem, da hon andra
dagen stokade i vraarne : knnnandes fdrstft, at de af vettret voro dit lagde. At sa
i sanning ar skedt, vitnar jag med mitt namns nndersattande. Bagunda, d. 12

april, 1671. Pet. Rahm.' [Substance of the foregoing : 1, the undersigned, and

my wife were accosted by a little man with black fac* and old gray clothes, who
begged my wife to come and aid his wife then in labour. Seeing he was a troll,
such as the peasantry call vettar (wights), I prayed over my wife, blessed her, and
bade her go. She seemed for a time to be borne along by the wind, found his wife
in a little dark room, and helped, etc. Refused food, was carried home in the
same way ; found next day a heap of old rilver vessels brought by the vettrA

In Finland the vulgar opinion holds, that under the altars of churches there live
small mis-shapen beings called kirkonwdki (church-folk) ; that when their women
have difficult labour, they can be relieved by a Christian woman visiting them and
laying her hand on them. Such service they reward liberally with gold and silver.
Mnemosyne, Abo 1821, p. 813.

* Pref. p. xxx. Neocorus 1, 542. Einderm. 2, 43. 8, 172. 225. Nib. 92, 8.
Bit 7819. Conf. Deutsche heldensagen, p. 78.

* Hoia (Deut. sagen, no. 35). Bonikau (Elisabeth von Orleans, Strassb. 1789,
p. 133 ; Leipzig 1820, p. 450-1). Btisching's Wochentl. nachr. 1, 98 ; conf. 101.

4 The wounded hardmandle, p. 450-1. Here are two Swedish stories given iu
Odman's Bahuslan pp. 191, 224 : Biorn Martensson, accompanied by an archer,



Digitized by *



loogle



458 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Absit at inter nos unquam regnaverit haec f raus !
non tarn longaevi tunc essemus neque sani.
Inter vos nemo loquitur nisi corde doloso,
hinc neque ad aetatem maturam pervenietis :
pro cujusque fide sunt ejus tempora vitae.
Non aliter loquimur nisi sicut corde tememus,
neque cibos varios edimus morbos generantes,
longvus incolumes hinc nos durabimus ac vos.

Thus already in the 10th century the dwarf complains of the
faithlessness of mankind, and partly accounts thereby for the
shortness of human life, while dwarfs, because they are honest
and feed on simple viands, have long and healthy lives. More
intimately acquainted with the secret powers of nature, they can
with greater certainty avoid unwholesome food. This remark-
able passage justifies the opinion of the longevity of dwarfs ; and
their avoidance of human food, which hastens death, agrees
with the distinction drawn out on p. 318 between men and gods
(see Suppl.).

went hunting in the high woods o! ftrnekulla; there they found a bergsmed
(mountain- Bmith) asleep, and the huntsman ordered the archer to seize him, hut
he declined : 'Pray God shield you I the bergsmith will fling you down the hill.*
But the huntsman was so daring, he went up and laid hands on the sleeper ; the
bergsmith cried out, and begged they would let him go, he had a wife and seven
little ones, and he would forge them anything they liked, they had only to put the
iron and steel on the cliff, and they'd presently find the work lying finished in the
same place. Biorn asked him, whom he worked for? 'For my fellows,' he
replied. As Biorn would not release him, he said: ' Had I my oap-of -darkness
(uddehat, p. 463), you should not carry me away ; but if you don't let me go, none
of your posterity will attain the greatness you enjoy, but will go from bad to worse.'
Which afterwards came true. Biorn secured the bergsmith, and had him put in
prison at Bohus, but on the third day he had disappeared.

At Mykleby lived Swen, who went out hunting one Sunday morning, and on the
hill near Tyfweholan he spied a fine buck with a ring about his neck ; at the same
instant a cry came out of the hill : ' Look, the man is shooting our ring-buck ! '
' Nay,' cried another voice, * he had better not, he has not washed this morning '
(i.e., been sprinkled with holy water in church). When Swen heard that, he

immediately , washed himself in haste, and shot the ring-buck. Then

arose a great screaming and noise in the hill, and one said : ' See, the man has
taken his belt-flask and washed himself, but I will pay him out.' Another
answered : • You had better let it be, the white buck will stand by him.' A tre-
mendous uproar followed, and a host of trolls filled the wood all round. Swen
threw himself on the ground, and crept under a mass of roots ; then came into his
mind what the troll had said, that the white buck, as he contemptuously called the
church, would stand by him. So he made a vow, that if God would help him out
of the danger, he would hand over the buck's ring to Mykleby church, the horns to
Torp, and the hide to Langeland. Having got home uninjured, he performed all
this : the ring, down to the year 17S2, has been the knocker on Mykleby church
door, and is of some unknown metal, like iron ore ; the buck's horn was preserved
in Torp church, and the skin in Langeland church.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWARFS. 459

Whilst in this and other ways the dwarfs do at times have
dealings with mankind, yet on the whole they seem to shrink
from man ; they give the impression of a downtrodden afflicted
race, which is on the point of abandoning its ancient home
to new and more powerful invaders. There is stamped on
their character something shy and something heathenish, which
estranges them from intercourse with christians. They chafe
at hnman faithlessness, which no doubt would primarily mean
the apostacy from heathenism. In the poems of the Mid. Ages,
Laurin is expressly set before us as a heathen. It goes sorely
against the dwarfs to see churches built, bell-ringing (supra,
p. 5) disturbs their ancient privacy ; they also hate the clearing
of forests, agriculture, new fangled pounding-machinery for ore. 1



1 More fully treated of in Ir. Elfenm. xciv. xov. ; oonf. Thiele 1, 42. 2, 2. Faye
p. 17, 18. Htinchen driven away by grazing herds and tinkling sheepbells % Variscia
2, 101. Hessian tales of wichtelmdnnerehen, Kinderm. no. 39, to which I add the

following one: On the Sohwalm near Uttershansen stands the Dosenberg; close

to the river's bank are two apertures, once the exit and entrance holes of the
wiehtelmdnner. The grandfather of farmer Tobi of Singlis often had a little
wichtelmann come to him in a friendly manner in his field. One day, when the
farmer was catting corn, the wichtel asked him if he would undertake a carting job
across the river that night for a handsome price in gold. The farmer said yes, and
in the evening the wichtel brought a sack of wheat to the farmhouse as earnest ; so
four horses were harnessed, and the farmer drove to the foot of the Dosenberg.
Out of the holes the wichtel brought heavy invisible loads to the waggon, which tbe
farmer took through the water to the other side. So he went backwards and
forwards from ten in the evening till four in the morning, and his horses at last
got tired. Then said the wichtel : * That will do, now you shall see what you have
been carrying/ He bid the farmer look over hi* right shoulder, who then saw the
whole wide field full of little wichtelmen. Said the wichtel : ' For a thousand years
we have dwelt in the Dosenberg, our time is up now, we must away to another
country ; but there is money enough left in the mountain to oontent the whole
neighbourhood. ' He then loaded Tobi's waggon full of money, and went his way.
The fanner with much trouble got his treasure home, and was now a rich man ;
his descendants are still well-to-do people, but the wichtelmen have vanished from
the land for ever. On the top of the Dosenberg is a bare place where nothing will
grow, it was bewitched by the wichtel holding their trysts upon it. Every seven
years, generally on a Friday, you may see a high blue flame over it, covering a
larger space of ground than a big caldron. People call it the geldfeuer, they have
brushed it away with their feet (for it holds no heat), in hopes of finding treasure,
but in vain : the devil had always some new hoouspoous to make some little word
pop out of their mouths.

Then, lastly, a Low Saxon story of the Aller country : Tau Offensen bin

Eloster Wienhusen was en groten buern, Hdvermann nenhe he siok, die harre ok en
schip up der Aller. Bins dages komt 2 lite tau jUm un segget, he soholle se over dat
water schippen. Tweimal fauert hei over de Aller, jedesmal na den groten rume,
den se AUerO heiten dauet, dat is ne grote unminsohliohe wische lang un breit, dat
man se kums afkiken kann. Ans de buer taun tweitenmale over efauert is, segt
ein von den twarmen to time : * Wut du nu ne Bumme geldes hebben, oder wut du
na koptal betalt sin? ' ' Iok will leiver ne snmme geld nemen ' sa* de buer. Do
nimt de eine von den liltjen lUen sinen haut af, un settet den dem sohipper up :
* Du herrst dik doch beter estan, wenn du na koptal efodert herrst ' segt de twarm £



Digitized by VjOOQIC



460 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Breton legend informs us : A man had dug a treasure out of a
dwarf's hole, and then cautiously covered his floor with ashes and
glowing embers ; so when the dwarfs came at midnight to get
their property back, they burnt their feet so badly, that they set
up a loud wail (supra, p. 413) and fled in haste, but they smashed
all his crockery. Villemarqu6 1, 42 (see Suppl.).

From this dependence of the elves on man in some things,
and their mental superiority in others, there naturally follows
a Itostile relation between the two. Men disregard elves, elves
do mischief to men and teaze them. It was a very old belief,
that dangerous arrows were shot down from the air by elves ;
this evidently means light elves, it is never mentioned in stories
of dwarfs, and the AS. formula couples together ' dsagescot and
ylfagescot/ these elves being apparently armed with weapons
like those of the gods themselves ; 1 the divine thunderbot is even
called an albschoss (pp. 179, 187), and in Scotland the elf-arrow,
elfflint, elf-bolt is a hard pointed wedge believed to have been
discharged by spirits ; the turf cut out of the ground by light-
ning is supposed to be thrown up by them. 1 On p. 187 I have
already inferred, that there must have been some closer con-
nexion, now lost to us, between elves and the Thundergod : if it
be that his bolts were forged for him by elves, that points rather
to the black elves.

Their touch, their breath may bring sickness or death on man
and beast ; 8 one whom their stroke has fallen on, is lost or in-
capable (Danske viser 1, 828) : lamed cattle, bewitched by them,

un de buer, de vorher nichts nich seien harre, on den et so lichte in schipp vorko-
men was, ana of he nichts inne herre, siit de ganze AlUrS von luter Ultjen minschen
krimmeln un wimmeln. Dat sind de twarme west, dei wier trokken Bind. Von der
tit heft Hovermanns noeh immer vull geld ehat, dat senich kennen deen, averst nu
sind se sail ein nan annern ut estorven, nn de hof is verkoft. ' Wann ist denn das
gewesen ? ' Vor olen tien, ana de twarme noch sau in der welt wesen sind, nu
gift et er wol keine mehr, vor drtlttig, virzig jaren. [Substance of the foregoing :

Hovermann, a large farmer at Oftensen, had also a ship on the R. Aller. Two

little men asked him to ferry them over. He did so twice, each time to a large
open spaoe called AUerd. Dwarf : * Will yon have a lamp sum, or be paid so much
a head ? ' Farmer : ' A lump sum.' Dwarf : * You'd better have asked so much
a head.' He put his own hat on the farmer's head, who then saw the whole AlUrS
swarming with little men, who had been ferried across. The H5vermanns grew rich,
have now all died out, farm sold. * When did that happen ? ' Ages ago, in the
olden time, when dwarfs were in the world, 80 or 40 years ago.]

1 Arrows of the Servian vila, p. 486. The Norw. tili-ikudt, elf -shot ten, is said
of sick cattle, Sommerfelt Saltdalens prastegield, p. 119. Soot, el/shot.

3 Irish Elf-stories xlv. zlvi. cii.

8 Ibid. ciii.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWAEFS. 461

are said in Norway to be dverg-slagen (Hallager p. 20) ; the term
elbentrotsch for silly halfwitted men, whom their avenging hand
has touched, was mentioned on p. 443. One who is seduced by
elves is called in Danish eUevild, and this ellevildehe in reference
to women is thus described: 'at elven legede med dem/
Blowing puffing beings language itself shews them to be from
of old : as spirittis comes from spirare, so does geist, ghost from
the old verb gisan (flari, cum impetu ferri) ; the ON. gustr,
Engl, gust, is flatus, and there is a dwarf named Gustr (S»m.
181 b ) ; l other dwarfs, Austri, Vestri, Norffri, Sudri (S®m. 2 b . Sn.
9. 15. 16) betoken the four winds, while Vinddlfr, still a dwarfs
name, explains itself. 3 Beside the breathing, the mere look of
an elf has magic power : this our ancient idiom denominates
inisehan (torve intueri, Gramm. 2, 810), MHG. entsehen : € ich
h&nin gesegent (blessed), er was entsehen/ Eracl. 3239; 'von
der elbe wirt entsehen vil maneger man/ MS. 1, 50 b (see Suppl.).
The knot-holes in wood are popularly ascribed to elves. In
Smaland a tale is told about the ancestress of a family whose
name is given, that she was an elf maid, that she came into the
house through a knot-hole in the wall with the sunbeams ; she was
married to the son, bore him four children, then vanished the
same way as she had come. Afzelius 2, 145. Thiele 2, 18.
And not only is it believed that they themselves can creep
through, but that whoever looks through can see things other-
wise hidden from him; the same thing happens if you look
through the hole made in the skin of a beast by an elf s arrow.
In Scotland a knot-hole is called elf bore, says Jamieson : ' a hole
in a piece of wood, out of which a knot has dropped or been
driven : viewed as the operation of the fairies/ They also say
auwisbore, Jutish ausbor (Molbech's Dial. lex. p. 22. 94). If on
the hill inhabited by elves the following rhyme be uttered 15
times:

allkuon, allkuon, est du her inn,
saa ska du herud paa 15 iegepinn !

(elf-woman, art thou in here, so shalt thou come out through 15

1 Norweg. alvgusU an illness caused by having been breathed upon by elves,
Hallager 4>.

2 Old French legend has an elf called Zephyr ; there is a German home-sprite
BlaterU, Mone's Anzeiger 1884, p. 260.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



462 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

oak knot-holes, egepind), the elfin is bound to make her appear-
ance, Molb. Dial. 99 (see Sappl.).

In name, and still more in idea, the elf is connected with the
ghostlike butterfly, the product of repeated changes of form.
An OHG. gloss (Graff 1, 248) says : brucus, locusta quae nondum
volavit, quam vulgo albam vocant. The alp is supposed often
to assume the shape of a butterfly, and in the witch-trials the
name of elb is given by turns to the caterpillar, to the chrysalis,
and to the insect that issues from it. And these share even the
names of gute holden and bbse dinger (evil things) with the spirits
themselves.

These light airy sprites have an advantage over slow unwieldy
man in their godlike power (p. 325) of vanishing or making
themselves invisible. 1 No sooner do they appear, than they are
snatched away from our eyes. Only he that wears the ring can
get a sight of Blberich, Ortn. 2, 68. 70. 86. 8, 27. With the
light elves it is a matter of course, but neither have the black
ones forfeited the privilege. The invisibility of dwarfs is usually
lodged in a particular part of their dress, a hat or a cloak, and
when that is accidentally dropt or cast aside, they suddenly
become visible. The dwarf -tales tell of nebelkappen (Deut. sag.
nos. 152-8-5), of gray coats and red caps (Thiele 1, 122. 135),
of scarlet cloaks (supra, p. 451n.).* Earlier centuries used the
words helkappe, helkeplein, helkleit (Altd. bl. 1, 256), nebelkappe
(MS. 2, 156 a . 258 b ; Morolt 2922. 3932) and tarnkappe. By Albe-
rich's and afterwards Sigfrit's tarnkappe (Nib. 98, 3. 386, 1.
442, 2. 1060, 2) or simply kappe (335, 1) we must understand
not a mere covering for the head, but an entire cloak; for
in 337, 1 we have also twrnhut, the protecting skin, and the

1 *Hujus tempore prinoipis (Heinrioi ducis Karinthiae) in montanis suae
ditionis gem gvana in cavernis montinm habitavit, cum hominibuB vesoebantur,
ladebant, bibebant, choreas ducebant, Bed invisibiliter. Literas soribebant, rem-
publieam inter se gerebant, legem habentes et prinoipem, fidem oatholicam pro-
fitentes, domicilia hominum latenter intrantes, hominibus oonsedentes et arridentes.
. . . Principe subducto, nihil de eis amplins est audi turn. Dicitur quod
gemma* gestant, quae eo$ reddunt inviribiles, quia dcformitatem et parvitatem cor-
porum erubescunt.' Anon. Leobiens. ad ann. 1385 (Pez 1, 940*).

* 01. Wormius's pref. to Claussfo's Dan. tranal. of Snorre, Copenh. 1633 : ' der-
for sigis de (dverger) at hafve h&tte paa, huormid kunde gidre sig usynlig.' Other
proofs are collected in Ir. Elfenm. lxxiv. lxxv. A schretel wears a rUet keppel on
him (not on his head), ibid. cxyi. Bollenhagen's * bergmannlein ' wear little white
shirts and pointed caps, Froschmeuseler xx. v b . Maugis, the Carolingian sorcerer,
is called * lerres (latro) o le noir chaperon. 1



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWARFS. 463

schretePs 'r6tez keppel' becomes in H. Sachs 1, 280 b a € mantel
scharlach rot des zwergleins/ Beside invisibility, this cloak
imparts superior strength, and likewise control over the dwarf
nation and their hoard. In other instances the cap alone is
meant: a Norwegian folk-tale in Faye p. 30 calls it uddehat
(pointed hat ?), and a home-sprite at Hildesheim bears the name
of HodeJcen from the felt hat he wore. Probably the OHG. helot*
helm (latibulum), Gl. Hrab. 969*, the OS. helith-helm, Hel. 164,
29, AS. heol9helm, Cod. Exon. 362, 31, haelShelm, Csedm. 29, 2,
ON. hialmr huliz (an Eddie word for clond), Seem. 50*, 1 and the
AS. grimhelm, Caedm. 188, 27. 198,. 20. Beow. 666, all have a
similar meaning, though the simple helm and grime (p. 238)
already contain the notion of a covering and a mask ; for helm
is from helan (celare) as huot, hood, or hat, from huotan (tegere).
No doubt other superior beings, beside elves and dwarfs, wore
the invisible-making garment ; I need only mention 08in's hat
with turned-up brim (p. 146), Mercury's petasue, Wish's hat,
which our fairy-tales still call urishing-hat,* and Pluto's or Orcus's
helmet (^1805 Kvveq, II. 5, 845. Hesiod, Scut. 227). The dwarfs
may have stood in some peculiar, though now obscured, relation
to OSinn, as the hat-wearing pataeci, cabiri and Dioscuri did to
Jupiter (see Suppl.).

Prom such ability to conceal their form, and from their teazing
character in general, there will arise all manner of deception and
disappointment (conf. Suppl. to p. 331), to which man is exposed
in dealing with elves and dwarfs. We read : der alp triuget
(cheats), Fundgr. 827, 18 ; den triuget, weiz Got, nicht der alp,
not even the elf can trick him, Diut. 2, 34; Silvester 5199 ; die
mag triegen wol der alp, Suchenwirt xxxi. 12; ein getroc daz
mich in dem sl&fe triuget, Ben. 429 ; dich triegen die elbin (1. elbe,
rhyme selbe), Altd. bl. 1, 261 ; elbe triegent, Amgb. 2 b ; diu elber
triegent, Herbort 5 b ; in beduhte daz in triige ein alp, Ir. elfenm.
Ivii. ; alfs ghedroch, Elegast 51, 775. Reinh. 5367, conf. Horae
Belg. 6, 218-9; alfsche droeh, Reinaert (prose lxxii. a ). In our



1 Fornm. sdg. 2, 141 says of Eyrindr the sorcerer : ' giftrtti J>eim hulidthialm*
made for them a mist, darkness, hulinhialmr, Fornald. s6g. 3, 219 ; kuJUfidttr 1,
9. 2, 20. See Bafn's Index sab y. dulgerfi.

* A weighty addition to the arguments for the identity of Wuotan and Mercury ;
conf. p. 419 on the wishing-rod.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



464 WIGHTS AND BLVE8.

elder speech gitroc, getroc, dgetroc, abegetroc, denotes trickery
especially diabolic, proceeding from evil spirits (Gramm. 2, 709.
740-1). l To the same effect are some other disparaging epithets
applied to elves : elbischez getwds, elbischez as, elbischez ungehiure,
as the devil himself is called a getw&s (fantasma) and a monster.
So, of the morbid oppression felt in sleep and dreaming, it is
said quite indifferently, either : ' the devil has shaken thee, ridden
thee/ 'hinaht ritert dich satanas (Satan shakes thee to-night)/
Fundgr. 1, 170; or else the elf, the nightmare 2 : c dich hat gertien
der mar/ 'ein alp zonmet dich (bridles thee)/ And as Dame
Holle entangles one's spinning or hair (p. 269), as she herself has
tangled hair, 8 and as stubbly hair is called HoUenzopf;* so the
nightelf, the nightmare, rolls up the hair of men or the manes and
tails of horses, in knots, or chews them through : alpzopf, druten-
zopf, wichlelzopf weichselzopf (of which more hereafter), in Lower
Saxony mahrenlocke, elfklatte (Brem. worth. 1, 802), Dan. mare-
loh, Engl, elflocks (Nares sub v.), elvish knots, and in Shakspeare
to elf means to mat: 'elf all my hair in knots/ K. Lear ii. 3.
Here will come in those 'comae equorum diligenter tricatae,'
when the white women make their midnight rounds (supra, p.
287). The Lithuanian elf named aitwaras likewise mats the
hair : aitwars yo plaukus snzindo, suwele (has drawn his hair to-
gether). Lasicz 51 has : aitwaros, incubus qui post sepes habitat
(from twora sepes, and ais pone). Some parts of Lower Saxony
give to the wichtelzopf (plica polonica) the name of selkensteert,
selkin's tail (Brem. wortb. 4, 749), sellentost (Hufeland's Journal
11. 43), which I take to mean tuft of the goodfellow, homesprite



1 Das analutte dee sih pergenten trugetievcles, N. Bth. 44; gidrog phantasma,
0. iii. 8, 24 ; gedrog, Bel. 89, 22 ; tievels getroc, Earl 62*; ' ne dragu ic €nio drngi
thing/ Hel. 8, 10. The dwarf Elberich (Ortn. 8, 27. 5, 105) is called ' ein triige-
vs'xz ' ; oonf. infra, bilwiz.

s Our nachtmar I cannot produce either in OHG. or MHG. Lye gives AS.
« mare foooe' incubus, ephialtes, but I do not understand faecce. Nearly akin is
the Pol. mora, Boh. tnura, elf and evening butterfly, sphinx. In the Mark they say
both alb and makre, Adalb. Kuhn, p. 874. French cauehemare, cochemar, also
chaucheville, chauchi vieilli (Mem. dee Antiq. 4. 899 ; J. J. Champollion Figeac
patois, p. 125) ; ItaL pesaruoU, Span, peeadilla, O.Fr. appesart; these from cauoher
(calcare), and pesar (to weigh down).

1 In Einderm. 8, 44, Holle gets her terrible hair combed out, which had not
been combed for a year. A girl, whom she has gifted, combs pearls and precious
stones out of her own hair.

* Hess. Hollezaul (for -zagel, tail), HolUzopp, Schmidt's Westerw. idiot. 841.
Adelung has : * hSllenzopf, plica polonica, Pol. koltun t Boh. koltaun.'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWABFS. 465

(gesellchen). 1 In Thoringia saellocke, Prrotorius's Weltbeschr. 1,
40. 293 (see SuppL).

The Edda nowhere represents either ftlfar or dvergar as mounted,
whilst our poems of the Mid. Ages make both Elberich and Laurtn
come riding. Heinrich von Ofterdingen bestows on them a steed
'als ein geiz (goat)/ and Ulrich's Alexander gives the dwarf
king Antilois a pony the size of a roe, 2 while Altd. bl. 2, 151
without more ado mounts the wihtel on a white roe. Antilois is
richly dressed, bells tinkle on his bridle-reins ; he is angry with
Alexander for spoiling his flower-garden, as Laurin is with Diet-
rich and Wittich. The Welsh stories also in Grofbon Croker 3,
306 say : ' they were very diminutive persona riding four abreast,
and mounted on small white horses no bigger titan dogs ' (see
Suppl.).

All dwarfs and elves are thievish. Among Eddie names of
dwarfs is an Aljriofr, Saam. 2 b ; Alpris, more correctly Alfrikr
dvergr, in Vilk. saga cap. 16, 40. is called t hinn mikli stelari ' ;
and in the Titurel 27, 288 (Hahn 4105), a notorious thief, who
can steal the eggs from under birds, is Elbegast (corrupted into
Elegast, Algast). In our Low German legends they lay their
plans especially against the pea-fields? Other thefts of dwarfs

i Ogonczyk Zakrzewski, in his Hist, of plica, polonica (Vienna, 1880), observes,
that its cure also is accomplished with superstitioas ceremonies. In Podlachia the
elftuft is solemnly cut off at Easter time and buried. In the Skawina district about
Cracow, it is partially cropped with redhot shears, a piece of copper money tied
up in it, and thrown into the ruins of an old castle in which evil spirits lodge ;
but whoever does this must not look round, but hasten home as fast as he can.
Superstitious formulas for the cure of plica are given by Zakrzewski, p. 20, out of
an Old Boh. MS. of 1325.

2 WackernageTs Basel MSS. p. 28.

' Deut. sagen, nos 152, 155 ; to which I will here add two communicated by Hr.

Scbambaoh. The first is from Juhnde, near Gdttingen : Yor nich langer tid gaf

et to June noch twarge. Duse plegten up et feld to gan, un den ltien de arften
(leuten die erbsen) weg to stolen, wat se um sau liohter konnen, da se unsichtbar
woren dor (durch) ene kappe, dei se uppen koppe harren (hatten). Sau woren nu
ok de twarge enen manne ummer up sin grat arftenstiicke egan, un richteden one
velen sehAen darup an. Diit duerde sau lange, bet hei up den infal kam, de twarge
to fengen. Hei tog alsau an hellen middage en eel (seil) rings iim dat feld. As nu
de twarge unner den sel dorkrupen wollen, fellen onen de kappen af, se seiten nu
aUe in blaten kdppen, un woren sichtbar. De twarge, dei sau efongen woren,
geiwen one vele gaue wore, dat he dat sel wegndinen mdgde, un versproken ene
mette (miethe) geld davor to gewen, hei solle mant vor sunnenupgange weer (wieder)
an duse stee komen. En ander man segde One awer, hei mdgde nich gegen sun-
nenupgang, sundern schon iim twftlwe hengan, denn da w5re de dag ok schon
anegan. Put dd he, und riohtig woren de twarge da met ener mette geld. Davon
heiten de Hie, dei dei mette geld ekregen harren, Mettens. [Epitome : — Dwarfs at
Juhnde preyed on the pea-fields ; wore caps which made them invisible. One man
at high noon stretched a cord round his field. Dwarfs, creeping under it, brushed



Digitized by



Google



466 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

are collected in Elfenm. xcii. xciii., and their longing for children
and blooming maids is treated of, p. civ. cv. Dwarf-kings run
away with maidens to their mountains : Lanrin with the fair
Similt (Sindhilt ?), Goldemar or Volmar with a king's daughter
(Dent, heldensag. 174, Haupt's Zeitschr. 6, 522-3); the Swed.
folk- lay 'Den bergtagna' (-taken) tells of a virgin, who spends
eight years with a mountain-king, and brings him seven sons and
a daughter, before she sees her home again. 1 The following

their caps off, became visible and were caught ; promised him money, if he came
there again before sunrise. A friend advised him to go as early as 12, for even
then the day (of the dwarfs?) was began. He did so, and got his meed.]

The second story is from Dorste in Osterode bailiwick : En buere harre arften

buten stan, dei wb'ren one iimmer ntefreten. Da word den bueren esegt, hei solle
hengan an slaen met w6enrauen (weidenruten) drape riim, saa sleagde gewis einen
de kappe af. Da geng he ok hen met sinnen ganzen lden, un funk ok enen twarg,
dei sie (sagte) tan one, wenn he 8ne wier las Ian (wieder los lassen) wolle, saa wolle
one enn wagen vol geld gewen, hei mdste awer vor sunnenupgange komen. Da leit
ne de bnere las, on de twarg sie 8ne, wo sine hiile wore. Do ging de buere henn
an frang enn, wnnnir dat denn die snnne npginge? Dei sie tan fine, dei ginge
glocke twolwe np. Da spanne ok sinen wagen an, un tog hen. Asse (as he) vor
de hiilen kam, do juchen se drinne un sungen :

Dat ist gaut, dat de buerken dat nioh weit,
dat de sunne dm twolwe up geit !

Asse sek awer melle, wesden se One en afgefillet perd, dat solle mee (mitj ndmen,
wier (weiter) k5nnen se dne nits gewen. Da was de buere argerlich, awer hei wolle
doch fleisch vor sine hunne mee ndmen, da haude en grat stiicke af, un laud et
upen wagen. Asser mee na has kam, da was alles schire gold. Da wollet andere
noch nae langen, awer da was hiile un perd verawunnen. [Epitome : — A farmer,
finding his peas eaten, was advised to beat all round with willow twigs, sore to
knock a dwarfs cap off. Caught a dwarf, who promised a waggon full of money if
he'd come to his cave before sunrise. Asked a man when sunrise was? *At
twelve.' Went to the cave, heard shouting and singing : ' ' Tis well the poor
peasant but little knows that twelve is the time when the sun up goes ! ' Is shown
a skinned horse, he may take that ! Gets angry, yet outs a great piece off for his
dogs. When he got home, it was all sheer gold. Went for the rest ; cave and
horse were gone.]

The remarkable trysting-time te/ore sunrise seems to be explained by the dwarf -
kind's shyness of daylight, which appears even in the Edda, Sam. 51b : they avoid
the sun, they have in their caves a different light and different time from those of
men. In Norse legends re-appears the trick of engaging a trold in conversation tiU
the sun is risen : when he looks round and sees the sun, he splits in two ; AsbiftrnBen
and Moe, p. 186. [The m kronen of Bumpelstilzohen includes the dwarfs' song,
4 'Tis well,' etc., the splitting in two, and the kidnapping presently to be men-
tioned.]

1 But she-dwarfs also marry men ; Odman (Bahuslan, p. 78-9, conf . Afzelius 2,

157) relates quite seriously, and specifying the people's names: Beors fbraldrar i

Hogen i Lurssockn, some bodde i Fuglek&rr i Svarteborgssockn ; hvars farfar var
en skdtt, ok bodde vid et berg, ther fiok han se mitt pa dagen sitjande en vaeker
piga pa en sten, ther med at fanga henne, kastade han stal emeUan berget ok henne,
hvarpa hennes far gasmade eller log in i berget, ok opnade bergets dorr, tilfragandes
honom, om han vill ha nans dotter? Hvilket han med ja besvarade, ok after Hon
var helt naken, tog han Bina klader ok holgde ofver henne, ok Hit ohristna henne.
Vid aftradet sade hennes far til honom : ' nar tu skalt ha brollup, skalt tu laga til
12 tunnor 01 ok baka en hop brod ok kiOtt efter 4 stutar, ok kiora tlljordhbgen eller
berget, ther jag nailer til, ok nar brudskanken skall utdelas, skall jag val ge min ' ;



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWABFS. 467

legend from Dorste near Osterode, it will be Been, transfers to
dwarfs what the Kindermarchen No. 46 relates of a sorcerer : —
Et was enmal en maken int holt nan arberen egan, da keimen de
twarge an neiment mfie. Da se na orer hiilen keimen, da verleifde
sek de eine twarg in se, un da solle se one ok frien, awer iest
(erst) wollen de twarge de andern twarge taur hochtit bidden,
underdes solle dat maken in hose alles reine maken un taur hochtit
anreien. Awer dat maken, dat wolle den twarg nich frien, da
wollet weglopen, awer dat se't nich glik merken, tog et sin teng
nt un tug dat ne strawisch an, un da sach et ne tunne vul hunig,
da krup et rinder (hinein), un da sach et ok ne tunne vul feddern,
un da krup et ok rinder, un da et wedder ruter kam, was et gans
vul feddern, un da leip et weg un steig upn hoagen boam. Da
keimen de twarge derbunder (darunter) vorbi, un da se't seichen,
meinen se, et wore en vugel, da reipen se't an un sfien :

s Wohen, woher du schoane feddervugel ? '
' Ek kome ut der twarges hule.'
1 Wat maket de schoane junge brut ? y
' Dei steit metn bessen un keret dat hus.'
< Juchhei ! .sau wil wie ok hen/

Und da se hen keimen, sden se taur brut 'gften morgen/ un
sfien noch mehr dertau ; awer da se nich antwure, sleuchten se'r
hinder de aren, un da fell se hen 1 (see Suppl.).

hvilket ok skedde. Ty nar de andre gafvo, lyfte han up tacket ok kastade en sa star
penningeposse ther igenom, at banken sa nar gftdt af , ok Bade thervid : * ther ar rn\n
skank ! ' ok Bade ytterligare : < nar tu skal ha tin hemmagifta, skalta kiora med 4
hastar hit til berget ok fa tin andeL' Ta han sedermera efter nans begaran kom
tit, fik han kopparklittlar, then ene stdrre an then andre, tils then ytterata stQrste
kaitelen blef upfyld med andra mindre; item brandcreatnr, som voro hielmeta, af
hyilken farg ok creatorslag, som aro stora ok frodiga, the an ha qvar p& rik, i
Tannma gall belaget. Thenne mannen Beors far i Foglekaraten benamd, aflade en
hop barn med thenna Bin saledes fran berget afhSmtade hnatra, bland hvilka var
namnemannen Beor p* Hogen ; bo har Ola Stenson i stora Kijk varit Beors syster-
Bon, hyilken i forledit ar med doden afgik. [Epitome : — Beor's fathers dwelt, etc.
One, an archer, lived near a hill, saw one day at noon a fine girl titling on a stone ;
to get her, he threw steel between her and the hill. Her father opened the door of
the hill, asked him if he wanted his daughter. He answered yes, and as she was
naked, threw some of his clothes oyer her ; had her christened. Father : • At thy
wedding bring ale, bread and horseflesh to my hill, and I will give thee a wedding
gift.' This being done, he lifted their roof and threw in a great sum of money.
'Now for honse-mrniture, come here with four horses.' The man did so, and re-
ceived copper kettles of all sizes, one inside the other, etc, etc. By this wife, thus
fetched from the hill, he had many children ; one was Beor, whose nephew 0. S.
died only last year.]

i Translation :— Once a girl had gone into the wood after strawberries, when the



Digitized by VjOOQIC



468 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

They abstract well-shaped children from the cradle, and sub-
stitute their own ugly ones, or even themselves. These sup-
posititious creatures are called changelings, cambiones (App.,
Superst. E.) ; OHG. wihselinga (N. Ps. 17, 46. Cant. Deuteron.
5), our wechselbalge ; Swed. bytingar, Dan. bittinger; also onr
kielkropfe, dickkopfe from their thick necks and heads. (Stories
about them in Thiele 1, 47. 3, 1. Paye p. 20. Ir. Elfenm.
xli.-xlv. cv. Deut. sag. nos. 81-2, 87-90.) 1 So early as in the
poem 'Zeno' (Brnns p. 27 seq.) it is the devil that fills the
place of a stolen child. The motive of the exchange seems to be,
that elves are anxious to improve their breed by means of the
human child, which they design to keep among them, and for
which they give up one of their own. A safeguard against such
substitution is, to place a key, or one of the father's clothes, or



dwarfs came and carried her off. When they got to their cave, one dwarf fell in
love with her, and she was to marry him ; but first the dwarfs were going to bid the
other dwarfs to the wedding, in the meantime the girl was to make the house clean
and prepare it for the wedding. But the girl, she did not want to many the dwarf,
so she would run away ; but that they might not notice it at once, she pulled her
dress off and put it round a bundle of straw ; then she saw a tub full of honey and
crept into it, and then she saw a tub full of feathers and crept into that also, and
when she came out again, she was all over feathers ; then she ran away, and climbed
up a high tree. Then the dwarfs came past under it, and when they saw her, they
thought she was a bird, and called to her and said : ' Whither and whence, thou

pretty feathered bird ?' 'I come out of the dwarfs hole' 'What does the

pretty young bride ? ' ' She stands with a besom and sweeps the house.*

* Hurra ! then we'll go there too. 1 And when they got there, they said to the

bride ' good morning,' and said other things too ; but as she never answered, they
boxed her ears, and down she fell.

Assuredly the dwarfs in this story are genuine and of old date. Besides, it can
be supplemented from Einderm. 3, 75, where the returning dwarfs are preceded by
foxes and bears, who also go past and question the 'Fitcher's fowl.' There tbe
tub of honey in the dwarf's house is a cask of blood, but both together agree wonder-
fully with the vessels which the dwarfs Fialar and Galar keep filled with Kvfiai's
precious blood and with honey. Sn. 83. 84.

1 Dresd. saml. no. 15, of the • mfillers sun.' A foolish miller begs a girl to teach
him the sweetness of love. She makes him lick honey all night, he empties a big
jar, gets a stomach-ache, and fancies himself about to become a parent. She sends
for a number of old women to assist him : « da fragt er, war sein kind wer komen
(what's come of the baby) ? sie sprachen : hastu nit vernommen ? ez was ain renter
wislonbalk (regular changeling), und tett als ein guoter sehalk: da er erst von
deinem leib kam (as soon as born), da fuer ez paid hin und entran hin uff zuo dem
fiirst empor. Der miiller spraoh : paid hin uff daz spor ! vaohent ez (catch him) !

pringent ez mir herab ! ' They bring him a swallow in a covered pot. Again a

Hessian folk-tale : A woman was cutting corn on the Dosenberg, and her infant lay
beside her. A wichtel-vrife crept up, took the human child, and put her own in its

Elace. When the woman looked for her darling babe, there was a frightful thick-
ead staring in her face. She screamed, and raised such a hue and cry, that at last
the thief came back with the child ; but she would not give it up till the woman
had put the wichtelbalg to her breast, and nourished it for once with the generous
milk of human kind.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWARFS. 469

steel and needles in the cradle (App., Superst. Germ. 484. 744.
Swed. 118) - 1

One of the most striking instances of agreement that I know
of anywhere occurs in connection with prescriptions for getting
rid of your changeling.

In Hesse, when the wichtelmann sees water boiled over the
fire in eggshells, he cries oat : * Well, I am as old as the Wester-
wald, bat I never saw anything boiled in eggshells ; ' Km. no.
39. In Denmark a pig staffed with skin and hair is set before
the changeling : ' Now, I have seen the wood in Tiso young three
times over, bat never the like of this ' : Thiele 1, 48. Before
an Irish changeling they also boil eggshells, till he says : ' I've
been in Hie world 1500 years, and never seen that ' ; Elfenm. p.
38. Before a Scotch one the mother pats twenty-foar eggshells
on the hearth, and listens for what he will say ; he says : € I was
seven before I came to my narse, I have lived four years since,
and never did I see so many milkpans ; ' Scott's Mintrelsy 2,
174. In the Breton folksong (Villemarque* 1, 29) he sees the
mother cooking for ten servantmen in one eggshell, and breaks
oat into the words : ' I have seen the egg before [it became] the
white hen, and the acorn before the oak, seen it acorn and sapling
and oak in Brezal wood, bat never aught like this/ This story
about the changeling is also applied to Dame Ganden's little dog,
chap. XXXI. Villemarque* 1, 32, quotes in addition a Welsh
legend and a passage from Geoffrey of Monmouth, in which the
Breton and Welsh formula for great age is already pat into
the mouth of Merlin the wild ; in each case an ancient forest is
named. In all these stories the point was, by some out-of-the-
way proceeding, to get the changeling himself to confess his age,
and consequently the exchange. Such traditions must have
been widely spread in Europe from the earliest times ; and it was
evidently assumed, that elves and korred had a very different
term of life assigned them from that of the human race (see
Suppl.).

All elves have an irresistible fondness for music and dancing.
By night you see them tread their round on the moonlit meadows,

1 The Finns call a changeling luoti : monstrnm nee non infans matre dormiente
a magie suppositus, quales putant esse infantem raehitide laborantem (Renvall). A
Breton story of- the korrigan ©hanging a child is in Villemarqu6 1, 25.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



470 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

and at dawn perceive their track in the dew : Dan. ailedcmds,
Swed. alfdands, Engl, fairy rings, fairy green. The sight of
mountain-spirits dancing on the meadows betokens to men a
fruitful year (Deut. sag. no. 298). An Austrian folk-song in
Schottky, p. 102, has : € und duart drobn afm beargl, da damn
zwoa zweargl, de d&nzn so rar/ In Laurin's mountain, in
Venus' s mountain, there murmurs a gay seductive music, dances
are trod in them (Laurin, 24) ; in the Ortnit (Ettm. 2, 17) there
is 'ein smalez pfat getreten mit kleinen fiiezen/ a small path
trod by little feet. Songs of elfins allure young men up the
mountain, and all is over with them (Svenska forns&nger 2, 305.
Danske viser 1, 235-240). 1 This performance is called elffrus hk,
elfvelek. The ordinary fornyrSalag 8 bears among Icelandic poets
the name liuflingslag (carmen genii), Olafsen p. 56 ; in Norway
that kind of sweet music is called huldresldt (supra, p. 271).
One unprinted poem in MHG. (Cod. pal. 341. 357 a ) contains
the remarkable passage : ' there sat fiddlers, and all fiddled the
albleidi (elf-lay) ' ; and another (Altd. bl. 2, 93) speaks of
' seiten spil and des wihtels schal ' : it must have been a sweet
enchanting strain, whose invention was ascribed to the elves. 8
Finn Magnusen derives the name of the dwarf Haugspori (Seam.
2 b ) from the footmarks printed on grass by an elf roaming over
the hills at night. And a song in Villemarqu6 1, 39 makes the
dwarfs dance themselves out of breath (see Suppl.).

This fondness of elves for melody and dance links them with
higher beings* notably with half-goddesses and goddesses. In
the ship (of Isis) songs of joy resound in the night, and a dancing
multitude circles round it (p. 258). In Dame Holda's dwelling,
in Dame Venus's mountain, are the song and the dance. Celtic
traditions picture the fays as dancing (M6m. de l'acad. celt. 5,
108) ; these fays stand midway between elfins and wise women. 4
The Hymn to Aphrodite 260 says of the mountain-nymphs :

Bnpbv fjih ^coovai teal Afifiporov elSap eSovat,,
xal re fier adavdrouri tca\6v %o/>oj/ ippwaavro.

1 Folk-tale of the Hanebierg in the Antiqvariske Annaler 1, 831-2.

* Forn-yrSa-lag, ancient word-lay, the alliterative metre of narrative verse, in
which the poems of the Elder Edda are written. — Tbanb.

* Conf . It. Elfenm. lxxxL-lzzziii., and the wihtel-ahow above, p. 441 note ; Ihre
sub v. alfdans ; Arndt'g Journey to Sweden 3, 16.

4 xike the Servian vily, who hold their dauoe on mountain and mead, p. 436.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



ELVES, DWABFS. 471

(On deathless food they feed, and .live fall long, And whirl with
gods through graceful dance and song.) No wonder our sage
elves and dwarfs are equally credited with haying the gift of
divination. As such the dwarf Andvari appears in the Edda
(S»m. 181*), and still more Alvfs (all-wise) ; dwarf Eugel (L.
Germ. Ogel) prophesies to Siegfried (Hum. Sifr. 46, 4. 162, 1),
so does Gripir in the Edda, whose father's name is Eylimi; in
the OFr. Tristran, the nains (nanus) Frocin is a devins (divinator),
he interprets the stars at the birth of children (11. 318-326. 632).
When, in legends and fairy tales, dwarfs appear singly among
men, they are sage counsellors and helpful, but also apt to fire up
and take offence. Such is the character of Elberich and Oberon ;
in a Swiss nursery- tale (no. 165), ' e Mis isigs mandle' (a little
ice-grey mannikin), *e Mis mutzigs mandle' (stumpy m.), ap-
pears in an 'isige chlaidle' (grey coat), and guides the course
of events ; elves forewarn men of impending calamity or death
(It. Elfenm. lxxxvi.). And in this point of view it is not without
significance, that elves and dwarfs ply the spinning and weaving
bo much patronized by Dame Holda and Frikka. The flying gos-
samer in autumn is in vulgar opinion the thread spun by elves and
dwarf 8; the Christians named it Marienfaden (-thread), Marien-
sommer, because Mary too was imagined spinning and weaving.
The Swed. dverg signifies araneus as well as nanus, and dvergs-nat
a cobweb. 1 The ON. saga of Samson hinn fagri mentions in cap.
17 a marvellous ' skickja, sem dlfkonurnar hofSu ofit,' mantle that
elfins had woven. On a hill inhabited by spirits you hear at
night the elfin (which 'troldkone' here must mean) spinning,
and her wheel humming, says Thiele 3, 25. Melusina the fay is
called alvinne in a Mid.Nethl. poem (Moneys Niederl. Volkslit.

p. 75). On the other hand, the male dwarfs forge jewels and

arms (supra, p.444-7, and in fuller detail in Ir. Elfenm. lxxxviii.) .*

1 So the Breton korr is both dwarf and spider.

2 Here is one more legend from Odman's Bahnslan, p. 79 :— Thessntan har
man atakiUige berattelser ok sagor om smedar, sa i hogar som barg, s&som bar i
Fossomstorp hdgar, hvarest man hdrdt, at the smidt liksom i en annan smidja om
aftonen efter solene$ nedergdng, ok eljest mitt pa hdga middagen. F6r 80 ar sedan
gik Olas fadar i Sartung, benamd Ola Simnnsson, har i fdrsamlingen fr&n Sl&ngevald
hafcandes med sig en hund, hvilken ta nan blef varse mitt pa dagen Mrgsmannen,
som ti imidde pd en star eten, akialde han p& honom, hvar p& bargsmeden, som hade
en litugrd rdk ok bldvulen hatt, begynte at snarka it hnnden, som tillika med hus-
boitden fnnno radeligast, at lemna honom i fred. Thet gifvas ok anna ibland
gemene man sma erucifixer af metall, som gemenligen halles fdre vara i fordna



VOL. II. D

Digitized by



Google



472 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

To bring pig-iron to dwarfs, and find it the next morning outside
the cave, ready worked for a slight remuneration, is a feature of
very ancient date; the scholiast on Apollon. Rhod. (Argon. 4,
761) illustrates the amoves 'Hfalaroto (anvils of H.) by a story
of the volcanic isles about Sicily taken from Pytheas's Travels :
to 8e iraXaibv ikeyero rbv ftovXofievov apyov aChrjpov aircxfripeiv
teal errl rffv avpiov iXdovra \a/i/3dv€ip f} £«£o? tj el n a\Xo tfdeke
KaraaKevdacu, KarapaXovra fucrdov (see Suppl.).

What I have thus put together on the nature and attributes of
elves in general, will be confirmed by an examination of particular
elvish beings, who come forward under names of their own.

Among these I will allot the first place to a genius, who is
nowhere to be found in the Norse myths, and yet seems to be
of ancient date. He is mentioned in several MHG. poems :

Sie wolten daz kein pilwiz

si d& schuzze durch diu knie. Wh. 324, 8.

Er solde sin ein guoter

und ein pilewis geheizen,

davon ist daz in reizen

die ubeln ungehiure. Buediger von zwein gesellen (Cod.

regimont.) 15 b .
Dfl, kom ich an bulwechsperg gangen,
d& schftz mich der bulweehs,
d& sch6z mich die bulwechsin,

d& schdz mich als ir ingesind. Cod. vindob. 2817. 71*.
Von schrabaz pilwihten. Titur. 27, 299 (Hahn 41 16).
Sein part het manchen pilbiszoten. Casp. von der Bon.

heldenb. 156 b .

Oat of all these it is hard to pick out the true name. Wolfram

tider smidde i bSrg t hvilka the of5rstandiire bruka at hanga pa boskap, som hastigt
fadt ondt ate pa marken, eller eom sages blifvit vaderslagne, hvarigenom tro them
bli helbregda. Af sadana bargsmiden har jag ok nyligen kommit Ofver ett, som
anna ar i fdrvar, ok pa ofrannamde satt gik i Un at bota siukdommar. [Epitome :
——Many stories of smiths in the mountains, who worked as at any other smithy,
after sunset or else at high noon. Eighty years ago Ola Simunsson was coming,
etc. ; had with him a dog, which, on seeing a hiU-man forging on a great stone,
barked at him ; bnt the hill-smithy who wore a light-grey coat and blue woollen cap*
snarled at the dog, etc. There are small metal crucifixes held to have been forged
in the hill* in former times, which simple folk still hang on cattle hart in the field
or weather-stricken, whereby they trow them to get healed. Of Bach HU-vorought
things I have lately met with one, that used to be lent out to cure sicknesses.]



Digitized by



Google



PILWIZ, BILWIT. 473

makes pilwiz (var. pilbiz, bilwiz, bilwitz) rhyme with biz (morsus),
where the short vowel in the last syllable seems to point to
pilwiht; the same with bilbis in another poem, which would have
spelt it bilbeis if it had been long; so that we cannot connect it
with the OS. balowts, nor immediately with the bilwts and balwis
contrasted on p. 374. The varying form is a sign that in the
13- 14th century the word was no longer understood; and later
on, it gets further distorted, till bulwechs makes us think of a
totally unconnected word balwahs (hebes). 1 A confession-book
of the first half of the 15th century (Hoffmann's Monatschr. 753)
has pelewyaen synonymous with witches, and Colerus's Hausbuch
(Mainz 1656), p. 403, uses bihlweisen in the same sense ; several
authorities for the form pilbis are given in Schm. 4, 188. We
welcome the present Westph. Nethl. belewitten in the Teutonista*
where Schoiren considers it equivalent to guede holden and witte
vrouwen (penates). Kilian has belevritte (lamia) ; and here comes
in fitly a passage from Gisb. Ycetius de miraculis (Disput., torn.
2, 1018) : 'De illis quos nostrates appellant beeldwit et blinde
belien, a quibus nocturna visa videri atque ex iis arcana revelari
putant/ Belwit then is penas, a kindly disposed home-sprite,
a guoie holds (supra, p. 266), what Riiediger calls 'ein guoter
und ein pilewiz.' Peculiar to AS. is an adj. bihvit, bUewit,
C®dm. 53, 4. 279, 23, which is rendered mansuetus, simplex, but
might more exactly mean aequus, Justus. God is called 'Uleurit
ffBder' (Andr. 1996), Boeth. metr. 20,510. 538; and is also
addressed as such in Cod. exon. 259, 6 ; again, ' bihvitra breoste ?
(bonorum, aequorum pectus), Cod. exon. 343, 23. The spelling
bilehwit (Beda 5, 2, 13, where it translates simplex), would lead
to hwit (albus), but then what can bil mean ? I prefer the better
authorized biletvit, taking ' wit ' to mean scius, and bilwit, OHG.
pUawiz, pilwiz ? to mean aequum 8 sciens, aequus, bonus, although

1 Fundgr. 1, 843, where palwasse rhymes with vahse, as MHG. often has « wahs
for aeutus, when it should he • was,' OHG. hnas f AS. hw»s, ON* hvass ; thus the
OHG. pftlohuafl— badly sharp, i.e. blunt, ON. bolhvass? just as palot&t— baleful
deed. A later form bulwaohs in Schm. 4, 16.

* The simple bil seems of itself to be aequitas, jus, and mythic enough (p. 876).
MHG. biUieh (aequus), Diut. 8, 88. Fundgr. ii. 56, 27. 61, 88. 66, 19. Beinh.
354. Iw. 1680. 6244. 6780. 6842. I*. 2, 829. billichen (jure), Nib. 460, 2. der
billich (aequitas), Trist. 6429. 9374. 10062. 13772. 18027. An OHG. billih I only
know from W. Ixt. 27, where the Leyden MS. has biUtMich. As the notions
* aequus, aequalis, similis ' lie next door to each other, piladi, hilidi (our bild) is
really aequalitas, similitudo, the ON. liknedti (imago). The Celtic bil also means
good, mild ; and Leo (Malb. GL 38) tries to explain bilwiz from bilbheith, bilbhith.



Digitized by



Google



474 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

an adj. € vit, wiz ' occurs nowhere else that I know of, the ON.
vitr (gen. vitrs) being provided with a suffix -r. If this etymology
is tenable, bilwiz is a good genius, but of elvish nature ; he haunts
mountains, his shot is dreaded like that of the elf (p. 460), hair
is tangled and matted by him as by the alp (p. 464). One
passage cited by Schm. 4, 188, deserves particular notice: 'so
man ain kind oder ain gewand opfert zu aim pilbispawm/ if one
sacrifice a child or garment to a pilbis-tree, i.e. a tree supposed
to be inhabited by the pilwiz, as trees do contain wood-sprites
and elves. Borner's Legends of the Orlagau, p. 59. 62, name a
witch Bilbze. The change of bilwiz, bilwis into bilwiht was a step
easily taken, as in other words also * and h, or * and hi inter-
change (lios, lioht, Gramm. 1, 138), also st and ht (forest, foreht,
Gramm. 4, 416) ; and the more, as the compound bilwiht gave
a not unsuitable meaning, 'good wight/ The Gl. bias. 87* offer
a wihtiUtein (penas), nay, the varying form of our present names
for the plica (p. 464), weichselzopf, wichselzopf, wichtelzopf (bich-
telzopf) makes the similar shading off of bilweichs, bilwechs, bil-
wicht probable : I have no doubt there is even a Hlweichszopf,
bilwizzopf to be found. 1

Popular belief in the last few centuries, having lost the old and
higher meaning of this spiritual being, has retained, as in the case
of the alb, of Holla and Berhta, only the hateful side of its nature :
a tormenting terrifying spectre, tangling your hair and beard,
cutting up your corn, it appears mostly in a female form, as a
sorceress and witch. Martin von Amberg's Mirror of Confession
already interprets pilhis by devil, as Kilian does belewitte by
lamia, strix. The tradition lingers chiefly in Eastern Germany,



> Another Polish name for plica, beside koltun, is vrieszczyce (Linde 6, 227), and
vulgar opinion ascribes it to the magic of a wietzczka vise woman, witch. This
wieszczyce agrees with our wrichsel-zo-pi, and also with the -wiz, -wets in bilwiz.
If we could point to a compound bialowieszczka (white witch, white fay ; but I
nowhere find it, not even among other Slavs), there would arise a strong suspicion
of the Slavic origin of our bilwiz ; for the present its German character seems to
me assured both by the absence of such Slavic compound, and by the AS. bilwit
and Nethl. belwitte : besides, our wiz comes from wizan, and the Pol. vnttzcz from
wiedziel [O.S1. vedetd, to wit] , and the kinship of the two words can be explained
without any thought of borrowing. Of different origin seem to me the Sloven,
paglawitz, dwarf, and the Lith. Pilvitus (Lasicz 54) or Pilwite (Narbutt 1, 52), god
or goddess of wealth. [The Buss, vishch (shch pron. as in parish-church) has the
same sound as wieszcz, but means thing, Goth, vafht-s ; for kt, ht becomes shch,
as in noshch, night. I am not sure therefore that even wietzczha may not be
"little wiht."— Tbahs.]



Digitized by VjOOQIC



PILWIZ, BILWIT. 475

in Bavaria, Franconia, Vogtland and Silesia. H. Sachs uses
bilbitzen of matting the hair in knots, pilmitz of tangled locks :
'ir har verbiibitzt, zapfet nnd stroblet, als ob sie hab der rab
gezoblet/ i. 5, 309 b . ii. 2, 100 d ; 'pilmitzen, zoten nnd fasen/ iii.
3, 12*. In the Ackermann yon Bohmen, cap. 6, pilvds means
the same as witch; ( pielweiser, magician, soothsayer/ Bohme's
Beitr. znm schles. recht 6, 69. 'an. 1529 (at Schweidnitz), a
pielvoeUs buried alive/ Hoffmann's Monatschr. p. 247. f 1582
(at Sagan), two women of honest carriage rated for pilweissen

and /.ibid. 702. ' du pileweissin ! ' A* Gryphius, p. 828.

' Las de deine bilbezzodn auskampln ' Says the angry mother to
her child, 'i den Hlmezschedl get nix nei/ get your b. clots
combed out, you don't come in in that shaggy scalp, Schm. I,
168. pilmeskind, a curse like devil's child, Delling's Bair. idiot.
1, 78. On the Saale in Thuringia, bulmuz is said of unwashed
or uncombed children; while bilbezschnitt, bilwezschnitt, bilfez-
schnitt, pilmassehrdd (Jos. Bank. Bohmerwald, p. 274) denotes a
cutting through a field of corn, which is regarded as the work
of a spirit, a witch, or the devil.

This last-mentioned belief is also one of long standing.
Thus the Lex Bajuvar. 12 (13), 8 : € si quis messes alterius
initiaverit maleficis artibus, et inventus fuerit, cum duodecim
solidis componat, quod arcvnscarti 1 dicunt.' I dare say such a
delinquent was then called a piliwiz, pilawiz ? On this passage
Mederer remarks, p. 202-8: An honest countryman told me
about the so-called bilm&rschnibt, bilberschnitt, as follows : ' The
spiteful creature, that wants to do his neighbour a rascally mis-
chief, goes at midnight, stark naked, with a sickle tied to his foot,
and repeating magic spells, through the middle of a field of corn
just ripe. From that part of the field that he has passed his
sickle through, all the grains fly into his barn, into his bin/
Here everything is attributed to a charm practised by man. 8

1 Goth, atang (messis), OHG. aran, am.

2 Can this magic be alluded to bo early as in the Kaiserohronik (2130-87) ?



din mooter heizit Bachel,
din h&t in geleret :
swenne sie in hiez snlden gan,
sin hant incom nie d&r an,



sin sichil sneit sohiere

mer dan andere viere ;

wil er dnroh einin berc vara,

der stet immer mer ingegen im uf get&n.



(His mother B. taught him : when she bade him go oat, he never put his hand to
it, his sickle soon out more than any other four ; if he will drive through a hill, it
opens before him*)



Digitized by VjOOQIC



476 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Julius Schmidt too (Reichenfels, p. 119) reports from the Vogt-
land : The belief in bilsen- or bilver-schnitter (-reapers) l ig toler-
ably extensive, nay, there seem to be certain persons who believe
themselves to be such : in that case they go into the field before
sunrise on St. John's day, sometimes on Walpurgis-day (May 1),
and cut the stalks with small sickles tied to their great toes, step-
ping slantwise across the field. Such persons must have small
three-cornered hats on (bilsenschnitter-hutchen) ; if during their
walk they are saluted by any one, they must die that year.
These bilsenschnitter believe they get half the produce of the
field where they have reaped, and small sickle-shaped instru-
ments have been found in some people's houses, after their death.
If the owner of the field can pick up any stubble of the stalks
so cut, and hangs it in the smoke, the bilsenschnitter will gra-
dually waste away (see Suppl.).

According to a communication from Thuringia, there are two
ways of baffling the bilms- or binsenschneider (-cutter), 1 which-
ever he is called. One is, on Trinity Sunday or St. John's day,
when the sun is highest in the sky, to go and sit on an elderbush
with a looking-glass on your breast, and look round in every
quarter, then no doubt you can detect the binsenschneider, but
not without great risk, for if he spies you before you see him,
you must die and the binsenschneider remain alive, unless he
happen to catch sight of himself in the mirror on your breast,
in which case he also loses his life that year. Another way is,
to carry some ears that the binsenschneider has cut to a newly
opened grave in silence, and not grasping the ears in your bare
hand ; if the least word be spoken, or a drop of sweat from your
hand get into the grave with the ears, then, as soon as the ears
rot, he that threw them in is sure to die.

What is here imputed to human sorcerers, is elsewhere laid
to the devil (Superst. no. 523), or to elvish goblins, who may at
once be known by their small hats. Sometimes they are known
as bilgenschneider, as pilver~ or hilperts-schnitter, sometimes by
altogether different names. Alberus puts sickles in the hands of
women travelling in Hulda's host (supra, p. 269 note). In some
places, ace. to Schm. 1, 151, they say bockschnitt, because the

1 Bihe is henbane, and binse a rash, which plants have no business here. They
are merely an adaptation of bilwiz, when this had become unintelligible.— Traxs.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ROGGEN-MUHME, CORN-MAMMY. 477

goblin is supposed to ride through the cornfield on a he-goat,
which may well remind us of Dietrich with the boar (p. 214). The
people about Osnabruck believe the tremsemuMer walks about in
the corn : she is dreaded by the children. In Brunswick she is
called Jeornwif: when children are looking for cornflowers, they
will not venture too far into the green field, they tell each other
of the cornwife that kidnaps little ones. In the Altmark and
Mark Brandenburg they call her roggenmohme (aunt in the rye),
and hush crying children with the words : ' hold your tongue,
or roggenmohme with the long black teats will come and drag
you away ! ' l Others say ' with her long iron teats,' which
recals iron Berbta: others again name her rockewmor, because
like Holla and Berhta, she plays all manner of tricks on idle
maids who have not spun their distaffs clear during the Twelves.
Babes whom she puts to her black breast are likely to die. Is
not the Bavarian preinseheuhe the same kind of corn-spectre f
In the Schrackengast, Ingolst. 1598, there are coupled together
on p. 73, / preinseheuhen und meerwunder/ and p. 89 'wilde
larvenschopper und preinscheuhen? This prein, brein, properly
pap (puis), means also grain-bearing plants like oats, millet,
panicum, plantago (Schm. 1, 256-7) ; and breinscheuhe (-scare)
may be the spirit that is the bugbear of oat and millet fields ?

In all this array of facts, there is no mistaking the affinity
of these bilwisaes with divine and elvish beings of our heathenism.
They mat the hair like dame Holla, dame Berhta, and the alb,
they wear the small hat and wield the shot of the elves, they
have at last, like Holla and Berhta, sunk into a children's
bugbear. Originally ' gute holden/ sociable and kindly beings,
they have twisted round by degrees into uncanny fiendish goblins,
wizards and witches. And more, at the back of these elvish
beings there may lurk still higher divine beings. The Romans
worshipped a Robigo, who could hinder blight in corn, and per-
haps, if displeased, bring it on. The walking of the bitwise, of
the Boggenmuhme in the grain had at first a benevolent motive :
as the names mutter, muhme, mor teach us, she is a motherly



1 Conf. Bent, sagen, no. 89. Kuhn, p. 378. Temme's Sagen, p. 80. 82, of the
Altmark. The Baden legend makes of it a rockert-weibeU and an enchanted
countess of Ebexstein, who walks about in a wood named Boekert (Mone's Anaeiger,
8, 146).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



478 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

guardian goddess of spindle and seedfield. Fro upon his boar
must have ridden through the plains, and made them productive,
nay, even the picture of Siegfried riding through the corn I
incline to refer to the oircuit made by a god ; and now for the
first time I think I understand why the Wetterau peasant to this
day, when the corn-ears wave in the wind, says the boar walks in
the corn. It is said of the god who causes the crops to thrive.
Thus, by our study of elves, with whom the people have kept up
acquaintance longer, we are led up to gods that once were. The
connexion of elves with Holla and Berhta is further remarkable,
because all these beings, unknown to the religion of the Edda,
reveal an independent development or application, of the heathen
faith in continental Germany (see Suppl.). 1

What comes nearest the hairy shaggy elves, or bilwisses, is a
spirit named scrat or scrato in OHG. documents, and pilosus in
contemporary Latin ones. The Gl. mons. 333 have scratun
(pilosi) ; the Gl. herrad. 200 b waltsehrate (satyrus) ; the Sumerlat.
10, 66 state (lares mali) ; so in MHG. scrdz; Reinh. 597 (of the
old fragment), 'ein wilder waltschrat;' Barl. 251, 11. Aw. 3,
226. Ulr. Lanz. 437 has 'von dem schraze'** dwarf ; 'sie ist
villihte ein schrat, ein geist von helle;' Albr. Titur. 1, 190
(Hahn 180). That a small elvish spirit was meant, is plain
from the dimin. schretel, used synonymously with wihtel in that
pretty fable, from which our Irish elf-tales gave an extract, but
which has since been printed entire in Mone's treatise on heroic
legend, and is now capped by the original Norwegian story in
Asbiornsen and Moe, No. 26 (one of the most striking examples

i The Slavs too have Afield-ipirit who paces through the corn. Boxhorn's Besp.
Mosoov., pars 1, p. ... : •* Daemonem quoque meridiannm Moscovitae metuunt et
eolunt. Hie enim, dum jam maturae resecantur fruges, habitu viduae lugentU ruri
obambulat, operariisque uni vel pluribus, nisi protinus viso spectro in terrain proni
concidant, brachia frangit et crura. Neque tamen contra hano plagam remedio
destituuntur. Habent enim in vidua silva arbores religione patrnm eultas : haram
oortice vulneri superimposito, ilium non tantum sanant, sed et dolorem loripedi
eximunt." Among the Wends this corn-wife is named pshipolnitza [prop, prcpoln.,
from polno, full, i.e. full noon] , at the hour of noon she creeps about as a veiled
woman. If a Wend, conversing with her by the hour on flax and flax-dressina, can
manage to contradict everything she says, or keep saying the Lord's prayer back-
wards without stumbling, he is safe (Lausitz. monatsschr. 1797, p. 744). The Bohe-
mians call her baba (old woman), or poUdnice, poludnice (meridiana), the Poles
dziewanna, dziewice (maiden J, of whom we shall have to speak more than once, conf.
chap. XXXVI. Here also tnere are plainly gods mixed up with the spirits and
goblins.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SCBAT. 479

of the tough persistence of such materials in popular tradition) ;
both the schretel and the word wazzerbern answer perfectly to
the trold and the hvidbiorn. Vintler thinks of the schrattlin as a
spirit light as wind, and of the size of a child. The Vocab. of
1482 has schretlin (penates) ; Dasypodius naehtschretteU (ephi-
altes) i % later ones spell it schrattele, schrattel, schrettele, schrotle,
conf. Staid. 2, 850. Schmid's Schwab, worth. 478. In the Sette
comm. schrata or schretele is a butterfly, Schm. 3, 519. A
Thidericas Scratman is named in a voucher of 1244 ; Spilcker 2,
84. A district in Lower Hesse is called the Schratweg, Wochenbl.
1833, 952. 984. 1023. And other Teutonic dialects seem to
know the word : AS. scritta, Eng. scrat (hermaphroditus), 1 ON.
shratti (mains genius, gigas) ; a rock on the sea is called
skrattasker (geniorum scopulos), Fornm. sog. 2, 142. Compar-
ing these forms with the OHG. ones above, we miss the usual
consonant-change : the truth is, other OHG. forms do shew a
z in place of the t : scraz, Gl. fuld. 14 ; screza (larvae, lares mali),
Gl. lindenbr. 996 b ; * srezze vel strate' (not: screzzol scraito),
Sumerlat. 10, 66; 'unreiner schraz,' Altd. w. 8, 170 (rhymes
vraz). 8 And Upper Germ, dictionaries of the 16th cent, couple
sehretzel with alp; Hofer 3, 114, has r der schretz,' and Schm.
3, 552, 'der sehretzel, das schretzlein.' According to Mich.
Beham 8. 9 (Mone's Anz. 4, 450-1), every house has its schrez-
lein ; if fostered, he brings you goods and honour, he rides or
drives the cattle, prepares his table on Brecht-night, etc. 8

The agreement of Slavic words is of weight. O. Boh. scret
(daemon), Hanka's Zbirka 6 b ; screti, scretti (penates intimi efc
secretales), ibid. 16 b ; Boh. skret, skfjtek (penas, idolum) ; Pol.
skrzot, skrzitek ; Slovdn. zhkrdt, zhkrdtiz, zhkr&telj (hill-m&nmlrin).
To the Serv. and Buss, dialects the word seems unknown.

I can find no satisfactory root for the German form. 4 In Slavic

1 Already in Saehsensp. 1, 4 altvile and dverge side by side ; conf. BA. 410.

* A contraction of $chrawaz } Gudr. 448, schrawaz und merwnnder ; Albr. Titnr.
27, 299 has sehrabaz together with pilwiht ; tckrawatzen and merwnnder, Gasp. Ton
der Bon's Wolfdieterich 195. Wolfd. and Saben 496. [* Probably of different
origin,' says Snppl.]

* Mnchar, Bomisohes Noricnm 2, 87, and Gastein 147, mentions a capricious
mountain-spirit, schranel,

* The ON. skratti is said to mean terror also. The Swed. skratta, Dan. skratte,
is to langh load. Does the AS. form scritta allow ns to compare the Gr. adpros,
s hopping, leaping goblin or satyr (from cKiprdw, I bound) ? Lobeck's Aglaoph.,
1311.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



480 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

skr^ti (celare, occulere) is worth considering, [A compound of
kr^ti, to cover, root kr£, krov, scpuirrv. If Slav, skrf, why not
AS. scrud, shroud ?] •

Going by the sense, schrat appears to be a wild, rough, shaggy
wood-sprite, very like the Lat. faun and the Gr. satyr, also the
Roman silvanus (Iivy 2, 7) ; its dimin* schratlein, synonymous
with wichtel and alp, a home-sprite, a hiLUmannikin. But the
male sex alone is mentioned, never the female; like the fauns,
therefore, they lack the beauty of contrast which is presented by
the elfins and bilwissins. We may indeed, on the strength of
some similarity, take as a set-off to these schrats those wild women
and wood-minnes treated of at the end of chapter XVI* The
Greek fiction included mountain-nymphs (vvjufxu opeasapoi) and
dryads (Spv&Ses, Englished wvduoelfenne in AS. glosses), whose
life was closely bound up with that of a tree (loo. princ, Hymn
to Aphrodite 257-272 $ and see Suppl.).

Another thing in which the schrats differ from elves is, that
they appear one at a time, and do not form a people.

The Fichtelberg is haunted by a wood-sprite named the Katzen-
veit, with whom they frighten children ; e Hush, the Katzenveit
will come ! ' Similar beings, full of dwarf and goblin-like
humours, we may recognise in the Oubich of the Harz, in the
Rubezal of Biesengebirge. This last, however, seems to be of
Slav origin, Boh. Mybecal, B<ybrcoL l In Moravia runs the story
of the seehirt, sea-herd, a mischief-loving sprite, who, in the shape
of a herdsman, whip in hand, entices travellers into a bog (see
Suppl.). 8

The gloss in Hanka 7\ 11* h&s ' vilcodlac faunas, <oilcodlaci
faunificarii, incubi, dusii ' $ in New Boh. it would be wlkodlak,
wolf-haired; the Serv. vukodiae is vampire (Vuk sub v.). It is
not surprising, and it offers a new point of contact between elves,
bilwisses, and schrats, that in Poland the same matting of hair is
ascribed to the shrzot, and is called by his name, as the skfjtek is
in Bohemia; 8 in some parts of Germany schrotleinzopf.

1 In Slay, ryba is fish, bat osl, or ool (I think) has no meaning. Hie oldest
Germ. does, have Babe-zagil, -zagel, -zagl (-tail) ; Babe may be short for the
ghostly * kneoht Bapreoht,' or Bobert. Is Babezagel oar bobtail, of which I have
seen no decent etymology?— Tbanb.

8 Sagen aos der vorzeit Mahrens (Brtinn, 1817), pp. 136-171.

8 The plica is also called koltun, and again koUH are Polish and Bassian hotte-
sprites.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SCBAT (PILOSUS). 481

People in Europe began very early to think of daemonic beings
as pilosi. The Vulgate has ' et pUosi saltabunt ibi/ Isaiah 13,
21, where the LXX. had Saipovia i/cei ofix^coyrat, conf.
34, 14. 1 Isidore's Etym. 8, cap. ult. (and from it 61. Jon.
399) : 'pilosi qui graece panitae, latine incubi nominantur, —
hos daemones Galli durios nuncupant.* Quern autem yulgo
incubonem yocant, hunc Bomani faunum dicunt/ Burcard of
Worms (App. Superst. C) is speaking of the superstitious custom
of putting playthings, shoes, bows and arrows, in cellar or
barn for the home-sprites, 3 and these genii again are called
' satyri yelpilori.' The monk of St. Gall, in the Life of Charles
the Great (Pertz 2,741), tells of a pilosus who visited the house
of a smith, amused himself at night with hammer and anvil,
and filled the empty bottle out of a rich man's cellar (conf. Ir.
elfenm. cxi. cxii.). Evidently a frolicking, dancing, whimsical
homesprite, rough and hairy to look at, ' eislich get&n/ as the
Heidelberg fable says, and rigged out in the red little cap of a
dwarf, loving to follow his bent in kitchens and cellars. A figure
quite in the foreground in Cod. palat. 324 seems to be his very
portrait.

Only I conceive that in earlier times a statelier, larger figure
was allowed to the schrai, or wood-schrat, then afterwards the
merrier, smaller one to the schrettel. This seems to follow from
the ON. meaning ofikratti gigas, giant. These woodsprites must
have been, as late as the 6-7th cent, objects of a special worship :
there were trees and temples dedicated to them. Quotations in
proof have already been given, pp. 58. 68: 'arbores daemoni
dedicatae/ and among the Warasken, a race akin to the Bavarian,
' agrestium fana, quos vulgus faunos vocat.'

Some remarkable statements are found in Eckehart's Walt-
harius. Eckevrid of Saxony accosts him with the bitter taunt
(761):

1 Luther translates feldUufel ; the Heb. $agnir denotes a shaggy, goat-like
being. Badevicus /rising. 2, 13, imitates the whole passage in the prophet : ' ululae,
upupae, bubones toto anno in ectis fonebria personantes lngubri voce anres om-
nium repleverunt. Piloai quos $atyro* yocant in domibns plerunque auditi.* Again
2, 24: *in aedibus tuis lugabri voce respondeant ululae, salient piloriS

» • Daemones qnos duscios Galli nuneupant.' Augustine, Civ. Dei, o. 23. The
name dut still lives in Bretagne, dimin. duzik (Villemarque* 1, 42).

8 In the same way the Jildel (I suppose giletel, the same as gaote holde) has
toys placed lor him, Bnperst. I, no. 62 ; conf. infra, the homesprite*.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



482 * WIGHTS AND ELVES.

Die, ait, an corpus vegetet tractabile temet,
sive per aerias fallas, maledicte, figaras ?
saltibus assuetus f annus mihi quippe videris.

Walthari replies in mockery (765) :

Celtica lingua probat te ex ilia gente creatum,
cui natura dedit reliqaas ludendo praeire ;
at si te propios venientem dextera nostra
attingat, post Saxonibus memorare valebis,
te nunc in Vosago fauni fantasma videre.

If you come within reach of my arm, I give you leave then
to tell your Saxon countrymen of the * sohrat ' you now see in
the Wasgau (Vosges). When Eckevrid has hurled his spear at
him in vain, Walthari cries :

Haec tibi silvanus transponit munera faunus*

Herewith the € wood-schrat ' returns you the favour. 1

Here the faun is called fantasma, phantom ; OHG. giscin, T.
81 (Matt. xiv. 26), otherwise sdnleih (monstrum), Gl. hrab. 969 b .
Jun. 214; AS. sdnldc (portentum) ; or gitroc, p. 464. Phan-
tasma vagabundum (Vita Lebuini, Pertz 2, 361) ; s fantasma vult
nos pessundare ' (Hroswitha in Dulcicius) ; 'fantasia quod in
libris gentilium f annus solet appeilari/ Mabillon, Analect. 3, 852.
A 'municipium/ or 'oppidum mons fauni, 9 in Ivonis Carnot.
epist. 172, and conf. the doc. quoted in the note thereon, in
which it is monsfaunum. Similarly in OPr. poems : s fantosme
nous va faunoiant' M6on 4, 138; fantosme qui me desvoie,
demaine/ ibid. 4, 140. 4. 402. A passage from Girart de
Rossillon given in Mone's Archiv 1835. 210 says of a moun-
tain : ' en ce mont ha moult de grans secrez, trop y a defantomes.'
Such are the fauni ficarii and silvestres homines, with whom
Jornandes makes his Gothic aliorunes keep company (p. 404).
Yet they also dip into the province of demigod heroes. Miming
silvarum satyrus, and Witugouwo (silvicola) seem to be at once
cunning smith-schrats and heroes (pp. 376-379). A valkyr unites
herself with satyr-like Yolundr, as the aliorunes did with fauns.
The wild women, wood-minne (pp. 432-4), and the wilde man

i The dialogue is obscure, and in the printed edition, p. 86, 1 have endeavoured
to justify the above interpretation.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SCRAT (FAUNUS). WOOD-FOLK. 483

(Wigamur 203) come together. Wigal. 6286 has wildez wip, and
6602 it is said of the dwarf Karrioz :

Sin mooter was ein wildez wip His mother was a wild woman,

d& von was sin kurzer lip therefrom was his short body

alter ruch unde stark, all over hairy and strong,

sin gebein was &ne mark his bones without marrow

(solid)

nach dem geslehte der muoter sin, after his mother's stock,

deste sterker mnoser sin. the stronger must he be.

In the Wolfdietrich a wild man like this is called waltluoder, and
in Laurtn 173. 183 waltmann. The ON. mythology knows of
wild wood-wives by the names ividjur, Seem. 88*. 119 b , and iarn-
viffjwr, Sn. 13. Abont the ividja we find at the beginning of the
Hrafnagaldr the obscure statement ' elr IvrSja/ alit, auget, pant,
gignit dryas ; IviSja is derived from a wood or grove ivi&r, of
which the VoluspA 1* makes mention: 'nio man ek henna, nio
iviSi 9 ; so iarnvi&ja from iarnvidr, iron wood (see Suppl.). 1

I cannot properly explain these ON. iviojur and iarnviSjur.
The popular belief of to-day in South-eastern Germany presents
in a more intelligible shape the legend of the wild-folk, forest-folk,
wood-folk, moss-folk, who are regarded as a people of the dwar
kind residing together, though they come up singly too, and in
that case the females especially approximate those higher beings
spoken of on p. 432. They are small of stature, but somewhat
larger than elves, grey and oldish-looking, hairy and clothed in
moss: 'ouch wftren ime din dren als eime walttoren vermieset,'
his ears like a forest-fool's bemossed (?), Iw. 440. Often holz-
weibel alone are mentioned, seldomer the males, who are supposed
to be not so good-natured and to live deeper in the woods, wear-
ing green garments faced with red, and black three-cornered hats.
H. Sachs 1, 407* brings up holzmanner and holzfrauen, and gives
1, 348 e the lament of the wild woodfolk over the faithless world.
Schmidt's Beichenfels, pp. 140-8 tells us the Yoigtland tradition,
and Borner, pp. 188-242 that of the Orlagau ; from them I borrow
what is characteristic. The little wood-wives come up to wood-
cutters, and beg for something to eat, or take it themselves out

1 Afzelins 2 9 145-7, mentions Swed. l3fjer$kor, leaf -maids, forest-maids, and
compares them with Laufey (p. 246), bat the people haye little to say about them.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



484 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

of their pots ; but whatever they have taken or borrowed they
make good in some other way, not seldom by good advice. At
times they help people in their kitchen work and at washing,
but always express a great fear of the wild huntsman that pursues
them. On the Saale they tell yon of a bush-grandmother and her
moss-maddens ; this sounds like a queen of elves, if not like the
'weird lady of the woods' (p. 407). The little wood-wives are
glad to come when people are baking, and ask them, while they
are about it, to bake them a loaf too, as big as half a millstone,
and it must be left for them at a specified place ; they pay it back
afterwards, or perhaps bring some of their own baking, and lay
it in the furrow for the ploughmen, or on the plough, being
mightily offended if you refuse it. At other times the wood-wife
makes her appearance with a broken little wheelbarrow, and begs
you to mend the wheel ; then, like Berhta she pays you with the
fallen chips, which turn into gold ; or if you are knitting, she
gives you a ball of thread which you will never have done un-
winding. Every time a man twists (driebt, throws) the stem of
a young tree till the bark flies off, a wood-wife has to die. When
a peasant woman, out of pity, gave the breast to a crying wood-
child, the mother came up and made her a present of the bark in
which the child was cradled ; the woman broke a splinter off and
threw it in to her load of wood, but when she got home she found
it was of gold (see Suppl.).

Wood-wives, like dwarfs, are by no means satisfied with the
ways of the modern world ; but to the reasons given on p. 459
they add special ones of their own. There's never been a good
time since people took to counting the dumplings they put in the
pot, the loaves they put in the oven, to ' pipping ' their bread
and putting caraway-seeds in it. Hence their maxim :

Schal keinen baam, No tree ever shell,

erzahl keinen traum, no dream ever tell,

back keinen kiimmel ins brot, bake in thy bread no cummin-
seed,
so hilft dir Gott aus aller noth. and God will help in all thy

need.

The third line may be 'pip kein brod/ don't pip a loaf. A

Digitized by VjOOQIC



WOOD-POLK. 485

wood-wife, after tasting some newly-baked bread, ran off to the
forest, screaming load :

* Sie haben mir gebacken kiimmelbrot,
das bringt diesem hause grosse noth !

(They've baked me caraway-bread, it will bring that honse great
trouble). And the farmer's prosperity soon declined, till he was
utterly impoverished. To c pip ' a loaf is to push the tip of your
finger into it, a common practice in most places. Probably the
wood-wives could not carry off a pricked loaf, and therefore
disliked the mark ; for a like reason they objected to counting.
Whether the seasoning with cummin disgusted them as an inno-
vation merely, or in some other connection, I do not know. The
rhyme runs thus : € kiimmelbrot, unser tod ! ' the death of us ;

or — ' kiimmelbrot macht angst und noth/ Some wood-manni-

kins, who had long done good service at a mill, were scared away
by the miller's men leaving out clothes and shoes for them, Jul.
Schmidt, p. 146 (see Suppl.). 1 It is as though, by accepting

i This agrees wonderfully with what Beusoh, pp. 63-5, reports from Prussian

fiamland : A householder at Lapdhnen, to whom the subterraneans had done

many services, was grieved at their having such poor clothes, and asked his wife to
put some new little ooats where they would find them. Well, they took their new
outfit, but their leave at the same tune, crying, * paid up, paid up I ' Another time
they had been helping a poor smith, had oome every night and turned out a set of
little pots, pans, plates and kettles as bright as could be ; the mistress would set a
dish of milk for them, which they fell upon like wolves, and cleared to the last drop,
washed up the plates and then set to work. The smith having soon become a ricn
man, his wife sewed them eaoh a pretty little red coat and cap, and left them lying.
* Paid up, paid up 1 * cried the undergrounders, then quickly slipt into their new
finery, and were off, without touching the iron left for them to work at, or ever

coming back. Another story of the Seewen-weiher (-pond), near Bippoldsau, in

the Black Forest (Mone's Anz. 6, 175) : — A lake-mannikin liked coming to the
folks at Seewen farm, would do jobs there all day, and not return into his lake till
evening; they used to serve him up breakfast and dinner by himself. If in giving
out tasks they omitted the phrase • none too much and none too little/ he turned
cross, and threw all into confusion. Though his clothes were old and shabby, he
never would let the Seewen farmer get him new ones ; but when this after all was
done, and the new coat handed to the lake-mannikin, one evening, he said, ' When
one is paid off one must go ; beginning from to-morrow, I oome to you no more ;'
and in spite of all the farmer's apologies he was never seen again. — —Jos. Bank's
BOhmerwald, p. 217, tells a pretty story of a watchweiberl (wee washerwife), for whom
the people of the house wanted to have shoes made, but she would not hold out her
little foot to be measured. They sprinkled the floor with flour, and took the
measure bv her footprints. When the shoes were made and placed on the bench
for her, she fell a-sobbing, turned her little smock-sleeves down again, unlooped
the skirt of her frock, then burst away, lamenting loudly, and was seen no more.'
That is to say, the wee wife, on coming into the house, had turned up the sleeves
of her smock, and looped up her frock, that she might the more easily do any kind
of work. Similar tales are told of the browjtie, B. Chambers, p. 38. And the same
idea lies at the bottom of tug first story about wiohtelmumerohen in Kinderm. 89.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



486 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

clothes, the spirits were afraid of suddenly breaking off the
relation that subsisted between themselves and mankind. We
shall see presently that the home-sprites proper acted on different
principles, and even bargained for clothes. •

The more these wood-folk live a good many together, the more
do they resemble elves, wiohtels, and dwarfs; the more they
appear singly, the nearer do the females stand to wise women and
even goddesses, the males to gigantic fauns and wood-monsters,
as we saw in Katzenveit, Giibich and Riibezahl (p. 480). The
salvage man with uprooted fir-tree in his hand, such as supports
the arms of several princes in Lower Germany, represents this
kind of faun ; it would be worth finding out at what date he is
first mentioned. Grinkenschmied in the mountain (Deut. sag. 1,
232) is also called € der wilde man.'

In the Romance fairy-tales an old Roman god has assumed
altogether the nature of a wood-Bprite; out of Orcus 1 has been
made an Ital. orco, Neapol. huorco, Pr. ogre (supra, p. 314) : he
is pictured black, hairy, bristly, but of great stature rather than
small, almost gigantic; children losing their way in the wood
come upon his dwelling, and he sometimes shews himself good-
natured and bestows gifts, oftener his wife (orca, ogresse) pro-
tects and saves. 8 German fairy-tales hand over his part to the
devil, who springs even more directly from the ancient god of
the lower world. Of the invisible-making helmet the orco has
nothing left him, on the other hand a daemonic acuteness of
scent is made a characteristic feature, he can tell like a sea-
monster the approach of human flesh : € je sens la chair fraiche/
*ich rieche, rieche menschenfleisch/ r ich wittere, wittere
menschenfleisch/ r i schmoke ne Crist/ C I smell the blood/
€ j e g lngter det paa min hoire haand (right hand)/ 'her lugter
saa kristen mands been,' 8 exactly as the ineerminne already in

It is a common characteristic, that holds good of wiohtels, of subterraneans, of lake-
sprites and of wood-folk, but chiefly of male ones who do service to mankind.
[Might the objection to shewing their feet arise from their being web-footed, like
the Swiss hardmandle, especially in the case of water-sprites ?]

1 See App., Snperst. A, • Orcum invocare* together with Neptune and Diana ;
Superst. G, extr. fromVintler, 1. 83 : * er hab den orken geseohen.' Beow. 224 has
orcneas, pi. of orcne.

9 Pentamerone, for the orco 1, 1. 1, 5. 2, 3. 8, 10. 4, 8. For the orca 2, 1.
2,7. 4,6. 5,4.

1 Perrault's Petit pouoet ; Einderm. 1, 152. 179. 2, 850. 8, 410 ; Musaus 1,
21 ; Danske viser 1, 220 ; NorBke folkeeventyr, p. 35.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



scuomsAL. 487

Morolt 8924 says : ' ich smacke diutsche fserngewant/ coats
of mail (see SuppL). The Ital. however has also an uom foresto,
Palci's Morgante 5, 88.

The Gothic neat, skohsl, by which Ulphilas renders Scujjloviov,
Matth. 8, 81. La. 8, 27 (only in margin; text reads unhulj?6).
1 Cor. 10, 20. 21, 1 am disposed to explain by supposing a siohs,
gen. skdhis, or rather skogs (the h being merely the g softened
before si). It would answer to the ON. sJcogr (silva) ; in all our
Gothic fragments the word for forest never occurs, so that in
addition to a vidas (p. 376) we may very well conjecture a skdgs.
In Sweden the provincialisms skogsnerte, skogsnufva 1 are still
used; snerte appears to contain snert gracilis, and snufva to
mean anhelans. 2 Now if skohsl is wood-sprite/ there may have
been associated with it, as with Scujiovtov, the idea of a higher
being, semi-divine or even divine. When we call to mind the
sacred, inviolable trees inhabited by spirits (chap. XXI, and
Saperst. Swed. no. 110, Dan. no. 162), and the forest- worship of
the Germani in general (pp. 54-58. 97-8) ; we can understand
why wood-sprites in particular should be invested with a human
or divine rather than elvish nature.

Water-sprites exhibit the same double aspect. Wise-women,
valkyrs, appear on the wave as swans, they merge into prophetic
merwomen and merminnes (p. 434). Even Nerthus and dame
Holla bathe in lake or pool, and the way to Holla's abode is
through the well, Kinderm. 24. 79.

Hence to the general term holde or guoter holde (genius, bonus
genius) is added a waazerholde (p. 266), a brunnenholde (p. 268) ;
to the more general minni a rneriminni and marmennill (p. 438).
Other names, which explain themselves, are: MHG. wildiu

1 LinnsBUs's Gothlandske resa, p. 312. Faye, p. 42.

* In 1298 Torkel Knutson founded on the Neva a stronghold against the Russians,
called Landskrona. An old folk-tale says, there was heard in the forest near the
river a continual knocking, as of a stone-cutter. At last a peasant took courage and
penetrated into the forest ; there he found a wood-sprite hewing at a stone, who, on
being asked what that should mean, answered : * this stone shall be the boundary
between the lands of the Swedes and Moskovites.' ForselTs Statistik von Sohwe-
den, p. 1.

* To make up anOHG. skuoh and skuohisal is doubtless yet more of a venture.
Our tchaual (monstrum), if it comes from scheuen (soiuhan), to shy at, has quite
another fundamental vowel ; it may however be a corruption. The only very old
form I know is the schwel given in the foot-note on p. 269. But the Vocab. of 1482
has seheuhe (larva).

VOL. II. B

Digitized by VjOOQIC



488 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

merkint, wildiu merwunder, Gudrun 109, 4. 112,3. wildez merwip,
Osw. 653. 673; Mod. HG. meerwunder, wassermann (Slav.
vodnik), sequngfer, meerweib ; ON. haf-fru, ces-kona, hafgygr, mar-
gygr; Dan. havmand, brondmand (man of the burn or spring),
Molb. Dial. p. 58; Swed. hafsman, hafsfru, and more particularly
stromkarl (river sprite or man). Wendish vodny muz, water man.
The notion of a water-king shews itself in waterconink, Melis
Stoke 2, 96. Certain elves or dwarfs are represented as water-
sprites : Andvari, son of Oin, in the shape of a pike inhabited
a fors, Saam. 180-1 ; and Alfrikr, ace. to Yilk. saga, cap. 34,
haunted a river (see Suppl.).

The peculiar name of such a watersprite in OHG. was nihhus,
nichus, gen. nichuses, and by this term the glossists render croco-
dilus, Gl. mons. 832, 412. Jun. 270. Wirceb. 978 b ; the Physio-
logus makes it neuter : daz nikhus, Diut. 3, 25. Hoffm. Fundgr.
23. Later it becomes niches, Gl. Jun. 270. In AS. I find, with
change of * into r, a masc. nicer, pi. niceras, Beow. 838. 1144.
2854, by which are meant monstrous spirits living in the sea,
conf. nicorhds, Beow. 2822. This AS. form agrees with the M.
Nethl. nicker, pi. nickers, (Horae Belg. p. 119) ; Beinaert prose
MIIIIP has € nickers ende wichteren '; necker (Neptunus), Diut.
2, 224 b . ' hfift mi die necker bracht hier ? ' (has the devil brought
me here ?), Mone's Ndrl. volkslit. p. 140. The Mod. Nethl.
nikker means evil spirit, devil, ' alle nikkers nit de hel ; ' so the
Engl. ' old Nick.' We have retained the form with s, and the
original sense of a watersprite, a male nix and a female nixe, i.e.,
niks and nikse, though we also hear of a nickel and nickelmann.
In MHG. Conrad uses wassernixe in the sense of siren : ' heiz uns
leiten uz dem bade der vert&nen (accursed) wassernixen, daz uns
ir gedcene (din) iht schade ' (MS. 2, 200 b ). 1

The ON. nikr (gen. niks?) is now thought to mean hippo-
potamus only ; the Swed. nak, nek, and the Dan. nok, nok, nocke,
aanycke (Molb. Dial. p. 4) express exactly our watersprite, but
always a male one. The Danish form comes nearest to a Mid.
Lat. nocca, spectrum marinum in stagnis et fluviis; the Finn.

1 Gryphiue (mihi 743) has a rhyme : * die tcasserlti$$ auf erden mag nicht
so sohone werden,' apparently meaning a water-wife or nixe. In Ziska's Ostr.
volkam. 64 a kind wawernix, like dame Holla, bestows wishing-gifts on the
children.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



NICHUS, NIX. 489

nakki, Esth. nek (watersprite) seem borrowed from the Swedish.
Some have brought into this connexion the much older neha
nehalennia (pp. 257, 419), I think without good reason: the
Latin organ had no occasion to put h for c, and where it does
have an h in German words (as Vahalis, Naharvali), we have no
business to suppose a tenuis ; besides, the images of Nehalennia
hardly indicate a river-goddess.

I think we have better reason for recognising the water-sprite
in a name of OSinn, who was occasionally conceived of as Nep-
tune (p. 148), and often appears as a sailor and ferryman in his
bark. The AS. Andreas describes in detail, how God Himself, in
the shape of a divine shipman escorts one over the sea ; in the
Legends Aurea it is only an angel. OSinn, occording to Sn. 3, is
called Nikarr or Hnikarr, and Nikuz or Hnikudr. In Seem. 46 a » b
we read Hnikarr, HnikuSr, and in 91 a 184*» b Hnikarr again.
Nikarr would correspond to AS. Nicor, and Nikuz to OHG.
Nichus. Snorri's optional forms are remarkable, he must have
drawn them from sources which knew of both ; the prefixing
of an aspirate may have been merely to humour the metre. Finn
Magnusen, p. 438, acutely remarks, that wherever OSinn is called
Hnikarr, he does appear as a sea-sprite and calms the waves.
For the rest, no nickar (like alfar and dvergar) are spoken of in
either Edda. Of the metamorphoses of the nickur (hippop.) the
ON. uses the expression " nykrat e*Sa finngalkat," Sn. 317 (see
Suppl.).

Plants and stones are named after the nix, as well as after
gods. The nymphsea (vvfufyaia from vvjufyrj) we still call nix-
blume as well as seeblume, seelilie, Swed. nackblad, Dan. nok-
keblomster, nokkerose; the conferva rupestris, Dan. nokkeskdg
(nix-beard) ; the haliotis, a shellfish, Swed. ndekora (nix-ear) ;
the crumby tufa-stone, tophus, Swed. naekebrod, the water-
sprite's bread. Finn, ndkinkenka (mya margaritifera) nakin
waltikka (typha angustif olia) ; the Lausitz Wends call the blos-
soms or seedpods of certain reeds 'vodneho mvzha porsty,
potaczky [piorsty, perczatky?], lohszy/ water- man's fingers or
gloves. We ourselves call the water-lily wassermannlein, but
also munvmel, rmlmmelchen = muemel, aunty, water-aunt, as the
merminne in the old lay is expressly addressed as Morolt's
'liebe muome/ and in Westphalia to this day watermome is a

Digitized by VjOOQIC



490 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

ghostly being; in Nib. 1479, 3 Siglint the one merwoman says
of Hadburc the other :

Darch der waste liebe h&t min muome dir gelogen,

'tis through love of raiment (weeds) mine aunt hath lied to thee;
these merwomen belong, as swan-maidens, to one sisterhood and
kindred (p. 428), and in Oswald 673-9 r ein ander merwtp' is
coupled with the first. Several lakes inhabited by nixes are
called mummelsee (Deut. sag. nos. 59. 331. Mone's Anz. 3, 92),
otherwise mevmke-loch, e.g., in the Paschenbarg of Schaumbarg.
This explains the name of a little river Mumling in the Oden-
wald, thongh old docs, spell it Mimling. Mersprites are made to
favour particular pools and streams, e.g., the Saale, the Danube,
the Elbe, 1 as the Romans believed in the bearded river-gods
of individual rivers; it may be that the name of the Neckar
(Nicarus) is immediately connected with our nicor, nechar (see
Suppl.).

Biorn gives nennir as another ON. name for hippopotamus,
it seems related to the name of the goddess Nanna (p. 310).*
This nennir or nikur presents himself on the sea-shore as a hand-
some dapple-grey horse, and is to be recognised by his hoofs
looking the wrong way ; if any one mounts him, he plunges with
his prey into the deep. There is a way however to catch and
bridle him, and break him in for a time to work. 8 A clever man
at Morland in Bahus fastened an artfully contrived bridle on him,
so that he could not get away, and ploughed all his land with
him; but the bridle somehow coming loose, the 'neck' darted
like fire into the lake, and drew the harrow in after him. 4 In
the same way German legends tell of a great hulking black horse,
that had risen out of the sea, being put to the plough, and going
ahead at a mighty pace, till he dragged both plough and plough-
man over the cliff. 6 Out of a marsh called the 'taufe/ near

1 The Elbjungfer and Saalweiblein, Dent. sag. no. 60 ; the river-sprite in the
Oder, ibid. no. 62.

8 Maohar, in Noriknm 2, 37, and in Gastein p. 145, mentions an Alpine
sprite Donanadel; does nadel here stand for nandel? A misprint for madel (girl)
is scarcely conceivable.

s Landnimabdk, 2, 10 (Islend. sog. 1, 74). Olaf sen's Beise igiennem Island,
1, 65. Sv. vis. 8, 128.

4 P. Kalm's WestgiSta ooh Bahuslandska resa, 1742, p. 200.

• Letzner's Dasselsohe chronik 5, 18.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



NICHXJ8, NIX. 491

Scheaen in Lower Saxony, a wild bull comes np at certain times,
and goes with the cows of the herd (Harry's Sagen, p. 79).
When a thunderstorm is brewing, a great horse with enormous
hoofs will appear on the water (Faye, p. 55). It is the vulgar
belief in Norway, that whenever people at sea go down, a
soedrouen (sea sprite) shews himself in the shape of a headless
old man (Sommerfelt, Saltdalens prastegjeld, Trondhjem 1827, p.
119). In the Highlands of Scotland a water-sprite in the shape
of a horse is known by the name of water-kelpie (see Suppl.).

Water-sprites have many things in common with mountain-
sprites, but also some peculiar to themselves. The males, like
those of the schrat kind, come up singly rather than in companies.
The water man is commonly represented as oldish and with a
long beard, like the Roman demigod out of whose urn the river
spouts; often he is many-Iieaded (conf. p. 387), Faye p. 51. In
a Danish folk-song the nokke lifts his beard aloft (conf. Svenska
visor 3, 127. 133), he wears a green hat, and when he grins you
see his green teeth (Deut. sag. no. 52). He has at times the
figure of a wild boy with shaggy hair, or else with yellow curls
and a red cap on his head. 1 The nakki of the Finns is said to
have iron teeth. 9 Tfhe nixe (fern.), like the Romance fay and our
own wise-women, is to be seen sitting in the sun, combing her
long hair (Svenska vis. 3, 148), or emerging from the waves with
the upper half of her body, which is exceedingly beautiful. The
lower part, as with sirens, is said to consist of a fish-like tail ;
but this feature is not essential, and most likely not truly
Teutonic, for we never hear of a tailed nix, 8 and even the nixe,
when she comes on shore among men, is shaped and attired like
the daughters of men, being recognised only by the wet skirt of

1 The small size is implied in the popular rhyme : ' Nix in der grube (pit), da
hist ein bdser bube (bad boy) ; wasch dir deine beinchen (little legs) mit rothen
ziegelsteinchen (red brick).'

9 On the grass by the shore a girl is seized by a pretty boy wearing a handsome
peasant's belt, and is forced to scratch his head for nun. While she is doing so, he
slips a girdle round her unperceived, and chains her to himself ; the continued
friction, however, sends him to sleep. In the meantime a woman comes up, and
aaks the girl what she is about. She tells her, and, while talking, releases herself
from the girdle. The boy was more sound asleep than ever, and his lips stood
pretty wide apart ; then the woman, coming up closer, cried out : * why, that's a
neck, look at his fish's teeth 1 ' In a moment the neck was gone (Etwas iiber die
Bhsten, p. 51).

* But we do of nixes shaped like men above and like horses below ; one water-
sprite takes his name from his slit ears, Deut. sag. no. 63.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



492 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

her dress, the wet tips of her apron. 1 Here is another point of
contact with swan-maidens, whose swan-foot betrays them : and
as they have their veils and clothes taken from them, the nixe
too is embarrassed by the removal and detention of her gloves
in dancing (Deut. sag. nos. 58. 60). Among the Wends the
water-man appears in a linen smockfrock with the bottom of its
skirt wet ; if in buying up grain he pays more than the market
price, a dearth follows, and if he bays cheaper than others, prices
fall (Lansitz. monatschr. 1797, p. 750). The Russians name
their water-nymphs rusdlki: fair maidens with green or gar-
landed hair, combing themselves on the meadow by the waterside,
and bathing in lake or river. They are seen chiefly on Whit-
sunday and in Whitsun-week, when the people with dance and
song plait garlands in their honour and throw them into the
water. The custom is connected with the German river-worship
on St. John's day. Whitsun-week itself was called by the
Russians rusaldnaya, in Boh. rusadla, and even in Wallachian
rusalie.*

Dancing, song and music are the delight of all water-sprites, as
they are of elves (p. 470). Like the sirens, the nixe by her
song draws listening youth to herself, and then into the deep.
So Hylas was drawn into the water by the nymphs (Apollod.
i. 9, 19. Apollon. rhod. 1, 131). At evening up come the dam-
selsfrom the lake, to take part in the human dance, and to visit
their lovers. 8 In Sweden they tell of the stromkarVs alluring
enchanting strain : the stromkarls-lag (-lay) is said to have
eleven variations, but to only ten of them may you dance,
the eleventh belongs to the night-spirit and his band; begin.

1 In Olaf the Saint's saga fFornm. s5g. 4, 56. 5, 162) a margtigr is pictured as a
beautiful woman, from the girdle downward ending in a fish, lolling men to sleep
with her sweet song ; evidently modelled on the Roman siren. Pretty stories of
nixes are told in Jul. Schmidt's Reichenfels, p. 150 (where the word docken=<io]ls t
puppets) and 151. Water-wives when in labour send for human assistance, like
she-dwarf 8 (p. 457). * They spake at Dr. M. L.'s table of spectra and of changelings,
then did Mistress Luther, his goodwi/e, tell an history, how a midwife at a place
was fetched away by the devil to one in childbed, with whom the devil had to do,
and that lived in a hole in the water in the MxUda, and the water hurt her not at
all, but in the hole she sat as in a fair chamber.' Table-talk 1571. 440b.

* Schafarik in the fiasopis desk, mus. 7, 259 has furnished a full dissertation on
the ruBalky [from rusy, blond ; but there is also ruslo, river's bed, deepest part] .

8 Hebel doubtless founds on popular tradition when (p. 281) he makes the
' jungfere mem tee ' roam through the field* at midnight, probably like the roggen-
muhme to make them fruitful. Other stories of the meerweiblein in Mone's Anz. 8,
178, and Bechstein's Thiir. sagen 8, 236.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



NICHTJ8, NIX. 493

to play that, and tables and benches, cnp and can, gray-beards
and grandmothers, blind and lame, even babes in the cradle
would begin to dance. 1 This melodious stromkarl loves to linger
by mills and waterfalls (conf. And van, p. 488). Hence his
Norwegian name fossegrim (fos, Swed. and ON. fors, waterfall).
On p. 52 it was cited as a remnant of heathen sacrifices, that to
this dffiinonic being people offered a black lamb, and were taught
music by him in return. The fossegrim too on calm dark
evenings entices men by his music, and* instructs in the fiddle
or other stringed instrument any one who will on a Thursday
evening, with his head turned away, offer him a little white he-goat
and throw it into a ' forse ' that falls northwards (supra, p. 34) .
If the victim is lean, the pupil gets no farther than the tuning of
the fiddle ; if fat, the fossegrim clutches hold of the player's right
hand, and guides it up and down till the blood starts out of all
his finger-tips, then the pupil is perfect in his art, and can play
so that the trees shall dance and torrents in their fall stand still
(see Suppl.).*

Although Christianity forbids such offerings, and pronounces
the old water-sprites diabolic beings, yet the common people
retain a certain awe and reverence, and have not quite given up
all faith in their power and influence : accursed beings they
are, but they may some day become partakers of salvation. This
is the drift of the touching account, how the stromkarl or neck
wants you not only to sacrifice to him in return for musical
instruction, but to promise him resurrection and redemption. 9
Two boys were playing by the riverside, the neck sat there
touching his harp, and the children cried to him : ' What do you
sit and play here for, neck ? you know you will never be saved. 1
The neck began to weep bitterly, threw his harp away, and sank
to the bottom. When the boys got home, they told their father

1 Arndt's Reise nach Sohweden 4, 241 ; similar dances spoken of in Herrauds-
aaga, cap. 11. pp. 49—62.

» Faye p. 67. Conf. Thiele 1, 186 on the Hrkegrim.

s Adman's Bahuslan, p. 80 : Om speleman i hdgar ok forsar har man ok
iiskilliga sagor ; fdr 15 Ar tilbaoka har man har uti hdgen under Garen i Tannms
gall belagit hdrt spela som the baste nmsioanter. Then Bom har viol ok Till lara
epela, blu* i dgnableket lard, allenast han lofvar upst&ndelse ; en som ej lofte thet,
lick hdra hum the i hdgen $logo Bonder sina violer oh greto bitterliga. (He that has
a fiddle and will learn to play, becomes in a moment learned, only ne promises
resurrection ; one who promised not that, did hear how they in the hill beat
asunder their fiddles and wept bitterly.) •



Digitized by VjOOQIC



494 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

what had happened. The father, who was a priest, said ' yon
have sinned against the neck, go back, comfort him and tell him
he may be saved. 1 When they returned to the river, the neck
sat on the bank weeping and wailing. The children said : ' Do
not cry so, poor neck, father says that your Redeemer, liveth too/
Then the neck joyfully took his harp, and played charmingly till
long after sunset. 1 I do not know that anywhere in our legends
It is so pointedly expressed, how badly the heathen stand in need
of the Christian religicfa, and how mildly it ought to meet
them. But the harsh and the compassionate epithets bestowed
on the nixes seem to turn chiefly upon their unblessedness, their
damnation. 2

But beside the freewill offering for instruction in his art, the
nix also exacted oruel and compulsory sacrifices, of which the
memory is preserved in nearly all popular tradition. To this day,
when people are drowned in a river, it is common to say : ' the
river-sprite demands his yearly victim/ which is usually 'an
innocent child. 9 8 This points to actual human sacrifices offered
to the nichus in far-off heathen times. To the nix of the Diemel
they throw bread and fruit once a year (see Suppl.).

On the whole there runs through the stories of water-sprites a
vein of cruelty and bloodthirstiness, which is not easily found among
dromons of mountains, woods and homes. The nix not only kills
human beings who fall into his clutches, but wreaks a bloody
vengeance on his own folk who have come on shore, mingled
with men, and then gone back. A girl had passed fifteen years
in the sea- wife's house (i haf-fruns gard), and never seen the sun
all that time. At last her brother ventures down, and brings
his beloved sister safely back to the upper world. The hafsfru
• waited her return seven years, then seized her staff, and lashing
the water till it splashed up high, she cried :

1 Sv. visor 8, 128. Ir. Elfenm. p. 24; similar Irish, Scotch, and Danish tra-
ditions, pp. 200-2. Conf. Thiele 4, 14. Holberg's Julestue so. 12 : * Nisser og
underjorske folk, drive store fester bort med klagen og hylen, eftersom de ingen del
har derndi ' (because they have no part therein).

* ' Vertdne wassernixe,' fordone, done for (p. 488) ; ' den fula stygga necken,'
Sv. vis. 8, 147 ; 'den usle havfrne, usle maremind,' ' den arme mareviv,' 4 du fule
og Ude spaaqvinde I * Danske visor 1, 110. 119. 125. Holberg's Melampus 8, 7
cites a Danish superstition : ' naar en nsker ligger hos sin fiskerinde paa soen,
saa foder hun en havfrue.'

8 Deut. sag., nos. 61. 62. Faye, p. 51. The River Saale yearly demands her
victim on Walburgis or St. John's day, and on those days people avoid the river.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



NICHXJS, NIX. 495

Hade jag trott att da varit s& falsk,

S& skulle jag knackt dig din tiufvehals ! #

(had I trowed thou wert so false, I'd have nicked thy thievish
neck), Arvidsson 2, 320-3. If the sea-maidens have stayed too
long at the dance, if the captive Christian have born a child to
the nix, if the water- man's child is slow in obeying his call, one
sees a jet of blood shoot np from the water's bed in sign of the
vengeful deed. 1 As a rule, there was likewise a favourable sign

1 Dent, sag., nos. 49. 58-9. 60. 804-6. 318, 1. Here I give another Westphalian

legend, written down for me by Hr Seitz, of Osnabrfick : Ddnken yon den smett

uppn Darmssen. Dichte bei Braumske liggt en ltitken see, de Darmssen ; do stond
Tdrr anlen tien (olden tide) en klanster ane. de midnke aber in den klauster liabeden
nig n& Goddes wilien ; drumme gftnk et nnner. Nig lange na hiar horden de buren
in der nauberakup, in Epe, olle nachte en kloppen un liarmen bi den Darmssen, osse
wenn me npn ambold slet, und wecke Hie seigen wott (some folk saw somewhat)
midden np den Darmssen. Se sgeppeden drup to ; d& was et n smett, de bet ant lif
(bis an's leib) inn water seit, mitn h&mer in de fdst, d&mit weis he jammer np den
ambold, un bedndde (bedeutete) de buren, dat se em wot to smien bringen sollen.
Sit der tit brochten em de ltie ut der burskup jiimmer isen to smien (iron to forge),
un ninmin8ke hadde so goe plogisen (good ploughshares) osse de Eper. Ens wol
Koatman to Epe ret (reed) ut den Darmssen h&len, do feind he n liitk kind annen
ower, dat was ruw upn ganssen liwe.* Do sgreggede de smett : ' nimm mi meinen
t&ennen nig weg I ' Aber Koatman neim dat kind inn baek full, un lop dermit n&
huse. Sit der tit was de smett nig mehr to sehn or to boren. Koatman f&rde
(futterte) den ruwwen up, un de word sin beste un flitigste knecht. Osse he aber
twintig jar ault wor, sia he to sinen buren: ' bur, ik mot Ton ju gaun, min vdr het
mi ropen.' * Dat spit mi je,' sia de bur, * gift et denn gar nin middel, dat du bi mi
bliwen kannst ? ' * Ik will es (mal) sehn/ sia dat waterkind, • gat erst es (mal) no
Braumske un halt mi en niggen djangen (degn) ; mer ji mjdt do fdrr giebn wot de
kaupmann hebben will, un jau niks afhanneln.* De bur gdnk no Braumake un
kofde en djangn, hannelde aber doch wot af . Nu gongen se to haupe no'n Darmssen,
do sia de ruwwe : * Nu passt Upp, wenn ik int water slae un et kiimmt blot, dann
mot ik weg, kiimmt mjalke, dann darf ik bi ju bliwwen.' He slog int water, d&
kwamm kene mjalke un auk ken bldd. gans iargerlik sprak de ruwwe : ' ji hebt mi
wot wis maket, un wot afhannelt, dorumme kdmmt ken bldd un kene mjalke. spdt
ju, un kaupet in Braumske en annern djangn.' De bur gdng weg un kweim wir ;
Aber erst dat drudde mal br&chte he en djangen, w& he niks an awwehannelt hadde.
Oase de ruwwe d& mit int water slog, do was et so rout osse bldd, de ruwwe stdrtede

aik in den Darmssen, unninminske hef en wier sehn. [Epitome : — The smith in

Darmssen lake. Once a monastery there ; bad monks, put down. Peasants at Epe
heard a hammering every night, rowed to middle of lake, found a smith sitting
up to his waist in water; he made them signs to bring him work, they did eo
constantly, and the Epe ploughshares were the best in the country. Once farmer
Koatman found a child on the bank, all over hairy. Smith cried, ' don't take my
son ' ; but K. did, and reared him. Smith never seen again. The Shaggy one, when
aged 20, said, *I must go, father has called m*.'—' Can't you stay anyhow? 1 —
' Well, I'll see ; go buy me a new sword, give the price asked, don't beat down. ' K.
bought one, but cheapened. They go to the Darmssen ; says Shag, * Watch, when
I strike the water ; if blood comes, I must go, if milk, I may stay/ But neither came :
• You've cheapened I go 'buy another sword.' K. cheapened again, but the third time
he did not. Shag struck the water, it was red as blood, and he plunged into the
Darmssen.] The same sign, of milk or blood coming up, occurs in another folk-
tale, which makes the water-nymphs into white- veiled nuns, Mone's Anz. 3, 93.

• So in Gasp, von der Ron, pp. 224-5 the meerwunder is called * der rauhe, der
rameheJ' Conf. supra, pp. 481. 491.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



496 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

agreed upon (a jet of milk, a plate with an apple), but withheld
in such a rase as this.

And here is the place to take up Orendd again, whom we
likened (p. 243) to the malicious god Loki, though Loki, even
apart from that, seemed related to Oegir. Grendel is cruel and
bloodthirsty : when he climbs out of his marsh at night, and
reaches the hall of the sleeping heroes, he clutches one and drinks
the blood out of another (Beow. 1478). His mother is called a
merewif (3037), hrimwylf (she- wolf of the breakers, 3197), and
grundwyrgen (3036) which means the same thing (from wearg,
lupus, comes wyrgen, lupa). This pair, Grendel and mother, have
a water-house, which is described (3027 seq.) almost exactly as
we should imagine the Norse Oegir' s dwelling, where the gods
were feasted : indoors the water is excluded by walls, and there
burns a pale light (3033) . l Thus more than one feature leads on
to higher beings, transcending mere watersprites (see Suppl.).

The notion of the nix drawing to him those who are drowning
has its milder aspect too, and that still a heathen one. We saw
on p. 311 that drowned men go to the goddess Ran; the popular
belief of later times is that they are received into the abode of the
nix or nixe. It is not the river-sprite kills those who sink in the
element of water ; kindly and compassionately he bears them to
his dwelling, and harbours their souls. 4 The word ran seems to
have had a more comprehensive meaning at first : ' media ran ok
regin ' was to invoke all that is bad, all evil spirits, upon one. It
has occurred to me, whether the unexplained Swed. r& in the
compounds sjcrd (nix), skogsrd (schrat), tomtrd (homesprite), which
some believe to be ra angulus, or a contraction of radande, may
not have sprung from this ran, as the Scandinavian tongue is so
fond of dropping a final n. Dame Wachilt too (p. 434) is a
succouring harbouring water-wife. The water man, like Hel and
Ban, keeps with him the souls of them that have perished in the
water, ' in pots turned upside down/ to use the naive language of
one story (no. 52) ; but a peasant visiting him tilts them up, and
in a moment the souls all mount up through the water. Of the

1 Gonf. the dolphin's house in Musaus's marchen of the Three Bisters.

2 Probably there were stories also of helpful succouring river-gods, such as the
Greeks and Romans told of Thetis, of Ino-Lenoothea (Od. 5, 383-353), Albunea,
Matuta.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



NIX. WATER-SPBITE. 497

drowned they say 'the nix has drawn them to him/ or 'has sucked
them,' because bodies found in the water have the nose red. 1
'Juxta pontem Mosellae quidam puerulus naviculam excidens
submersus est. quod videns quidam j uvenis vestibus abjectis aquae
insilivit, et inventum extrahere volens, maligno spiritu retrahente,
quern Neptunum vocant, semel et secundo perdidit ; tertio cum
nomen apostoli invocasset, mortuum recepit.' Miracula S. Mat-
thiae, cap. 43. Pez, Thes. anecd. 2, 3, pag. 26. Bollenhagen in
the Froschmeuseler (Nn IP) :

s das er
elend im wasser wer gestorben,
da die seel mit dem leib verdorben,
oder beim geist blieb, der immer frech
den ersofnen die hels abbreckJ

(that he had died miserably in the water, and his soul had per-
ished with the body, or abode with the spirit that ever without
ado breaketh the necks of the drowned). The Swedish supersti-
tion supposes that drowned men whose bodies are not found have
been drawn into the dwelling of the kafsfru (Sv. vis. 3, 148).
In some German fairy-tales (no. 79) children who fall into the
well come under the power of the water-nixe ; like dame Holla,
she gives them tangled flax to spin.

Faye, p. 51, quotes a Norwegian charm, to be repeated on the
water against the nix :

nyk, nyJc, naal i vatn !

jomfru Maria kastet staal i vatn :

du sak, ak flyt. 9

(nick, nick, needle in water ! Virgin casteth steel in water.
Thou sink, and I flee). A similar one for bathers is given in*
Snperst. Swed. no. 71 [with the addition: 'thy father was a
steel-thief, thy mother was a needle-thief/ etc.] . Steel stops a
spirit's power to act upon you (supra, p. 466-7 n.).

A sepulchral cry of the nix, similar to death groans, is said to
portend drowning (Faye, p. 51). Some very old writings ascribe

1 Dan. ' nokken har taget ham, 1 < nSkken har suet dem,' Tallin's Skrifter 2, 18.
3 Bo Brynhildr calls out at last to the giantess : 'ieykttu, g?gjar kyn ! ' Sam.
229*.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



498 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

to watersprites in general wailing voices and doleful speeches, that
resound from lakes and pools : they tell each other of their
baffled schemes, or how they have to vacate the land before the
christians. Gregory of Tours, in De glor. confess, cap. 81, re-
members an incident of his young days ' apud Arvernos gestum/
A man setting out early to the forest has his morning meal
blessed before he takes it: Cumque ad amnem adhuc ante-
lucanum venisset, imposito plaustro cum bobus in ponte qui
super navem locatus erat, alteram transmeare coepit in littus.
Verum ubi in medium amnis devenit, audivit vocem dicentis
s merge, merge, ne moreris /' Cui respondens vox alia ait : ' sine
tua etiam admonitione quae proclamas fecissem, si res sacra meis
conatibus non obstaret ; nam scias eum eulogiis sacerdotis esse
inunitum, ideo ei nocere non possum' (see Suppl.) — In the
Vita Godehardi Hildesiensis (first quarter of 11th cent.), cap. 4
(Leibn. 1, 492), we read : Erat etiam in orientali parte civitatis
nostrae (Hildenes-hem) pahis horrifica et circummanentibus
omnino plurali formidine invisa, eo quod ibi, ut opinabantur, tarn
meridiano quam et nocturno tempore illusiones quasdam horri-
biles vel audirent vel viderent, quae (sc. palus) a fonte salsuginis
quae ibidem in medio bulliebat Suiza dicitur. Qua ille (Gode-
hardus) spectata, et illusione etiam phantastica, qua bruta plebs
terrebatur, audita, eandem paludem secuudo sui adventus anno
cum cruce et reliquiis sanctorum invasit, et habitationem suam
ibidem aptavit, et in medio periculo oratorium in honorem S.
Bartholomaei apostoli fundavit, quo sequenti anno consummato et
dedicato, omne daemonum phantasma (conf. p. 482) exinde fundi-
tus extirpavit, et eundem locum omnibus commorantibus vel
advenientibus gratum et sine qualibet tentatione habitabilem
reddidit. — My third quotation is a continuation of that given
pn p. 108 from the Vita S. Galli (Pertz 2, 7) : Volvente deinceps
cursu temporis electus Dei Gallus retia lymphae laxabat in silentio
noctis, sed inter ea audivit demonem de culmine moniis pari suo
clamantem, qui erat in abditis maris. Quo respondents 'adsum,*
montanus econtra: 'Surge' inquit 'in adjutorium mihi. Ecce
peregrini venerunt, qui me de templo ejecerunt (nam deos con-
terebant quos incolae isti colebant, insuper et eog ad se conver-
tebant) ; veni, veni, adjuva nos expellere eos de terris.' Marinus
demon respondit :

Digitized by VjOOQIC



WATEB-SPBITE. HOME-SPRITE. 499

' En iinns eornm est in pelago,
cni nunquam nocere potero,
volui enim retia sna ledere,
sed me victnm proba lagere :
signo orationis est semper clansus,
nee nmquam somno oppressus.'

Electns vero Gallus haec andiens munivit se nndiqne signaculo
Christi, dixitque ad eos :

' In nomine Jesu Christi praecipio vobis,
nt de locis istis recedatis,
nee aliquem hie ledere presumatis 1 '

et cam festinatione ad littus rediit, atqne abbati suo quae aadierat
recitavit. 1 Quod vir Dei Colambanns audiens, convocavit fratres
in ecclesiam, solitum signum tangens. mira dementia diaboli !
Toces servorum Dei praeripnit vox fantasmatica, earn hejulatus
atqne ululatus dirca vocis audiebatur per culmina. — Read further
on (2, 9) the story of two lake-women who stand naked on the
shore and throw stones. Everywhere we see the preachers con-
front the pagan daemons with cross and holy spell, as something
real; the mournful howl of the spirits yields to the ringing of
bells. Gods and spirits are not distinguished : the god cast out
of the temple, whose image has been broken, is the elf or nix
meditating revenge. It is remarkable, too, that mountain and
water sprites are set before ns as fellows (pares) ; in folk-tales of
a later time their affinity to each other seems abundantly estab-
lished.

We have now considered genii of mountains, of woods and of
rivers; it remains to review the large and variously named group
of the friendly familiar Home-sprites.

They of all sprites stand nearest to man, because they come
and seek his fellowship, they take up their abode under his very
roof or on his premises.

Again, it is a feature to be marked in home-sprites, that they
are purely male, never female ; there appears a certain absence
of sex in their very idea, and if any female beings approach this

1 Conf. the conversations of trolls overheard by two of St. Olaf's men, Fornm.
sfig. 1, 18&-188.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



500 WIGHTS AND BLVBS.

goblin kind, it is former goddesses who have come down in the
world. 1

What the Romans called lar* lar familiaris (see the prologue
to Plautus's Aulularia) and penas, is named in oar older speech
husing or stetigot (genius loci) ; conf. * husinga (penates) ' in Not-
ker's Capella 51. In Cap. 142 N. renders lares by 'ingoumen
(hiusero aide burgo)'; the literal meaning of ingoumo would be
guard of the interior. In Cap. 50 he uses ingeside for penates, i.e.
our ingesinde, inmates, domestics ; the form continued to be used
inMHGr. : daz liebe heilige ingeside, Bol. 115, I. 226, 18. Simi-
larly the Span, duende, duendecillo (goblin) seems derivable from
domus, dueno is house-owner (dominus, distinct from don, p. 299
note), and duendo domestic, retired. The ON. tdft, Swed. tomt,
means area, domus vacua, and the home-sprite's name is in Swed.
tomtekarl, tomtegubbe (old fellow on the premises), tomtrd, tomts-
hiss, som styr i kallrars rike (Hallman, p. 73) : Norw. tomtevatte,
toftvatte. Another ON. name is skurgoft, p. 112. We can trace
in them a peculiar connexion with the hearth of the house ; they
often come out from under it (p. 456 n.), it seems to be the door, as
it were, to their subterranean dwelling : they are strictly hewrth-
gods. Here and there in Germany we also meet with the name
gesell, fellow (supra, p. 464, selle, selke), gutgesell, nachbar, lieber
nachbar, in the Netherlands goede hind (Horae Belg. 119), in
England goodfellow, in Denmark god dreng, good boy, kiare
granite, dear neighbour, (conf. bona socia, p. 283-8, and guoie
holde, p. 266). The Eng. puck we may indeed connect with the
Ir. phuka, Wei. pwcca? but with more justice perhaps with the
Dan. pog (lad), which is simply the Swed. pojke, ON. puki (puer),
and comes from Finn, poiea (Alius) ; in Lower Germany too they
say pook for a puny stunted man (Brem. wb. 3, 349). Heim-
reich's Nordfries. chron. 2, 348 has huzpuke (see Suppl.).

From the 13th century (and possibly earlier, if only we had
authorities) 4 down to the present time the name kobold has been

1 Holla, Berhta, Werra, Stempe. Female are the Gr. Mopp<£ and Aa/da, the
Bom. Lamia, Mania, Maniola. The Poles too have a fern. Omacnica : ' Aniculae
vetant pueros edere in tenebris, ne spectrum hoc devorent, quod eos insatiabiles
reddat,' Linde sub t. ' omacac,' to burden. OHG. dg eng gun lamiae,iOraff 1, 132.

2 Larva (spectre, daemon) is conn, with lar, as arvum, arras with arare. The
MonachuB SangaU. calls the pilosus (p. 481) larva.

» Croker's Fairy legends 8, 230-2. 262.

* * Ace. to Falke, a Koboltesdorp (ann. 946), Trad. corv. ; Adalpertus chobolt,
kobolt (ann. 1185), MB. 27, 36. 42/ Extr. from Supfl.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOME-SPBITE. KOBOLD. 501

in use. A doc. of 1250 in Bohmer*s Cod. francof. 1, 83 has a
'Heinricus dictus Ooboldus.' Even before that date coboldus
occurs (Zeitschr. des Hess, vereins 3, 64). Conrad of Wiirzburg,
MS. 2,206*, has: 'mir ist ein ldser hoveschalk als ein hobolt
yon buhse/ no better than a k. of boxwood ; and the Misnrere
(Amgb. 48*) : ' w6 den kobolden, die alsus erstammen (are so
struck dumb) I mir ist ein holzln (wooden) bischof vil lieber
dan ein stammer herre.' The notions of kobold, dwarf, thumb-
kin, puppet, idol largely ran into one another (conf . supra, malik,
p. 104 note). It seems, they used to carve little home-sprites
of boxwood and set them up in the room for fan, as even now
wooden nutcrackers and other mere playthings are cut in the
shape of a dwarf or idol ; yet the practice may have had to do
with an old heathen worship of small lares, to whom a place was
assigned in the innermost part of the dwelling ; in time the
earnest would turn into sport, and even christian sentiment tole-
rate the retention of an old custom. 1 They must also have tied
rags and shreds into dolls, and set them up. The dumb wooden
kobold is kept in countenance by the 'wooden bishop 1 mentioned
immediately after by the Misnasre.* In the oft-quoted poem of
Ruediger we find (l7 d of the Konigsb.MS.) 'in koboldes spr&che/
[i.e. j speaking low] . In Altd. w. 2, 55 ' einen kobold von wahse
machen/ one of wax. Hoffmann's Fundgruben give us in the
Glossary 386, from a Vocab. of the 14th century, opold for
kopold. Hugo von Trimberg has several allusions to kobolds :
line 5064, ' und ldrn einander goukelspil, unter des mantel er
Jcobolie mache, der (whereat) manic man tougen (secretly) mit im
lache ' ; 5576, ' der m&le ein andern kobolt dar, der ungessen bi
im sitze ' ; 10277, ' einer siht den andern an, als kobolt hern tater-
man'; 10843, 'ir abgot (the heathens' gods), als ich gelesen
h&n, daz waren kobolt und taterman' ; 11527, 'Got mohte wol
lachen, solte ez sin, wan sine tatermennelin (same in Roth's
Fragment, p. 65) s& wunderlich uf erden leben/ God might
laugh to see his little mannikins behave so strangely. Jugglers

1 One ought to search out the age and design of the various gear that is set out
(as mere ornament this long while) on shelves and tables ; from this and from
long-established moulds for pastry, we may arrive at some conclusions about the
heathen custom of carving or * doughing ' idols (conf. pp. 15. 105. 112. 114) : teig
(dough) including any soft substance, day, wax or flour-paste.

* On * papa salignus ' conf. Reinh. p. zciv.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



502 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

bring kobolds oat from under their cloak, kobolds are painted
on the wall, the heathen gods were nothing but kobolds and

tatermen, to stare at each other like kobold and taterman,

all through, the kobold appears as the tiny tricky home-sprite.
In writers of the 17th century I find the remarkable phrase 'to
laugh like a kobold/ Ettner's Unwiird. doct. p. 840, and App. p.
53 ; ' you laugh as though you'd empty yourself, like a kobolt/
Reimdich p. 149. This must either mean, to laugh with mouth
agape, like a carved kobold, who may have been so represented,
or simply to laugh loud and heartily. 1 Again, ' to laugh like a
hampelmann/ Deutschfranzos p. 274 ; ' ho, ho, ho ! the loud
laugh of Robin Goodfellow/ Anecd. and Trad., ed. by W. J.
Thorns, Lond. 1839, p. 115. In the poem of Zeno 867. 1027
this daemonic laughter is expressed by skraken (Brein. wb. 4,
686 schrachtern). Schweinichen 1, 260 tells of an unquiet spirit
laughing loud and shrill ; it may be a laugh of mirth or mockery.

In the Netherlands too we find at an early time the form
koubout (pi. coubouten, Horae Belg. 1, 119) ; now kabout, and in
Belgium kabot, kabotermanneken. 2 The Scandinavian languages
have not the word.

It is a foreign word, sprung no doubt from the Gr. K6f3dko%
(rogue), Lat. cobalus? with a t added, as our language is partial
to forms in -ott for monstrous and ghostly beings. Prom cobalus,
in Mid. Lat. already gobelinus, the Pr. has formed its gobelin,
whence the Engl, goblin, strengthened into hobgoblin. Hanka's
0. Boh. glosses render 79 b gitulius (getulius, gaetulius) by kobolt,
and directly after, aplinus (1. alpinus, i.e. alphinus, the 'fool'
or queen in chess) by tatrman : here are kobolt and tatrman
together, just as we saw them staring at each other in the
Renner; hence also the Cod. pal. 841, 126 c speaks of 'einen
taterman m&len/ painting a t., and the Wahtelmrare 140 of
guiding him with strings, ' rihtet zuo mit den snueren die tater-

1 * Hlahtar kiscutitaz,* laughed till he shook, E. 24*. Notk. Cap. 88 has : ' taz
lahter scutta sia ; Petronius, cap. 24, * risu dissolvebat ilia sua ' ; Beinardus 8,
1929, * cachinnu8 viscera fissurus ' ; or, as we say, to split with laughing, laugh
yourself double, short and small, to pieces, to a hdlzlin (Gryphius p. m. 877), brown,
out of your senses ; * einen schtlbel voll lachen ' ; perish, die with laughing, MHG.
' man swindet under lachen,' Ben. 830. A Breton song in Villemarqu6 1, 89 speaks
of the loud laugh of the korred (see Suppl.).

9 Schayes but les usages et traditions des Beiges. Louvain 1884, p. 280.

s Lobeck's Aglaoph. 1308-1828.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



GOBLIN. TATEBMAN. 503

manne' (supra, p. 410 g.). To explain this taterman by the
Engl, tatter has some plausibility, but then our HG. ought
to have had zaterman (conf. OHG. zata, zatar, Graff 5, 632-3,
with AS. taBttera, panniculus). The glossist above may have
meant by gaetulius an African savage, by alpinus a Tartar (MHG.
tater, tateler), or still better, a fool; 1 the word taterman occurs
in other 0. Boh. documents besides, and signifies doll and idol
(Jungmann 3, 554 b ) ; foreign to all other Slavic dialects, it seems
borrowed from German. 8 Its proper meaning can only be re-
vealed by a fuller insight into the history of puppet-shows. Per-
haps the Hung, tatos (juggler) has a claim to consideration. 3

Several MSS. however and the first printed edition of the
Benner have not taterman at all, but katerman (Cod. francof.
164 b reads verse 10843 kobiilde undo katirman), which is not
altogether to be rejected, and at lowest offers a correct secondary
sense. Katerman, derived from kater (tom-cat), may be com-
pared with heinzelman, hinzelman, hinzemannchen, the name of
a home-sprite, 4 with Hinze the cat in Reineke, and the wood-
sprite Katzenveit (p. 480) . The puss-in-boots of the fairy-tale plays
exactly the part of a good-natured helpful kobold ; another one
is called stiefel (boot, Deut. sag. no. 77), because he wears a
large boot: by the boot, I suppose, are indicated the gefeite
sckuhe (fairy shoes) of older legend, with which one could travel
faster on the ground, and perhaps through the air ; such are the
league-boots of fairy-tales and the winged shoes of Hermes. The
name of Heinze is borne by a mountain-sprite in the Frosch-
meuseler. Heinze is a dimin. of Heinrich, just as in Lower*
Germany another noisy ghost is called Chimke, dimin. of Joachim
(conf. 'dat gimken/ Brem. wb. 5, 379) : the story of Chimmeken

1 There is in the kobold's character an unmistakable similarity to the witty
court-fool ; hence I feel it significant, that one described in Schweiniohen 1, 260-2
expressly carries a bawble. The Engl, hobgoblin means the same as elowngoblin
(Nares sub v. hob).

3 Hanusch (Slay. myth. 299) takes the taterman (he says, hasterman also occurs)
for a water-sprite.

• ' In Tyrol tatterman** scarecrow, coward, kobold, from tattern, zittern, to quake,
skedaddle ; Frommann 2, 827. Leopreohting p. 177 says, tattern to frighten ; at
Gratz in Styria, the night before solstice, tattermann, a bugbear, is carried round
and set on fire in memory of extirpated heathenism.' — Extr. from Suppl.

4 Deut. sag. no. 75 ; the story is 10p years later than the composition of the
Reineke. Hinzelmann leaves a dint in the bed, as if a cat had lain in it. Luther's
Table-talk (ed. 1571, p. 441*) had previously related the like concerning a spirit
Heinzlin.

VOL. II, *

Digitized by VjOOQIC



504 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

(of about 1327) is to be found in Kantzow*s Pomerania 1, 333.
The similar and equally Low-German name Wolterken seems
to have a wider circulation. Samuel Meiger in bis Panurgia
lamiarum (Hamb. 1587. 4), bok 8 cap. 2, treats Wan den laribus
domesticis edder husknechtkens, de men ok Wolterken unde
ChimJeen an etliken orden nomet.' These Wolterkens are also
mentioned by Arnkiel (Cimbr. heidenth. 1, 49) ; in the Nether-
lands they are called Wouters, Wouterken, and Tuinman 2, 201
has a proverb € 't is een wilde Wouter, 9 though incorrectly he
refers it to wout (silva). Wouter, Wolter is nothing but the
human proper name Walter bestowed on a home-sprite. It is
quite of a piece with the familiar intercourse between these spirits
and mankind, that, beside the usual appellatives, certain proper
names should be given them, the diminutives of Henry, Joachim,
Walter. Not otherwise do I understand the Robin and Nissen in
the wonted names for the English and Danish goblins Robin
goodfellow and Nissen god dreng. Robin is a French-English
form of the name Robert, OHG. Hruodperaht, MHGr. Ruotperht,
our Ruprecht, Rupert, Ruppert ; and Robin fellow is the same
home-sprite whom we in Germany call knecht Ruprecht, and
exhibit to children at Christmas, but who in the comedies of the
16-1 7th centuries becomes a mere Rupel or Ruppel, i.e. a merry
fool in general. 1 In England, Robin Goodfellow seems to get
mixed up with Robin Hood the archer, as Hood himself reminds
us of Hddeken (p. 463) ; and I think this derivation from a
being of the goblin kind, and universally known to the people,
43 preferable to the attempted historical ones from Rubertus
a Saxon mass-priest, or the English Robertus knight, one
of the slayers of Thomas Becket. Nisse, Nissen, current in
Denmark and Norway, must be explained from Niels, Nielsen,

1 Ayrer's Fastnachtspiele 73 d confirms the fact of Rupel being a dimin. of
Rupreoht. Some dialects use RUpel, Riepel as- a name for the tom-cat again ; in
witch-trials a little young devil is named Rubel. Ace. to the Leipzig Avanturier 1,
22-3, knecht Ruprecht appears in shaggy clothes, sack on back and rod in hand.—
[If Hob in hobgoblin stands for Robert, it is another instance of the friendly or at
least conciliatory feeling that prompted the giving of such names. In Mids. N,
Dream ii. 1, the same spirit that has just been called Robin Goodfellow, is thus
addressed :

Those that ZTo&-goblin call you, and sweet Puck,
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.

Of course Hob as a man's name is Robert, as Hodge is Roger.— Trans,]

Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOME-SPRITE. 505

t.e. Nicolaus, Niclas, 1 not from our HG. common noun ' nix '
the watersprite, which is in Danish nok, nok (p. 488), and has
no connexion with Nisse; and the Swed. form is also Nilson. I
find a confirmation of this in our habit of assigning to Niclaus,.
Clous or Globes the selfsame part that in some districts is played
by Buprecht. To this latter I am inclined to refer even the-
words of so early a writer as Ofterdingen, MS. 2, 2 b : ' Rupreht
min knecht muoz iuwer har gelich den tdren schern/ E. my man
mast shear your hair like that of fools. A home-sprite Rildy (for
Kudolf) in Mone's Anz. 3, 365.

Another set of names is taken from the noises which these
spirits keep up in houses : you hear them jumping softly, knock-
ing at walls, racketing and tumbling on stairs and in lofts.
Span, trasgo (goblin), and trasguear (to racket) ; Fr. soterai,
sotret (jumper), M6m. de 1'acad. celt. 4, 91 ; ekerken (eichhorn-
chen, squirrel), Deut. sag. no. 78; poltergeist, rumpelgeist, rum*
pelstilz in the Kindermarchen no. 55, rumpelstilt in Fischart;, 2
one particular goblin is called klopfer, knocker (Deut. sag. no.
76), and it may be in this connexion that hammerlein, hemerlein
(supra, p. 182) has come to be applied to home-sprites of diabolic
nature. Nethl. bullman, bullerman, bullerkater, from bullen,
bullern, to be boisterous. Flem. boldergeest, and hence 'bi
holder te bolder,' our ' holter die polfcer/ helter-skelter. A pop-
hart, identical with rumpelstilt in Fischart, is to be derived
from popeln, popern, to keep bobbing or thumping softly and
rapidly; 8 a house-goblin in Swabia was called the poppele; in
other parts popel, popel, pbpelmann, popanz, usually with the side-
meaning of a muffled ghost that frightens children, and seldom
used of playful good-humoured goblins. At the same time popel
is that which muffles (puppt) itself: about Henneberg, says
Beinwald 2, 78, a dark cloud is so called ; it contains the notion

1 Not only Nielsen, but Nis$en is a family name in Denmark, and can only
mean the same, by no means nix or goblin. [I suppose Niels is rather Nigellus,
Nigel, which breaks down the connexion with Nicolas or Claus ; still the two can
stand independently. — Tbams.]

* Is stilt, stUz the old stalt in compounds? Gramm. 2, 527. What the fairy-
tale says of Rumpelstilt, and how his name has to be guessed, other stories tell of
Euenk&Ul or HopfenMUel (who wear an iron hat or one wreathed with hop-leayes),
Kletke's Alman. v. Tolksm. 67 ; or of the dwarf HoUrilhrlein, BonnefUhrlein, Harrys
1, 18 [of Knir/lker, Gebhart, Tepenliren, MfiUenh. 806-8, of Titteli Ture, Sv. folkv,
1, 171. — Suppl.] ; and we shall meet with the like in giant-stories.

' Staid. 1, 204. Bchm. 1, 298. 828.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



506 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

of mask and tarnkappe (p. 333). In connexion with Holda, a
Hollepopel, Hollepeter is spoken of.

The same shifting of form appears in the words mumhart
(already in CaBsarius heisterb. 7, 46: 'mummart momordit me'),
mummel, mummelmann, mummanz, 1 which express the very same
notion, ' mummen, mnmmeln y signifying to mumble, to utter a
muffled sound. Or can we connect it with mumel, muomel, the
name of the watersprite (p. 490) ? In that case, vermummen
(to disguise), mummerei (mumming, larva) would seem to mean
acting like the spectre, instead of the spectre having taken his
name from mumming (see Suppl.).

The word butze as far back as the 12th-13th century had the
same meaning as mummart and poppart : a place called Puzi-
prunnun, Pueijmmnen, MB.' 6, 60. 62. 9, 420 (12th century),
unless puzi = pu teas be meant, might take its name from a well,
haunted by such a home-sprite. 'Ein ungehiurer (uncanny)
butze/ Martina 116* 224*; ' si sehent mich nicht m&r an in butzen
wis/ they look at me no more in butze wise, Walth. 28, 87 ; 'in
butzenwise gehn/ Oberlin sub v. ; € den butzen vorht er kleine,
als man dd seit von kinden/ he little fears the b., as we say of
children, Albr. Tit. x. 144 (Hahn 1275) ; butzengriul, -horror,
Walth. 140, 2. MsH. 3, 451*; 'geloub ich daz, s6 bfz mich
butze/ b. bite me if I believe it, Hatzlerin 287*, which agrees with
'mummart momordit me' above; *ein hinderbutze/ Ls. 1, 617;
'forht ich solchen butzel/ Ls. 1, 380, where a wihtel is spoken
of. So, to frighten with the butze, to tear off the butze (mask) ;
butzen antliit (face) and butzen kleider (clothes) =larva in
Kaisersperg (Oberlin 209) ; ivinterbutz in Brant's Narrenschiff
129 (winterbutte in the Plattdeutsch translation 140 b ). I do
not understand the butzenhdnsel in Weisth. 1, 691. All over
Germany almost, we hear to this day : 'der butz kommt/ 9 or € der
butzemann, butzelmann/ and in Elsass butzrnummel, the same as
butz or mummel alone, buz, Jager's Ulm, p. 522. butzenmann,
Fischart's Bienkorb 194*. butz, Garg. 231*. butzemann, Simpl.
2, 248. In Bavaria, fasnachtbutz, Shrovetide b., buzmann, buzi-
bercht, b. coupled with the Bercht or Berchta of our pp. 272-9 ;

1 For mumhan8 (muffle- jack), as popanz is for pop-bane (bob-jack), and as
there were likewise blindhans, grobhans, karsthana, scharrhans, etc.
- In Normandy : * hush, the gobelin will eat you up.'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOME-SPRITE. 507

butzwinkel, lurking-place, butzlfinster, pitch-dark, w hen the ap-
parition is most to be dreaded ; ' the putz would take us over
hill and dale/ Schm. 1, 229. 230; the butz who leads travellers
astray (Muchar's Gastein, p. 145). In Swabia butzenmaukler
(from maucheln, to be sly), butzenbrecht, butzenraule, butzenrolle,
rollputz, butzenbell (because his rattle rolls and his bell tinkles),
Schmid 111. About Hanau I have heard the interjection, katza-
butza-rola ! the ' katze-butze ' bringing up the connexion between
cat and goblin (p, 503) in a new form. In Switzerland bootzi, bozi,
St. 1, 204. Here several meanings branch out of one another :
first we have a monstrous butz that drags children away, then a
tiny butzel, and thence both butzel and butz-igel (-urchin) used
contemptuously of little deformed creatures. In like manner but
in Low Germ, stands for a squat podgy child ; button, verbutten
is to get stunted or deformed, while the bugbear is called butte,
blithe, budde, buddeke : ' dat di de butke nig bit/ (that thee the
bogie bite not !) is said satirically to children who are afraid of
the dark, Brem. wb. 1, 173-5; and here certainly is the place
for the watersprite butt or buttje in the Kindermarchen no. 19,
the name having merely been transferred to a blunt-headed fish,
the rhombus or passer marinas. 1 There is also probably a butte-
mann, btUtmann, but more commonly in the contracted form
bu-man (Br. wb. 1, 153). Nethl. bytebauw, for buttebauw, which
I identify with Low Germ, bu-ba (Br. wb. 1, 152). The Dan.
buseemand, busaegroll, bussetrold (Molbech, p. 60) seems to be
formed on the German (see Suppl.). — The origin of this butze,
butte is hard to ascertain: I would assume a lost Goth, biuta
(tundo, pulso), b6ut, butum, OHG. piuzu, p6z, puzum, whence
OHG. anapdz, our amboss, anvil, MHG. bdzen (pulsare), and
gebiuze, thumping, clatter [Engl, to butt?], conf. Lachmann
on Nib. 1823, 2. Pragm. 40, 186; butze would be a thumping
rapping sprite, perfectly agreeing with mumhart and pophart,*
and we may yet hear of a bdzhart or buzhart. But, like

i Homesprite and water-sprite meet in this soothsaying wish-granting fish.
The story of the hutt has a parallel in the OFr. tale of an elvish spirit and en-
chanter Merlin, who keeps fulfilling the growing desires of the charcoal burner, till
they pass all bounds, then plunges him back into his original poverty (M6on, nouv.
ree. 2, 242-262. Jubinal 1, 128-185.

* As the monstrous includes the repulsive and unclean, it is not surprising that
both butze and popel signify muous, filth (Oberlin 210. Schm. 1, 291). The same
with Swiss bddg, St. 1, 203.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



508 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

butzenhiinsel, there is also a lianselmcmn used for spiritus
familiaris (Pbil. v. Sittew. 5, 328, ed. Lugd.), and the similar
hampelmann for goblin, puppet and mannequin ( = manneke,
mannikin). Bavar. hampel, haimpel, both devil and simpleton
(Schm. 2, 197), Austr. henparl (Hofer 2, 46).

The Fr. follet, It. foletto, is a diminuitive of fol, fou ; which,
like follis (bellows), seems to be derived from an obsolete follere
(to move hither and thither), and brings us to a fresh contact
of the home- sprite with the fool. 1 Then lutin, also luton, perhaps
from the Lat. luctus : a sprite who wails and forebodes sorrow ?
Lithuan. bildukkas, bildunas, bildziuks (noisy sprite), from
bildenti (to racket, rattle) ; grozdunas from gr<5dzia (there is a
racket made). Sloven, ztrazhnik, Serv. strashilo, Boh. strasidlo,
Pol. straszydlo, from stranti (terrere) ; Boh. bubdh (noisy sprite) .
Somewhat stronger is the Pol. dzieciojad, child-eater, like the
Lat. manducus. Irish home-sprites are called Oluricauns (Elfenm.
p. 85-114), Leprechaun, Logheriman (Keightley 2, 179 ; and see
Suppl.).

But enough of these names : no doubt many more could be
added. It is time to consider the nature and functions of these
Home-sprites.

In stature, appearance and apparel they come very near to
elves and dwarfs; legend loves to give them red hair or a
red beard, and the pointed red hat is rarely missing. Hutchen
(Hodeke, Hoidike), the Hildesheim goblin, and HopfenhuteU
Eisenhiitel take their names from it. A broad-topped mushroom
is in Dan. called nissehat. The Norwegian Nissen is imagined
small like a child, but strong, clothed in grey, with a red peaky
cap, and carrying a blue light at night. 3 So they can make
themselves visible or invisible to men, as they please. Their fairy
shoes or boots have been noticed, p. 503; with these they can get
over the most difficult roads with the greatest speed : it was just
over mountains and forests that Hiitchen's rennpfad extended
(Deut. sag. 1, 100), and the schratweg (p. 479) means much the

> Batherius, ed. Ballerini, p. 814 : * merito ergo follit latiali rusticitate vocaiis,
quoniam veritate vacuus.' Wilhelm. metens. ep. 3: 'follcm me ruatieo verbo
appellasti.'

8 J. N. Wilae's Beskrivelse over Spydeberg, Christiana 1779, p. 418. Gonf. the
blue light of the black mannikin, Einderm. no. 116.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOME-SPRITE. ^ 509

same. 1 With this walking apparatus and this swiftness there is
associated now and then some animal's form and name : Heinze,
Heinzelmann, polterkater, katermann, boot-cat, squirrel; their
shuffling and bustling about the house is paralleled by the nightly
turbulence of obstreperous cats. 3 They like to live in the stable,
barn or cellar of the person whose society they have chosen,
sometimes even in a tree that stands near the house (Swed. bo-tra,
dwelling- tree). You must not break a bough off such a tree, or
the offended goblin will make his escape, and all the luck of the
house go with him ; moreover, he cannot abide any chopping in
the yard or spinning on a Thursday evening (Superst. Swed. no.
110). 8 In household occupations they shew themselves friendly
and furthersome, particularly in the kitchen and stable. The
dwarf-king Goldemcvr (pp. 453. 466) is said to have lived on in-
timate terms with Neveling of Hardenberg at the Hardenstein,
and often shared his bed. He played charmingly on the harp,
and got rid of much money at dice ; he called Neveling brother-
in-law, and often admonished him, he spoke to everybody, and
made the clergy blush by discovering their secret sins. His
* hands were lean like those of a frog, cold and soft to the grasp ;
he would allow himself to be felt, but never to be seen. After a
stay of three years he made off without injuring any one. Other
accounts call him king Vollmar, and they say the room he lived
in is called Vollmar } s hammer to this day : a place at table had
to be kept for him, and one in the stable for his horse ; meats,
oats and hay were consumed, but of horse or man you saw nothing
but the shadow. Once an inquisitive man having sprinkled ashes
and peas to make him fall and to get sight of his footprints, he
sprang upon him as he was lighting the fire, and chopped him up
into pieces, which he stuck dn a spit and roasted, but the head
and legs he thought proper to boil. The dishes, when ready,
were carried to Vollmar's chamber, and one could hear them
being consumed with cries of joy. After this, no more was heard

i So a chemin de f4et is spoken of in M6m. celt. 4, 240, and a trdUatkeid
(curriculum gigantum) in LaxcL saga 66.

' Witches and fays often assume the thape of a cat, and the eat is a creature
peculiarly open to suspicions of witchcraft.

1 Wilse, ubi supra, entirely agrees : * tomtegubben skal have bib til hold unde
gamie trSer ved stuehuset {boetrder), og derfor har man ej tordet falde disse gand-
ske.' To this connexion of home-sprites with tree-worship we snail have to return
further on.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



510 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

of king Vollmar ; but over his chamber-door it was found written,
that from that time the house would be as unlucky as it had been
prosperous till then, and the scattered estates would never come
together again till there were three Hardenbergs of Hardenstein
living at once. Both spit and gridiron were long preserved, till
in 1651 they disappeared during the Lorrain war, but the pot is
still there, let into the kitchen wall. 1 The home-sprite's parting
prophecy sounds particularly ancient, and the grim savagery of
his wrath is heathen all over. Sam. Meiger says of the wolter-
Tcens : ' Se vinden sik gemeinichlich in den hiiseren, dar ein god
vorrad (store) van alien dingen is. Dar scholen se sik bedenst-
haftigen (obsequious) anstellen, waschen in der koken up, boten
viir (beet the fire), schiiren de vate, schrapen de perde im stalle,
voderen dat quik, dat it vet und glat herin geit, theen (draw)
water und dragent dem vehe (cattle) vor. Men kan se des
nachtes horen de ledderen edder treppen (or stairs) up und dal
stigen, lachen, wen se den megeden efte knechte de decken
aftheen (pull off), se rich ten to, houwen in, jegen (against) dat
geste kamen scholen, 2 smiten de ware in dem huse umme, de den
morgen gemeinliken darna verkoft wert/ The goblin then is an •
obliging hardworking sprite, who takes a pleasure in waiting on
the men and maids at their housework, and secretly dispatching
some of it himself. He curries the horses, combs out their
manes, 8 lays fodder before the cattle, 4 draws water from the well
and brings it them, and cleans out the stable. For the maids he
makes up fire, rinses out the dishes, cleaves and carries wood,
sweeps and scrubs. His presence brings prosperity to the house,
his departure removes it. He is like the helpful earth-mannikins
who lend a hand in field labour (p. 451 n.). At the same time he
oversees the management of the house, that everything be done
orderly; lazy and careless workers get into trouble with him (as
with Holla and Berhta, pp. 269. 273), he pulls the coverlets off

1 Von Steinen's Westph. gesoh. pp. 777-9.

3 When the cat trims her whiskers, they say it is a sign of guests.

8 Like the white lady (Berhta), whose nightly visits are indicated the next
morning by the wax that has dropt from her taper on the manes (Dent. sag. no. 122).
In Wales the people believe that goats have their beards combed out every Friday
night by the elves (Oroker 8, 204).

4 Henoe the name futtermdnnchen, (confounded at times with Peterm&nnchen) ;
but often he has one favourite hors§ that he pays special attention to, taking hay
out of the others' cribs to bring to him. Faye p. 44.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOME-SPRITE. 511

the beds of sluggards, blows their light oat, tarns the best cow's
neck awry, kicks the dawdling milkmaid's pail over, and mocks
her with insulting laughter ; his good-nature turns into worrying
and love of mischief, he becomes a € tormenting spirit/ Agemund
in the Beinardus 4, 859-920 seems to me no other than a house-
dfflmon, distorted and exaggerated by the poet, disturbing the
maid in her sleep, her milking and churning (see Suppl.). 1

Servants, to keep on good terms with him, save a little potful
of their food on purpose for him, which is surely a vestige of little
sacrifices that were offered him of old (p. 448). That is probably
why one Swiss goblin bears the name Napfhans, Potjack. But
in many cases it is only done on holidays, or once a week. The
sprite is easily satisfied, he puts up with a saucerful of porridge,
a piece of cake and a glass of beer, which are left out for him
accordingly ; on those evenings he does not like any noisy work
to be going on, either in or out of doors. This they call in
Norway 'at holde qvelvart (qvellsvart)/ to hold evening rest.
Those who desire his goodwill, give him good words : ' kiare
granne, gior det ! ' dear neighbour, do this; and he replies con-
formably. He is said at times to carry his preference for the
goodman so far as to pilfer hay and straw from other farmers'
barns or stables, and bring it to him (see Suppl.).

The Nissen loves the moonlight, and in wintertime you see
him merrily skipping across the farmyard, or skating. He is a
good hand at dancing and music, and much the same is told of
him as of the Swedish stromkarl (p. 493), that for a grey sheep
he teaches people to play the fiddle.*

The home-sprite is contented with a trifling wage : a new hat, a
red cap, a parti-coloured coat with tinkling bells he will make
shift with. The hat and cap he has in common with dwarfs
(p. 463), and therefore also the power to make himself invisible.
Petronins (Satir. cap. 38) shows it was already a Roman super-
stition : 'sed quomodo dicunt, ego nihil scivi, sed audivi, quo-
modo ineuboni pileam rapuisset, et thesaurum invenit.' Home-

1 The description of his figure (a horse's mane, hawk's bill, cat's tail, goat's
beard, ox's horns and ooek's feet) can hardly hare been all invented there and then.

' Unless Wilse (Beskriv. over Spyd. 419) has confounded Nissen with nooken ;
yet the German goblin Ooldemar was likewise musical (Ir. Eifenm. lxxxiii.). Wilse,
and Faye, pp. 48-45, give the best account of the Norwegian Nissen, and Thiele i.
134-5 of the Danish.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



512 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

sprites guard treasures, and in Nib. 399 Siegfried becomes
master of the hoard as soon as he has taken Alberich's tarnkappe
from him. In Calderon's Dama duende the little goblin wears a
large hat : ' era unfrayle tamanito, j tenia nn cucurucho tamano.'
The Swedish ' tomte i garden ' looks like a year-old child, but
has an old knowing face under his red cap. He shews himself at
midday (see chap. XXXVI., daemon meridianus) in summer and
autumn, slow and panting he drags a single straw or an ear
(p. 459) ; when the farmer laughed and asked, € What's the
odds whether you bring me that or nothing ? ' he quitted the
farm in dudgeon, and went to the next. From that time pros-
perity forsook the man who had despised him, and went over to
his neighbour. The farmer who respected the busy tomte and
cared for the tiniest straw, became rich, and cleanliness and
order reigned in his household. Many Christians still believe in
such home-sprites, and present them an offering every year, ' pay
them their wage ' as they call it. This is done on the morn of
Yule, and consists of grey cloth, tobacco and a shovelful of earth,
Afzelius 2, 169. A puck served the monks of a Mecklenburg
monastery for thirty years, in kitchen, stall and elsewhere ; he
was thoroughly good-natured, and only bargained for ' tunieam
de diverts cohribus, et tintinnabulis plenam.' 1 In Scotland there
lived a goblin Shellycoat, and we saw (p. 465) that the dwarfs
of the Mid. Ages also loved bells [schellen; and schellenkappe is
Germ, for cap and bells] • The bells on the dress of a fool still
attest his affinity to the shrewd and merry goblin (fol, follet) ;
see Suppl.

He loves to play merry pranks, and when he has accomplished
one, he is fain to laugh himself double for delight : hence that
goblin laughter (p. 502) and chuckling* But also when he sulks,
and means mischief to those who have brought him into trouble
and difficulty, he utters a scornful laugh at the top of his voice. 2

As henchman true, he abides by the master he once takes up
with, come weal come woe. But his attachment is often found
irksome, and one cannot be rid of him again. A farmer set fire

1 The story (as written down in 1559) is given in Era. Joaoh. Westphal's Speci-
men dooumentorom ineditorum, Bostock 1726, pp. 156-166.

* Scott's Minstrelsy 1. civ. mentions a North English Brag or Barguett : * he
usually ended his mischievous frolics with a horselaugh.' Cont Hone's Tablebook
2, 656.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOME-SPRITE. 513

to his barn, to burn the goblin that haunted it ; when it is all
ablaze, there sits the sprite at the back of the cart in which they
were removing the contents (Deut. sag. no. 72). ] In Mone's
Anzeiger 1835, 312 we read of a little black man that was
bought with a chest, and when this was opened, he hopped out
and slipped behind the oven, whence all efforts to rout him out
were fruitless ; but he lived on excellent terms with the house-
hold, and occasionally shewed himself to them, though never to
strangers. This black figure reminds one both of the Scandi-
navian dwarfs, and of the devil. Some thoroughly good goblin-
stories are in Adalb. Kuhn's collection, pp. 42. 55. 84. 107. 159.
191-3. 872. 2

There are also goblins who, like nix and watersprite, are
engaged in no man's service, but live independently ; when such
a one is caught, he will offer you gifts or tell your fortune, to be
set at liberty again. Of this sort is the butt in the nursery-tale



i Very similar stories in Kuhn, no. 103, Thiele 1, 136, and the Irish tale of the
ehiricaun (pp. 92. 213 of the transl.). Also a capital Polish story about Iskrzyoki,
in Woyeicki's Klechdy 1, 198 : An unknown person, who called himself Iskrzyoki
[flinty, from iskra» spark, says Grimm; there is also a Slav, iskri—near, iskrenny
«. neighbour, friendly] came and offered his services to a man of noble family.
The agreement was drawn up, and even signed, when the master observed that Isk-
rzyoki had horse's feet, and gave him notice of withdrawal. But the servant stood
on his righta, and declared his intention of serving his master whether he would
or no. He lived invisible by the fireplace, did all the tasks assigned him, and by
degrees they got used to him ; but at last the lady pressed her husband to move,
and he arranged to take another estate. The family all set out from the mansion,
and had got through the better part of the way, when, the log-road being out of
repair, the carriage threatens to upset, and the lady cries out in alarm. Suddenly
a voice from the back of the carriage calls out : Never fear, my masters! Iskrzyoki
is with you (nie b6j si$, pani ; Iskrzyoki z wami). The * masters • then perceiving
that they could not shake him off, turned back to their old house, and lived at
peace with the servant until his term expired. [English readers will remember

Tennyson's • Yes, we're flitting, says the ghost.'] The alraun or gallow$-man-

nikin in Deutsche sagen nos. «8. 84 is not properly a kobold, but a semi-diabolic
being carved out of a root, and so diminutive that he can be kept in a glass ; like
an idol, he has to be bathed and nursed. In one thing however he resembles the
home-sprite, that he will not leave his owner, and even when thrown away he
always comes back again, unless indeed he be sold [orig. ' bought '] for less than
he cost. The last purchaser has to keep him. Simplioiss. 2, 184. 203. Conf.
Sehm. 3, 96-7. [Home-sprites can be bought and sold, but the third buyer must
keep him, Miffienhoff p. 322. With ref. to the « idol (gotze) ' : As the figure of the
child Jesus has its shirt washed (Sommer, pp. 38. 173), so the heekmSnnchen must
be dressed up anew at a certain time every year, 10 Ehen, p. 235. — Extr. from

SuPPIj.j

* To escape the futterm&nnohen, a farmer built a new house, but the day before
he moved, he spied the f . dipping his grey coat in the brook : * My little coat here
I swill and souse, To-morrow we move to a fine new house.' Borner's Orlagau,
p. 246. Whoever has the kobold must not wash or comb himself (Sommer p. 171.
MfUlenh. 209) ; so in the ease of the devil, oh. XXXIIL— Extr. from Suppl.



Digitized by



Google



514 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

(p. 507), likewise the folet in Marie de Fr. 2, 140, who grants
three wishes (oremens). And the captive marmennill (p. 434),
or the sea- wife, does the same.

The unfriendly, racketing and tormenting spirits who take pos-
session of a house, are distinguished from the friendly and good-
natured by their commonly forming a whole gang, who disturb
the householder's rest with their riot and clatter, and throw stones
from the roof at passers by. A French comedy of the 16th
century, ' Les Bsprits/ l represents goblins racketing in a house,
singing and playing at night, and aiming tiles at passers by in
the daytime ; they are fond of fire, but make a violent uproar
every time the master spits. 8 In Gervase of Tilbury, cap. 18,
the folleti also pelt with stones, and this of stone-throwing is
what we shall meet with in quite early stories of devils; al-
together the racketing sprites have in this respect more of the
devil or spectre in them than of the elf : it is a darkening and
distortion of their original nature in accordance with Christian
sentiment.

So it becomes clear, at last, how the once familiar and faith-
ful friend of the family under heathenism has gradually sunk
into a bugbear or a taunt to children : a lot which he shares with
goddesses and gods of old. As with Holle and Berhte, so people
are threatened with the Lamia, the Omacmica, the manducus and
goblin (pp. 500. 507) : ' le gobelin vous mangera, le gobelin
vous attrapera ! ' Little butzel no more, but a frightful butze-
mann or katzenveit, in mask (strawbeard) or with sooty visage
he scares (like the roggenmuhme, p. 477). And it is worth
remarking how, in some districts at least, JcneclU Buprecht, Jcnecht
Nicolas, appear at Christmas-time not by themselves, but in



1 Comedies faceoieuses de Pierre de l'Arivey, ehampenois, Lyon 1597. Bouen,
1611, p. 242 seq.

' Legend* aurea, cap. 177 : Hujus Ludovioi tempore, anno Domini 856, at in
qnadam chronica habetur, in paroohia Maguntina malignus spiritut parietes domo-
rum quasi mallei* puUando et manifesto loqnendo et disoordias Beminando adeo horn-
inis inf estabat, nt quocumque intrasset, statim ilia domut exurereter. Presbyteris
antem tetanias agentibus et aquam benedictam spargentibus inimicos lapides jaeU
abat et multos cruentabat. Tandem aliquando oonquiescens confessos est se, qnando
aqua spargebatur, sub eapa talis tacerdotit quasi familiarU $ui latoisse, aoousana
earn quod earn filia proouratoris in peooatom lapsus fuerit. [This incident, said to
have occurred at Capmunti (Kembden) near Bingen, is derived from Hudolfi Ful-
densifl Annal. ann. 858, in Pertz 1, 872, where further details are given. — Extr.
from Sufpu



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOME-SPRITE. 515

attendance on the real gift-giver, the infant Christ or dame
Berhta : while these dole oat their favours, those come on with
rod and sack, threatening to thrash disobedient children, to
throw them into the water, to puff their eyes ont (Bockenphilos.
6, 353). Their pranks, their roughness, act as foil to the gracious
higher being from whom the gifts proceed; they are almost as
essential to the festival as Jackpudding to our old comedy. I
can well imagine that even in heathen times the divinity, whose
appearing heralded a happy time, had at his side some merry elf
or dwarf as his attendant embodying to the vulgar eye the bless-
ings that he brought. 1 Strongly in favour of this view are the
North Franconian names Hullepopel (Popowitsch 522), Hollepeter
(Schm. 2, 174), the Bavarian Semper, of whom they say he cuts
naughty children's bodies open and stuffs them with pebbles
(Schm. 3, 12. 250), exactly after the manner of Holla and Berhta
(p. 273)*; and consider faithful Eckart, who escorts Holla.
In Christian times they would at first choose some saint to
accompany the infant Christ or the mother of God in their dis-
tribution of boons, but the saint would imperceptibly degenerate
into the old goblin again, but now a coarser one. The Christmas
plays sometimes present the Saviour with His usual attendant
Peter, or else with Niclas, at other times however Mary with
Gabriel, or with her aged Joseph, who, disguised as a peasant,
acts the part of knecht Buprecht. Nicolaus again has converted
himself into a ' man Clobes ' or Rupert ; as a rule, it is true,
there is still a Niclas, a saintly bishop and benevolent being,
distinct from the ' man ' who scares children ; but the characters
get mixed, and Globes by himself acts the 'man' (Tobler 105 b ,
106»); the Austrian Grampus (Hofer 1, 313. Schm. 2, 110),
Krampus, Krambas, is possibly for Hieronymus, but how to ex-
plain the Swiss Schmutzli (Staid. 2, 337) I do not rightly know,
perhaps simply from his smutty sooty aspect ? Instead of Grampus
there is also in Styria a Barthel (pointing to Berhta, or Bartho-
lomew f) Schmutzbartel s and Klaubauf, who rattles, rackets, and

1 Heinrich and Ruprecht were onoe common names for serving-men, as Hans
and Glaus are now.

* Zember about Eger in German Bohemia (Popowitsch 523) ; at the same time
the Lauaita idol Sompar (supra, p. 71 note) is worth considering.

* The phrase ' he knows where Barthel gets his must,' notwithstanding other
explanations, may refer to a home-sprite well-known in the cellar.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



516 WIGHTS AND ELVES.

throws uats (Denis, Lesefr. 1, 131 ; see Suppl.). Farther, on this
point I attach weight to the Swedish jullekar, Dan. jvleleger,
yule-lays, undoubtedly of heathen origin, which at Christmas-
time present Christ and certain saints, but replace our man
Ruprecht by a julbock, julebuk, i.e. a manservant disguised as
a goat. 1 This interweaving of jackpudding, fool, Klobes and
Rtipel, of the yule-buck and at last of the devil himself, into the
rude popular drama of Our Mid. Ages, shows what an essential
part of it the wihtels and tatermans formerly were, how ineradi-
cable the elvish figures and characters of heathenism. The
Greeks enlivened the seriousness of their tragedy by satyrio
plays, in which e.g. Proteus, similar to our sea-sprite (p. 484),
played a leading part. 8

There is yet another way in which a former connexion between
gods, wise* women and these genii now and then comes to light.
The elf who showers his darts is servant or assistant to the high
god of thunder, the cunning dwarf has forged his thunderbolts
for him ; like gods, they wear divine helmets of invisibility, and
the home-sprite has his feet miraculously shod as well; water-
sprites can assume the shape of fishes and sea-horses, and home-
sprites those of cats. The weeping nix, the laughing goblin are
alike initiated in the mystery of magic tones, and will even un-
veil it to men that sacrifice. An ancient worship of genii and
daemons is proved by sacrifices offered to spirits of the mountain,
the wood, the lake, the house. Goblins, we may presume, ac-
companied the manifestation of certain deities among men, as
Wuotan and Holda, and both of these deities are also connected
with watersprites and swan-maids. Foreknowledge of the future,
the gift of prophecy, was proper to most genii ; their inexhaust-
ible cheerfulness stands between the sublime serenity of gods



1 Bead Holberg's Julestue, and look upjulvdtten in Finn Magn. lexicon, p. 326
note.

3 They frightened children with sooty Cyclops, and aoo. to Callimaohns (Hymn
to Diana 66-71), Hermes, like our Ruprecht blackened with soot, struck terror
into disobedient daughters even of gods :

aXV ore Kovpdw ns &TCi0ta ftiyrcpi t«Jx<k,
fi^TTjp fity KVK\wira$ £$ M xatSl KaXiorpei
"Apyrjv ij Xrep&mjv 6 dc 5upiaro$>& fivx&roio
(pxercu 'E/o/ttehpf, (nrofarj Kexjnjfi^vos aJ0p,
airrlKa. rty KOtjpTjr fiopufoaertu' if & Tetcofoijt
Svwei Area koKtovs dtfibni M #de<ri xetpai.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SPRITES. GENII. 517

and the solemn fates of mortals. They feel themselves drawn to
men, and repelled by them. The downfall of heathenism must
have wrought great changes in the old-established relationship :
the spirits acquired a new and terrible aspect as ministers and
messengers of Satan. 1 Some put on a more savage look that
savours of the giant, especially the woodsprites. Grendel's
nature borders on those of giants and gods. Not so with the
females however : the wild women and female nixes drop into
the class of fortune-telling swan-maids who are of human kind,
while the elfins that present the drinking-horn melt into the
circle of valkyrs ; and here again we recognise a general beauty
pervading all the female spirits, and raising them above the
males, whose characteristics come out more individually. In
wichtels, dwarfs and goblins, especially in that children's bugbear
the man Ruprecht, there shews itself a comic faculty derived
from the oldest times.

Through the whole existence of elves, nixes, and goblins there
runs a low under-current of the unsatisfied, disconsolate : they
do not rightly know how to turn their glorious gifts to account,
they always require to lean upon men. Not only do they seek
to renovate their race by intermarriage with mankind, they also
need the counsel and assistance of men in their affairs. Though
acquainted in a higher degree than men with the hidden virtues
of stones and herbs, they yet invoke human aid for their sick
and their women in labour (pp. 457. 492), they borrow men's
vessels for baking and brewing (p. 454 n.), they even celebrate
their weddings and hightides in the halls of men. Hence too
their doubting whether they can be partakers of salvation, and
their unconcealed grief when a negative answer is given.

1 Bruder Bauaeh (friar Rush) a Ten table goblin, is without hesitation [described
as being] despatched from hell among the monks ; his name is to be derived from
rose— fuligo (as kohlrausoh was formerly spelt kolrnss).



Digitized by



Google



CHAPTER XVIII.

GIANTS.

The relation in which giants stand to dwarfs and men has
been touched upon in p. 449. By so much of bodily size and
strength as man surpasses the elf or dwarf, he falls short of the
giant; on the other hand, the race of elves and dwarfs has a
livelier intellect and subtler sense than that of men, and in these
points again the giants fall far below mankind. The rude coarse-
grained giant nature is defiant in its sense of material power and
might, the sly shy dwarf is conscious of his mental superiority.
To man has been allotted a happy mean, which raises him above
the giant's intractableness and the dwarf's cunning, and betwixt
the two he stands victorious. The giant both does and suffers
wrong, because in his stupidity he undervalues everybody, and
even falls foul of the gods ; 1 the outcast dwarf, who does discern
good and evil, lacks the right courage for free and independent
action. In order of creation, the giant as the sensuous element
came first, next followed the spiritual element of elvish nature,
and lastly the human race restored the equilibrium. The abrupt-
ness of these gradations is a good deal softened down by the
giants or dwarfs forming frequent alliances with men, affording
clear evidence that ancient fiction does not favour steep contrasts :
the very earliest giants have sense and judgment ascribed to
them (see Suppl.).

On one side we see giants forming a close tie of brotherhood
or servile dependence with human heroes, on the other side
shading off into the type of schrats and woodsprites.

There is a number of ancient terms corresponding in sense to
our present word riese (giant). 8

1 Not a trace of the finer features of gods is to be seen in the Titans. 0. Mailer's
Proleg. 873.

9 Some are mere circumlocutions fa counterpart to those quoted on p. 450) : der
ffrdze man, Er. 6880. der michel man, Er. 6475. der michel knabe, Iw. 6066.

as



Digitized by VjOOQIC



EZAN, EOTEN. 519

The oldest and most comprehensive term in Norse is iotunn,
pi. iotnar (not jotunn, jotnar) ; it is backed up by an AS. eoten,
pi. eotenas, Beow. 223 (eotena cyn, 836. eotonisc, 5953), or
eten, Lye sab v.; OE. etin, ettin, Nares sab v.; Scot, ettyn,
eyttyn, Jamieson sab v. ; an OS. etan, eten can be inferred with
certainty from the name of a place in old docs., Etanasfeld,
Etenesfeld (campns gigantis), Wigand's Archiv i. 4, 85. Moser
nos. 2. 13. 18. 19. And what is more, the word mast have lived
on in later times, down to the latest, for I find the fern, eteninne
(giantess) preserved at least in norsery-tales. Laurenberg (ed.
Lappenberg, p. 26) 1 has ' de olde eteninne/ and another Rostock
book of the beginning of the 18th century 2 f die alte eteninne 9 ;
I should like to know whence Adelung sab v. mammel gets the
fact, that in Westphalia a certain terrible female with whom they
frighten children is called etheninne ? I have no doubt it is
correct. The Saxon etan warrants as in conjecturing an OHG.
ezan, ezzan, a Goth. Uans, having for root the ON. eta, AS. etan,
OHG. ezzan, Goth, i'tan (edere), and for meaning edo (gen.
edonis), mandncas, iroXv^ayo?, devonrer. An AS. poem in Cod.
exon. 425, 26 says: 'ic mesan m»g meahtelicor and efn etan
ealdam fyrre/ I can chew and eat more mightily than an old
giant. Now the question arises, whether another word, which
wants the suffix -n, has any business here, namely the ON. iotr*
AS. eot, now only to be found in the compound Forniotr, Forneot
(p. 240) and the national name Iotar, the Jutes? One thing
that makes for it is the same omission of -n in the Swed. jatte
(gigas), Dan. jette, pi. jetter; then, taking iotnar as = iotar
(Goth. Stands *=itds), we should be justified in explaining the
names Jotar, Jotland by an earlier (gigantic ?) race whom the
advancing Teutons crowded oat of the peninsula. 4 In that
case we might expect an OS. et, etes, an OHG. ez, ezes, with the



> Johann Laurenberg, a Bostock man, b. 1590, d. 1658. The first ed. of his poem
appeared 1652.

* Ern. Joaoh. Westphal, De consnetudine ex sacco et libro, Rost. 1726. 8. pp.
224-5 ; the catalogue there given of old stories of women is copied in Joh. Pet.
Schmidt's Fastelabendssamlmigen, Bostook (1742) 4. reap. 1752, p. 22, bat here
incorrectly * von der Arden Inn ' instead of Westphal's 'von der alten Eten Inne. y

9 For idtr, as miolk for midlk, see Gramm. 1, 451. 482.

4 Beda 1, 15 has Juti, which the AS. version mistakenly renders Ge&tas (the ON .
Gantar), though at 4, 16 it more correctly gives Eotaland for Jntorom terra, and
the Sax. Ghron. (Ingr. p. 14) has Iotnm for Iutis, Intnacynn for Iutornm gens.

VOL. II. G



Digitized by



Google



520 GIANTS.

meaning of giant. 1 Possibly there was beside iotunn, also an
ON. iotull, OHG. ezal (edax) ; 8 that would explain the present
Norwegian term for giant : jotul, jutul, Hallager 52. Faye 7
(see Suppl.). 8

Our second term is likewise one that suggests the name of
a nation. The ON. Jmrs seems not essentially different from
iotunn ; in Sn. 6 Tmir is called ancestor of all the hrlmjmrses, in
Saem. 118* all the iotnar are traced up to him. In particular
songs or connexions the preference is given to one or the other
appellative : thus in the enumeration of dialects in the AlvismcLl
the giants are always iotnar, never Jmrsar, and there is no
Thursaheimr in use for Iotunheirar, Iotnaheimr; but Thrymr,
though dwelling in Iotnaheimr, is nevertheless called Jmrsa
drdttinn (Saem. 70. 71) and not iotna drdttinn, but he summons
the iotnar (73 a ), and is a iotunn himself (74 a ). In S»m. 85 b
both iotnar and hrinijmrsar are summoned one after the other,
so there must be some nice distinction between the two, which
here I would look for in the prefix hrim: only hrimjmrsar, no
hrlmidtnar, are ever met with ; of this hrimjmrs an explanation
will be attempted further on. Instead of ]*urs there often occurs,
especially at a later stage of the language, the assimilated form
J>us8, particularly in the pi. }?ussar, hrimjmssar ; a daemonic being
in the later sagas is called Thusselin (Miiller's Sagab. 1, 367-8),
nay, the Danish tongue has retained the assimilation in its tosse,
clumsy giant, dolt (a folk-song has tossegrefve) , 4 and a Norwegian
daemon bears the name tuxsel. The ON. Jmrs, like several names
of gods, is likewise the title of a rune-letter, the same that the
Anglo- Saxons called j>orn (conf. 'J?urs rista/ Saam. 86 a ) : a
notable deviation, as the AS. tongue by no means lacks the
word ; in Beow. 846 we find Jryrs, and also in the menology in



1 Can the witch Jettha of the Palatinate (p. 96 note) be a corruption of Eta, Eza?
Anyhow the Jettenbuhel (Jettha ooIUh) reminds us of the Bavarian Jettenberg
(Mon. boica 2, 219, ann. 1817), and Mount Jet ten in Reinbote's Georg 1717, where
it is misprinted Setten. Near Willingshausen in Hesse is another Jettenberg, see
W. Grimm On the runes, p. 271.

* The ruined Weissenstein, by Werda near Marburg, was ace. to popular legend
the abode of a giant named Essel (ezzal?), and the meadow where at the fall of his
castle he sank its golden door in^the R. Lahn, is still called Rssehwerd.

3 Isidore's glosses render the Gallic name of a people ambro by devorator, which
agrees with the OHG. transl. inane zo, man-eater (Graff 1, 528), the well-known
MHG. manezze.

* So the Dan. fos, fossen, for the ON. fors.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



DUBS, THUBS. 521

Hickes (Gramm. AS. p. 207) : ( J>yrs sceal on fenne gewunian/
and elsewhere J>yrs y pi. J>yrsas, renders the Lat. cyclops, orcus.
The passage already given from the Cod. exon. 425, 28 has pyrre
with the 8 assimilated, as in irre for irse. And we find an
Engl, thurst surviving in hobthurst (woodsprite), conf. hobgoblin
p. 502 [hob o' t' hurst ?] The OHG. form ought to be durs, pi.
dursa, or duris, gen. durises, which last does occur in a gloss for
the Lat. Dis, Ditis (Schm. 1, 458), and another gloss more Low
Germ, gives thuris for orcus (Fr. ogre); yet Notker ps. 17, 32
spells it turs (daemonium), pi. tursa, and MHG. has turse, gen.
tursen (Aw. 3, 179), perhaps turse, tursen (as in Massm. denkm.
109 tursen rhymes kiirsen), and even turste, gen. tiirsten (MS. 2,
205*) ; on the other hand, Albr. Tit. 24, 47 has ' spil von einem
dursen 9 (Halm 3254 tursen) = play of a d., from which passage we
gather that torse-shows as well as wihtel-shows (p. 441n.) were
exhibited for pastime : Ls. 3, 564 says, alluding to a well-known
fable, ' des kunt der diirsch, und sprichet schuo ! ' the d. knows
that, etc., ^here the notion of satyr and wild man (p. 482)
predominates. The Latin poem of Wilten monastery in Tyrol,
which relates the story of the giant Haimo, names another giant
Thyrsis, making a proper name of the word :

Forte habitabat in his alius truculentior oris

Cyclops, qui dictus nomine Thyrsis erat,
Thyrsis erat dictus, Seveldia rura colebat. 1

The name of a place Tursinriut, Tursenriut (Doc. of 1218-9 in
Lang's Beg. 2, 88. 94) 2 contains our word unmistakably, and so
to my thinking does the earlier Tuzzinwanc near Neugart, stand-
ing for Tussinwahc, Tursinwanc (campus gigantis), the present
Dussnang. Nor does it seem much more hazardous to explain
Strabo's Sovavekda (7, 1. Tzsch. 2, 328) by Thurshilda, Thuss-
hilda, Thursinhilda, 8 though 1 cannot produce an ON. Thurshildr.
In Switzerland to this day dilrst is the Wild Hunter (St. 1, 329),
on the Salzburg Alp dusel is a night-spirit (Muchar's Gastein,
p. 145), and in Lower Germany dros or drost is devil, dolt, giant. 4

1 Mone's Unterouehnng, pp. 288-9.

2 Now Tinohenreit, Tirschengereith, Schmeller's birthplace in the Up. Pala-
tinate, Schm. 1, 458. Bo Turachenwald, Thyrsentritt, Turdtwinkel, et .— Suppl.

» Conf. Pharafldis, Verelde, p. 284-5 ; Grimild for Grimhild.

4 Brem. wb. 1, 257. Kichey sab v. druus, Sohutze sub v. drost, Strodtmann sub

Digitized by VjOOQIC



522 GIANTS.

Whether Thorsholt, Thosholt, the name of a place in Oldenburg,
is connected with Jmrs, I cannot tell. — In Gothic the word
would have to be J>aurs, pi. J>arfrs6s (or j?atirsis, pi. fttursjds?
)?aursus, )>aiirsjus f J>atirsja, J^adrsjans ?) ; and of these forms the
derivation is not far to seek. The Goth. )>aiirsus means dry,
J>aiirsjan to thirst, J>aiirstei thirst; )>alirsus, ^atirsis becomes in
OHG. durri for dursi (as airzis becomes irri for irsi), while the
noun durst (thirst) retains the s, and so does our durs (giant)
and the ON. Jmrs by the side of the adjective Jmrr (dry). So that
J>aurs, Jmrs, durs signify either fond of wine, thirsty, or drunken,
a meaning which makes a perfect pair with that we fished out of
itans, iotunn. The two words for giant express an inordinate
desire for eating and drinking, precisely what exhibits itself in
the Homeric cyclop. Herakles too is described as edax and
bibax, e.g. in Euripides's Alcestis ; and the ON. giant Suttungr
(Ssem. 23. Sn. 84) apparently stands for Suptungr (Finn Magn.
p. 738), where we must presuppose a noun supt = sopi, a sup
or draught.

Now, as the Jutes, a Teutonic race, retained the name of the
former inhabitants whom they had expelled, 1 these latter being
the real Iotnar or Itan6s; so may the J>ursar, durs&, in their mythic
aspect [as giants] be connected with a distant race which at a
very early date had migrated into Italy. I have already hinted
(p. 25) at a possible connexion of the J>aiirs6s with the Tvpcrrjvot,
Tvpfavol, Tusci, Etrusci: the consonant-changes are the very
thing to be expected, and even the assimilations and the
transposition of the r are all found reproduced. Niebuhr makes
Tyrrhenians distinct from Etruscans, but in my opinion wrongly ;
as for the 0vp<ro$ carried in the Bacchic procession, it has no claim
to be brought in at all (see Suppl.).

There is even a third mode of designating giants in which we
likewise detect a national name. Lower Germany, Westphalia
above all, uses hxlne in the sense of giant ; the word prevails in
all the popular traditions of the Weser region, and extends as far
as the Groningen country and R. Drenthe ; giants 9 hills, giants'

t. droost : ' dat di de droost sla ! ' may the d. smite thee ; in the Altmark : * det di
de druse hal (fetch) ! ' and elsewhere * de dros in de helle.' At the same time the
HG. druos, truos (plague, Main) is worth considering.

1 A case that often occurs ; thus the Bavarians, a Teutonic people, take their
name from the Celtic Boii. [And the present Bulgarians, a Slav raoe, etc.]



Digitized by VjOOQIC



hun. 523

tombs are called hunebedde, hunebedden, bed being commonly
used for grave, the resting-place of the dead. ' Grot as en hune '
expresses gigantic stature. Schiiren's Teutonista couples ' rese '
with huyne. Even H.Germ. writers of the 16th-17th centuries,
though seldomer, use heune; Mathesius: 'Goliath der grosse
heune ; ' the Yocab. of 1482 spells hewne. Hans Sachs 1, 453*
uses heunisch (like entisch) for fierce, malignant. But the word
goes back to MHG. too; Herbort 1381 : 'grdz alsam ein kUne/
rhym. ' mit starkem gelune ; ' Trist. 4034 : * an geliden und an
geliune gewahsen als ein hiune.' 1 In OHG. writings I do not find
the word in this sense at all. But MHG. has also a Hiune (gen.
Hiunen) signifying, without any reference to bodily size, a Hun-
garian, in the Nibelunge a subject of Etzel or Attila (1110, 4.
1123,4. 1271,3. 1824,3. 1829,1. 1831,1. 1832, 1), which
in Lat. writings of the Mid. Ages is called Hunnus, more exactly
Eunu8, Chunus. To this Hiune would correspond an OHG.
Hunio ; I have only met with the strong form Hun, pi. Hunt,
gen. Hunio, Huneo,* with which many names of places are com-
pounded, e.g. Huniofeld, a little town in Fulda bishopric, now
Hunfeld; also names of men, Hunolt, Hunperht (Humprecht), Hun-
rtt, Althun, Polchun, etc. The AS. Huna cyning (Beda 1, 13)
requires a sing. Hun; but to the ON. nom. pi. Hunar there is said
to belong a weak sing. Huni (Gl. Edd. havn. 2, 881). It is plain
those Huni have a sense that shifts about pretty much with time
and place, now standing for Pannonians, then for Avars, then
again for Vandals and Slavs, always for a nation brought into
frequent contact with Germany by proximity and wars. The
Hiunenlant of the 13th century (Nib. 1106, 3. 1122, 3) cannot
possibly be the Hunaland which the Eddie lays regard as SigurS's
home (Deutsche heldens. 6. 9). At the time when proper names
like Hunr&t, Hunperht first arose, there could hardly as yet be
any thought of an actual neighbouring nation like Pannonians
or Wends ; but even in the earliest times there might circulate
talk and, tale of a primitive mythic race supposed to inhabit some
uncertain 1 region, much the same as Iotnar and Thursar. I incline



1 Wolfdietr. 661 has, for giant, heme rhym. sehoane, hut only in the place of the
ancient caoura, so that the older reading was most likely hiune.

> In Hildeb. lied < Huneo truhtin (lord of Huns), and * alter Hun ; * Diut. 2, 182
Hunt (Pannonii) ; 2, 863 b Huni for Han (Hunus) ; 2, 870 Hunt (Vandali).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



524 GIANTS.

therefore to guess, that the sense of ' giant/ which we cannot
detect in Hftn till the 13th century, mnst nevertheless have lain
in it long before : it is by such doable meaning that Hadubrant's
exclamation 'altfirHAn!' first acquires significance. When
Gotfried nsed hiune for giant, he must have known that Hiune
at that time also meant a Hungarian; and as little does the
distinctness of the nationality rendered Huni in OHG. glosses
exclude the simultaneous existence of a mythic meaning of the
word. It may have been vivider or fainter in this place or that :
thus, the ON. hunar is never convertible with iotnar and jmrsar.
I will not touch upon the root here (conf. p. 529 note), but only
remark that one Eddie name for the bear is hunn, Sn. 179. 222%
and ace. to Biorn hun and hunbiorn = catulus ursinus (see Suppl.) •
One AS. term for giant is ent, pi. entas : Mlhed in his Orosius
p. 48 renders Hercules gigas by ' Ercol se ent .' The poets like
to use the word, where ancient buildings and works are spoken
of: ' enta geweorc, enta sargeweorc (early work of giants), eald
enta geweorc/ Beow. 3356. 5431. 5554. Cod. exon. 291, 24.
476, 2. So the adj. : ' entisc helm/ Beow. 5955 ; Lipsius's glosses
also give eintisc avitus, what dates from the giants' days of yore.
Our OHG. entisc antiquus does not agree with this in consonant-
gradation [t should be z] ; it may have been suggested by the
Latin word, perhaps also by the notion of enti (end) ; another
form is antrisc antiquus (Graff 1, 387), and I would rather asso-
ciate it with the Eddie ' inn aldni iotunn' (grand&vus gigas) , Seem.
23*46 b 84 b 189 b . The Bavarian patois has an intensive prefix
enz, enzio (Schmeller , 188), but this may have grown out of the
gen. of end, ent (Schm. 1, 77) ; or may we take this ent- itself in
the sense of monstrous, gigantic, and as an exception to the law
of consonant-change? They say both enterisch (Schm. 1, 77) and
enzerisch for monstrous, extraordinary. And was the Enzenberc,
MS. 2, 10 b a giant's hill f l and is the same root contained in
the proper names Anzo, Enzo, Enzinchint (Pez, thes. iii. 8, 689 c ),
Enzawip (Meichelb. 1233. 1305), Enzemun (Ben. 325) ? If
Hflni alluded to Wends and Slavs, we may be allowed tfi identify
entas with the ancient Antes ; as for the Indians, whom Mone

i The present Inselberg near Sohmalkalden ; old docs., however, spell it Emise-
berc, named apparently from the brook Emise, Emse, whioh rises on it. Later
forms are Enzelberg, Einzelberg, Einselberg.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



EST. GIGANT. EISO. 525

(Adz. 1836, 1. 2) would bring in, they may stay outside, for in
OHO. itself antisc, entisc (antiquus) is distinct from indisc (In-
dicus), Graff 1, 385-6 ; and see Suppl.

The AS. poets use also the Greek, Latin, 1 and Romance appel-
lative gig ant y pi. gigantas, Beow. 225. giganta cyn 3379. gigant-
maacg, Caedm. 76, 36; conf. Ital. Span, gig ante, Prov. jayan
(Ferab. 4232), O.Fr. gaiant (Ogier 8092. 8101), Fr. geant, Eng.
giant; also OHG. gigant (0. iv. 12, 61), MHG. gigante die
mdren (Diut. 3, 60), a M. Nethl. gigant. The ON. word which is
usually compared with this, but which wants the nt, and is only
used of giantesses, seems to me unconnected : fern, gygr, gen.
g^gjar, Seem. 39, Sn. 66. 68; a Swed. folk-song still has 'den
leda gijger/ Arvidsson, 2, 302. It is wanting in the other Teut.
dialects, but if translated into Gothic it would be giugi or giugja;
I trace it to the root giugan, and connect it with the words quoted
in my Gramm. 2, 50 no. 536 (see Suppl.) .

Our riese is the OHG. rid (O. iv. 12, 61) or riso (N. ps. 32, 16),
MHG. rise, MLG. rese (En. 7096), ON. risi (the elder Edda has
it only in Grdttas. 12), Swed. rese, Dan. rise, M. Nethl. rese, rose
(Huyd. op St. 3, 33. 306), now reus. To these would correspond
a Gothic vrisa, as may be gathered from the OS. form wriso which
I confidently infer from the adj. wrisilic giganteus, Hel. 42, 5.
The Anglo-Saxons seem to have had no analogous wrisa, as they
confine themselves to )>yrs, gigant [and ent] . The root of vrisa
is unknown to me ; it cannot belong to reisan surgere, therefore
the OHG. riso does not mean elatus, superbus, excelsus. 3

Again, lubbe, lubbe seems in parts of Lower Saxony to mean

1 Strange that the Latin language has no word of its own for giant, but must
borrow the Greek gigas, titan, cyclops ; yet Italy has indigenous folk-tales of Cam-
panian giants.

3 The Biblical Tiew adopted in the Mid. Ages traced the giants to Cain, or at least
to mixture with his family : ' gig antes y quales propter iracundiam Dei per filios Seth
de jHiafau Cain narrat scriptura procreates,' Pertz 2, 755. For in Genesis 6, 4 it
is said : • gigantes autem erant super terram in diebus illis ; postquam enim ingressi
sunt filii Dei ad Alias hominum, illffique genuerunt, isti sunt potentes a seculo viri
famosi.' The same Tiew appears in Caedm. 76. 77 ; in Beow. 213 GrendePs descent
is derived from Caines cynne, on whom God avenged the murder of Abel : thence
sprang all the untydras (neg. of tudor proles, therefore misbirths, evil brood), eotenas,
yife y oreneas and gigantas that war against God. This partly fits in with some
heathen notions of cosmogony. <

8 Mono in Anz. 8, 183, takes write for j rise, and makes Frisians and Persians out
of it. [What of * writhe, wris-t, wrest, wrestle,' (as wit, wis-t becomes wise) ? Or
Slav, vred-fti, to hurt, AS. wrefle T A Buss, word for giant is verzflo, supposed to
be from verg-ati, to throw.]



Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS.

unwieldy giant, lubbenstones are shown on the Corneliasberg
near Helmstadt, and lubbe ace. to the Brem. wb. 3, 92 means a
slow clumsy fellow; it is the Engl, lubber, lobber, and Michel
Beham's liipel (Mone's Anz. 1835, 450 b ), conf. ON. lubbi (hir-
sutus). To this add a remarkable document by Bp. Gebhard of
Halberstadt, bewailing as late as 1462 the heathenish worship of
a being whom men named den guden lubben, to whom they offered
bones of animals on a hill by Schochwitz in the county of Mans-
field. Not only have such ancient bone-heaps been discovered on
the Lupberg there (conf. the Augsburg perleich, p. 294), but in
the church of the neighbouring Mullersdorf an idol image let into
the wall, which tradition says was brought there from the Lup-
berg (see Suppl.). 1

The ON. has several words for giantess, beside the gygr men-
tioned above: skass, neut., Seem. 144 b 154 b , and skessa, fern.;
griffr f., mella f.; gift f., Seem. 143 b , Norweg. jyvri (Hallag. 53)
or gyvri, gurri, djurre (Faye 7. 9. 10. 12). This gifr seems to
mean saucy, defiant, greedy.

Troll neut., gen. trolls (S»m. 6*), Swed. troll, Dan. trold,-
though often used of giants, is yet a more comprehensive term,
including other spirits and beings possessed of magic power, and
equivalent to our monster, spectre, unearthly being. By trold
the Danish folk-tales habitually understand beings of the elf kind.
The form suggests a Gothic trallu ; does our getralle in Benner
1365, 'der gebftre ein getralle/ rhym. 'alle/ mean the same
thing ? (see Suppl.).

Giant is in Lith. milzinas, milzinis, Lett, mils is, milsenis ; but
it would be overbold to connect with it German names of places,
Milize (Trad. fuld. 2, 40), Milsenburg, Melsungen. The Slovak
obor, Boh. obr, 0. Pol. obrzym,* Pol. olbrzym, is unknown to the
South Slavs, and seems to be simply Avarus, Abarus. Nestor
calls the Avars Obri (ed. Schlozer 2, 112-7). The 'Gr®cus
Avar ' again in the legend of Zisa (p. 292-5) is a giant. Now,

» None mitth. des thiir. sachs. vereins 8, 180-6. 5, 2. 110-182. 6, 87-8. The
picture, however, contains nothing giant-like, but rather a goddess standing on a
wolf. Yet I remark, that a giant's tomb on Mt. Blanc is called * la tombe du ton
homme, de la bonne femmej an expression associated with the idea of a sacred vene-
rated man (supra, p. 89). Conf. also godgubbe used of Thdrr, p. 167, and godmor,
p. 430.

* Psalter of queen Margarets, Vienna 1834, p.l7 b : obrzim, the -im as in oyozim,
pielgrzym.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 527

as the Avari in the Mid. Ages are = Chuni, the words hftn and
obor alike spring out of the national names Hun and Avar. 1 To
the Slavs, Tchad signifies both Finn and giant, and the Buss.
ispolin (giant) might originally refer to the 'gens Spalorum' of
Joroandes; conf. Schafarik 1, 286. 310. So closely do the
names for giant agree with those of ancient nations : popular
belief magnified hostile warlike neighbours into giants, as it
diminished the weak and oppressed into dwarfs. The Sanskrit
rdhshasas can have nothing to do with our riese, nor with the
OHG. recchio, MH6. recke, a designation of human heroes (see
Suppl.).

We find plenty of proper names both of giants and giantesses
preserved in ON., some apparently significant; thus Hrungnir
suggests the Gothic hrugga (virga, rod, pole) and our runge
(Brem. wb. 3, 558) ; Herbort 1385 : 'grdz alsam ein runge/ Our
MHG. poems like giant's names to end in -olt } as Witolt, Fasolt,
Memerolt, etc.

A great stature, towering far above any human size, is ascribed
to all giants : stiff, unwieldy, they stand like hills, like tall trees.
According to the Mod. Greeks, they were as tall as poplars, and
if once they fell, they could not get up again [like Humpty
Dumpty]. The one eye of the Greek cyclops I nowhere find
imputed to our giants ; but like them * and the ancient gods,
(p. 322), they are pften provided with many hands and heads.
When this attribute is given to heroes, gigantic ones are meant,
as Heimo, Starkafcr, Asperian (p. 387). But Seem. 85 b expressly
calls a Jmrs firihofdudr, exactly as the MHG. Wahtelmrore names
a drihouptigen tursen (Massm. denkm. 109) : a remarkable in-
stance of agreement. In Saam. 35* appears a giant's son with
six heads, in 56* the many-headed band of giants is spoken of,
and in 53 a giantess with 900 heads. Brana's father has three
(invisible) heads, Fornald. sog. 3, 574, where also it is said : ' J>a

1 Schafarik explains obor by the Celtio ambro above (p. 520n.) ; but in that case
the Polish would have been %br.

* Briarens or Mgmon has a hundred arm (AraroTxeuw, E. 1, 402) and fifty
heads, Oeryon three heads and Hx handt ; in Hesiod's Theog. 160, Kottus, Gyges
and Briarens have one hundred arms and fifty heads. The giant in the Hebrew
story has only an additional finger or toe given to eaoh hand and foot : vir fnit
excelsus, qui senos in manibus pedibusqne habebat digitos, i.e. viginti qnatuor
(instead of the human twenty), 2 Sam. 21, 20. Bertheau's Israel, p. 143. O. Fr.
poems give the Saracen giant four arms, two noses, two chine, Ogier 9817.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



528 GIANTS.

fell margr (many a) tvihofffaffr iotunn.' Trolds witb 12 heads,
then with 5, 10, 15 occur in Norske event, nos. 3 and 24. In
Scotland too the story ' of the reyde eyttyn with the thre heydis '
was knowu (Complaynt, p. 98), and Lindsay's Dreme (ed. 1592,
p. 225) mentions the s history of reid etin. 9 The fairy-tale of
Red etin wi' three heads may now be read complete in Chambers, 1
pp. 56-58 ; but it does not explain whether the red colour in his
name refers to skin, hair or dress. A black complexion is not
attributed to giants, as it is to dwarfs (p. 444) and the devil,
though the half-black Hel (p. 312) was of giant kin. Hrungnir,
a giant in the Edda, has a head of stone (Seem. 76 b , Sn. 109),
another in the Fornald. sog. 3, 573 is called Iarnhaus, iron skull.
But giants as a rule appear well-shaped and symmetrical ; their
daughters are capable of the highest beceuty, e.g. GerSr, whose
gleaming arms, as she shuts the house-door, make air and water
shine again, Seem. 82*, Sn. 39 (see Suppl.).

In the giants as a whole, an untamed natural force has full
swing, entailing their excessive bodily size, their overbearing in-
solence, that is to say, abuse of corporal and mental power, and
finally sinking under its own weight. Hence the iotunn in the
Edda is called shrautgiarn (fastosus), Seem. 1 1 7 b ; sa inn dmdttki
(praepotens) 41 b 82 h ; storuSgi (magnanimus) 76 b ; J>rungm6Sgi
(superbus) 77*; hardrdSr (sabvus) 54* ; our derivation of the
words iotunn and Jmrs finds itself confirmed in poetic epithet and
graphic touch : hostmo&r iotunn (cibo gravatus), Seem. 56 b j ' olr
(ebrius) ertu Geirroftr, hefir J?u ofdruccit (overdrunk)' 47* (see
Suppl.).

From this it is an easy step, to impute to the giants a stupidity
contrasting with man's common sense and the shrewdness of the
dwarf. The ON. has 'ginna alia sem J>ussa 9 (decipere omnes
sicut thursos), Nialssaga p. 263. Dumm in our old speech was
mutus as well as hebes, and dumbr in ON. actually stands for
gigas; to which dumbi (dat.) the adj. pumbi (hebes, inconcinnus)
seems nearly related. A remarkable spell of the 11th cent, runs
thus : ' tumbo saz in berke mit tumbemo kinde in arme, tumb hiez
der berc, tumb hiez daz kint, der heilego tumbo versegene tisa
wunda ! ' i.e. dummy sat on hill with d. child in arm, d. was

i Popular rhymes, fireside stories, and amusements of Scotland, Edinb. 1842.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. "529

called the hill and d. the child, the holy d. bless this wound away
[the posture is that of Humpty Dnmpty] . This seems pointed
at a sluggish mountain-giant, and we shall see how folk-tales of
a later period name the giants dumme dutten ; the term lubbe,
lubbe likewise indicates their clumsy lubberly nature, and when
we nowadays call the devil dumm (stupid), a quondam giant is
really meant (see Suppl.). 1

Yet the Norse lays contain one feature favourable to the giants.
They stand as specimens of a fallen or falling race, which
with the strength combines also the innocence and wisdom of
the old world, an intelligence more objective and imparted at
creation than self-acquired. This half- regretful view of giants
prevails particularly in one of the finest poems of the Edda,
the EtymisqviSa. Etymir * is called forn iotunn (the old) 54 a , as
Uo\v<f>afMo<; in Theocr. 11,9 is apx&ios, and another giant, from
whom gods are descended, has actually the proper name Forniotr,
Forneot (p. 240), agreeing with the ' aldinn iotunn ' quoted on
p. 524; then we have the epithet hundviss (multiscius) applied
52 b , as elsewhere to LoSinn (Srom. 145*), to GeirroSr (Sn. 113),
and to StarkaSr (Fornald. sog. 3, 15. 32). 8 Oegir is called
fiolkunnigr (much-knowing), S»m. 79, and barnteitr (happy as a
child) 52 a ; while Thrymr sits fastening golden collars on his
hounds, and stroking his horses' manes, Srom. 70 b . And also the
faithfulness of giants is renowned, like that of the men of old :
troUtryggr (fidus instar gigantis), Egilss. p. 610, and in the Faroe
dialect ( trur sum trddlir,' true as giants (Lyngbye, p., 496) .*
Another lay is founded on the conversation that Oftinn himself
is anxious to hold with a giant of great sense on matters of
antiquity (& fornom stof um) : Vatyr&ftnir again is called ' inn
alsvinni iotunn,' 30* 35 b ; Orgelmir and Bergelmir r sa inn fro&i

1 The familiar fable of tbe devil being taken in by a peasant in halving the crop
between them, is in the Danish myth related of a trold (Thiele 4, 122), see Chap.

xxxm.

* ON. hum is crepusculum, hdma vesperascere, hfm& dormiturire ; is Ifymir the
sluggish, sleepy ? OHG. Hiumi t How if the MHG. hiune came from an OHG.
hinxni? An m is often attenuated into n, as OHG. sliumi, sniumi (celer), MHO.
sliune, sliunic, our sohleunig. That would explain why there is no trace of the
word hiune in ON. ; it would also be fatal to any real connexion with the national
name Hun.

* Hund (centum) intensifies the meaning : hundmargr (permultus), hundgamall
(old as the hills).

4 We find the same faithfulness in the giant of Christian legend, St. Christopher,
and in that of Carolingian legend, Ferabrcu.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



530 GIANTS.

iotunn/ SaBin. 35*» b ; Fenja and Menja are framvisar (Gr6ttas. 1,
18). When the verb j>reya, usually meaning exspectare, desi-
derare, is employed as characteristic of giants (S»m. 88*), it
seems to imply a dreamy brooding, a half-drunken complacency
and immobility (see Suppl.).

Such a being, when at rest, is good-humoured and unhandy, 1
but when provoked, gets wild, spiteful and violent. Norse legend
names this rage of giants iotunmodr, which pits itself in defiance
against &sm6$r, the rage of the gods : € vera 1 iotunm63i/ Sn.
150 b . When their wrath is kindled, the giants hurl rocks, rub
stones till they catch fire (Roth. 1048), squeeze water out of
stones (Kinderm. no. 20. Asbiornsen's Moe, no. 6), root up
trees (Kinderm. no. 90), twist fir-trees together like willows (no.
166), and stamp on the ground till their leg is buried up to the
knee (Roth. 943. Vilk. saga, cap. 60) : in this plight they are
chained up by the heroes in whose service they are to be, and
only let loose against the enemy in war, e.g. Witolt or Witolf
(Roth. 760. Vilk. saga, cap. 50). One Norse giant, whose story
we know but imperfectly, was named Belt (the bellower) ; him
Freyr struck dead with his fist for want of his sword, and thence
bore the name of r bani Belja/ Sn. 41. 74.

Their relation to gods and men is by turns friendly and hostile.
Iotunheimr lies far from Asaheimr, yet visits are paid on both
sides. It is in this connexion that they sometimes leave on us
the impression of older nature-gods, who had to give way to a
younger and superior race ; it is only natural therefore, that in
certain giants, like Ecke and Fasolt, we should recognise a pre-
cipitate of deity. At other times a rebellious spirit breaks forth,
they make war upon the gods, like the heaven-scaling Titans,
and the gods hurl them down like devils into hell. Yet there
are some gods married to giantesses : NiorSr to Skafti the
daughter of Thiassi, Thdrr to Iarnsaxa, Freyr to the beautiful
Ger8r, daughter of G^mir. GunnloB a giantess is OSin's be-
loved. The &sin Gefiun bears sons to a giant; Borr weds the
giant Boljjorn's daughter Bestla. Loki, who lives among the
Uses, is son to a giant Farbauti, and a giantess AngrboiSa is his

1 Unformed, inconcinnns ; MHG. ungevilege, applied to gianU, Nib. 450, 1.
Iw. 444. 6051. 6717. der ungertiege knabe, Er. 5552 ; * knabe,' as in * der niichel
kiiabe,' p. 518n.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 531

wife. The gods associate with Oegir the iotnnn, and by him
are bidden to a banquet. Giants again sue for {tains, as Thrymr
for Freyja, while Thiassi carries off Kunn. Hrungnir asks for
Freyjaor Sif, Sn. 107. StarkaSr is henchman to Norse kings;
in Bother's army fight the giants Asperi&n (Asbiorn, Osbern) and
Witolt. Among the &ses tlie great foe of giants is Thorr, who
like Jupiter inflicts on them his thunder- wounds ; l his hammer
has crushed the heads of many : were it not for Thdrr, says a
Scandinavian proverb, the giants would get the upper hand ; * he
vanquished Hrungnir, Etymir, Thrymr, GeirroSr, and it is not all
the legends by any means that are set down in the Edda (see
Suppl.). St. Oiaf too keeps up a hot pursuit of the giant race ;
in this business heathen and Christian heroes are at one. In our
heroic legend Sigen6t, Ecke, Fasolt succumb to Dietrich's human
strength, yet other giants are companions of Dietrich, notably
Wittich and Heime, as Asperi&n was Bother's. The kings
Niblunc and Schilbunc had twelve strong giants for friends
(Nib. 95), i.e. for vassals, as the Norse kings often had twelve
berserks. But, like the primal woods and monstrous beasts of
the olden time, the giants do get gradually extirpated off the
face of the earth, and with all heroes giant-fighting alternates
with dragon-fighting. 8

King Fr6$i had two captive giant-maidens Fenja and Menja as
mill-maids ; the grist they had to grind him out of the quern
Grdtti was gold and peace, and he allowed them no longer time
for sleep or rest than while the gowk (cuckoo) held his peace or
they sang a song. We have a startling proof of the former pre-
valence of this myth in Germany also, and I find it in the bare
proper names. Managold, Manigold frequently occurs as a man's
name, and is to be explained from mani, ON. men = monile ;
more rarely we find Fanigold, Fenegold, from fani, ON. fen =
pains, meaning the gold that lies hidden in the fen. One Trad.
patav. of the first half of the twelfth cent. (MB. 28 b , pp. 90-1)

i The skeleton of a giantess struck by lightning, hung up in a sacristy, see Wide-
gren's OstergOtland 4, 527.

* Swed. * yore ej thorddn (Thor-din, thunder) till, lade troll verlden dde.'
9 In British legend too (seldomer in Carolingian) the heroes are indefatigable
giant-queUers. If the nursery-tale of Jack the giantkiller did not appear to be of
Welsh origin, that hero's deeds might remind us of Thdr's ; he is equipped with
a cap of darkness, shoes of swiftness, and a sword that cuts through anything, as
the god is with the resistless hammer.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



532 GIANTS.

furnishes both names Manegolt and Femgolt oat of the same
neighbourhood. We may conclude that once the Bavarians well
knew how it stood with the fanigold and manigold ground out by
Fania and Mania (see Suppl.).

Ymir, or in giant's language Orgelmir, was the first-created,
and out of his body's enormous bulk were afterwards engendered
earth, water, mountain and wood. Ymir himself originated in
melted hoarfrost or rime (hrim), hence all the giants are called
hrimJ>ursaAr, rime-giants, Sn. 6. Seem. Bh** h ; hrimkaldr, rime-
cold, is an epithet of jmrs and iotunn, S»m. 33 b 90*, they still
drip with thawing rime, their beards (kinnskdgr, chin-forest) are
frozen, Seem. 53 b ; Hrimnir, Hrimgrimr, Hrimger&r are proper
names of giants, Srom. 85*86* 114. 145. As hrim also means
grime, fuligo, Ymir may perhaps be connected with the obscure
MHG. om, ome (rubigo), see Gramm. 3, 733. At the same time
the derivation from ymja, unrSi (stridere) lies invitingly near, so
that Ymir would be the blustering, noisy, and one explanation of
Orgelmir would agree with this ; conf. chap. XIX. (see Suppl.).

Herbs and heavenly bodies are named after giants as well
as after gods : }>ursaskegg, i.e. giant's beard (fucus filiformis) ;
Norw. tussegras (paris quadrifolia) ; Bronugras (satyrium, the
same as Friggjargras, p. 302), because a giantess Brana gave it
as a charm to her client H&lfd&n (Fornald. sog. 3, 576) ; Forneotes
folme, p. 240 ; OSinn threw Thiassi's eyes, and Th6rr Orvandil's
toe, into the sky, to be shining constellations, Sn. 82-3. 111.

Giants, like dwarfs, shew themselves thievish. Two lays of the
Edda turn npon the recovery of a hammer and a cauldron which
they had stolen.

The giants form a separate people, which no doubt split into
branches again, conf. Kask's Afhand. 1, 88. Thrymr is called
frursa drottinn, SaBm. 70-74 ; a Jmrsa ]>io& (nation) is spoken of,
107*, but iotunheimr is described as their usual residence. Even
our poem of Bother 767 speaks of a riesenlant. On the borders
of the giant province were situate the griottuna gar&ar, Sn. 108-9.
We have already noticed how most of the words for giant coin-
cide with the names of ancient nations.

Giants were imagined dwelling on rocks and mountains, and
their nature is all of a piece with the mineral kingdom : they are
either animated masses of stone, or creatures once alive petrified.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 533

Hrungnir had a three-cornered stone heart, his head and shield
were of stone, Sn. 109. Anotheif giant was named VagnlwfSl
(waggon-head), Sn. 211% in Saxo Gram. 9. 10. Dame Htitt is a
petrified queen of giants, Deut. sag. no. 233.

Out of this connexion with mountains arises another set of
names: bergrisi, Sn. 18. 26. 30. 45-7. 66. Gr6ttas. 10. 24.
Egilss. 22; 1 bergbui, Fornald. sog. 1, 412; hraunbui (saxicola),
Saem. 57 b 145*; hraunhvalr (-whale) 57 b ; pussin of biargi, Fornald.
s6g. 2, 29 ; bergdanir (gigantes), S»m. 54 b ; bergrisa bruSr (bride),
moer bergrisa, Grdttas. 10. 24, conf. the Gr. opetds: on this side
the notion of giantess can easily pass into that of elfin. Thrym-
heimr lies up in the mountains, Sn. 27. It is not to be over-
looked, that in our own Heldenbuch Dietrich reviles the giants
as mountain-cattle and forest-boors, conf. bercrinder, Laurin 2625,
and waltgeburen 534. 2624. Sigendt 97. walthunde, Sigendt 13.
114. waldes diebe (thieves), 120. waldes tdre (fool), waldes
affe (ape), Wolfd. 467. 991 (see p. 481-2 and Suppl.).

Proper names of giants point to stones and metals, as Iarnsaxa
(ironstony), Jarnhaus (ironskull) ; possibly our still surviving
compound steinalt, old as stone (Gramm. 2, 555), is to be ex-
plained by the great age of giants, approaching that of rocks and
hills ; gifur rata (gigantes pedes illidunt saxis) is what they say
in the North.

Stones and rocks are weapons of the giant race ; they use only
stone clubs and stone shields, no swords. Hrungni's weapon is
called hein (hone) ; when it was flung in mid air and came in
collision with Thdr's hammer, it broke, and a part fell on the
ground; hence come all the 'heinberg/ whinstone rocks, Sn.
108-9. Later legends add to their armament stahelstangen (steel
bars) 24 yards long, Roth. 687. 1602. Hum. Sifr. 62, 2. 68, 2.
Sigendt (Lassb.) 14, (Hag.) 69. 75. Iwein 5022 (-ruote, rod
5058. -fcotf>e,club 6682. 6726). Trist. 15980. 16146; isenstange,
Nib. 460, 1. Yeldek invests his Pandurus and Bitias (taken from
Aen. 9, 672) with giant's nature and iserne kolven, En. 7089 ;
king Gorhand's giant host carry holben stahelin, Wh. 35, 21.
395, 24. 396, 13; and giant Langben a staalstang (Danske
viser 1, 29). We are expressly told in Er. 5384, 'wftfens w&ren

i in the case of mixed descent : Iv&lf bergrisi, Mlfriri, h&lftrdll, Egilss. p. 22.
Ki&lw. p. 164 ; see Gramm. 2, 633.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



534 GIANTS.

si bldz/ i.e. bare of knightly weapon, for they carried ' holben
swwre, gr6ze uncle lange.' l *STet the ' eald sweord eotonisc ' pro-
bably meant one of stone, though the same expression is used
in Beow. 5953 of a metal sword mounted with gold ; even the
' entisc helm/ Beow. 5955 may well be a stone helmet. It may
be a part of the same thing, that no iron sword will cut into
giants ; only with the pommel of the sword can they be killed
(Ecke 178), or with the fat, p. 530 (see Sappl.).

Ancient buildings of singular structure, which have outlasted
many centuries, and such as the men of to-day no longer take in
hand, are vulgarly ascribed to giants or to the devil (conf. p. 85,
note on devil's dikes) : * burg an berge, hd holmklibu, wrisilic
giwerc' is said in Hel. 42, 5 of a castle on a rock (ris6nbnrg,
N. Bth. 173) ; a Wrisberg, from which a Low Saxon family takes
its name, stood near the village of Petze. These are the enta
geweorc of AS. poetry (p. 524) : ' efne swft wide sw4 wegas td
l&gon enta cergeweorc innan burgum, strcete stanfdge/ Andr. 2466.
' stapulas storme bedrifene, eald enta geweorc/ 2986. Our Anno-
lied 151 of Semiramis : 'die alten Babil&nie stiphti si van cigelin
den alten, die die gigandi branten/ of bricks that giants burnt.
And Karlmeinet 35 : ' we dise burg stichte ? ein rise in den alten
zidenS In 0. French poems it is either gaiant or paian (pagans)
that build walls and towers, e.g. in Gerars de Viane 1745 :

Les for s tors, ke sont dantiquitey,
ke paian firent par lor grant poestey.

Conf. Moneys Unters. 242-4-7. 250. Whatever was put together
of enormous blocks the Hellenes named cyclopean walls, while the
modern Greeks regard the Hellenes themselves as giants of the
old world, and give them the credit of those massive structures,. 3
Then, as ancient military roads were constructed of great blocks
of stone (str&ta felison gifuogid, Hel. 164, 27), they also were
laid to the account of giants : iotna vegar (viae gigantum), Ssem.
23 b ; c usque ad giganteam viam : entisken wee/ MB. 4, 22 (abou t
1130). The common people in Bavaria and Salzburg call such,
a road, which to them is world-old and uncanny, enterisch (Schm.

i Goliath too, 1 Sam. 17, 7, and 2 Sam. 21, 19 is credited with a hastile (spear-
staff) quasi liciatorium texentium (like a weaver's beam).

2 Conf. Niebuhr's Horn. Hist. i. 192-3. An ancient wall is in Mod. Greek -r6
AXipucrf, Ulrich's Beise 1, 182.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 535»

4, 44) ; the trollaskeid was mentioned p. 508-9, and trottahla&.is
septum gigantum. Some, passages in FergAfc are worthy of
notice; at 1576 :

Die roke was swert ende eiselike, -

want wtlen fir fin gig ant }

hie hieu hare ane enen cant

fin padelMn tote in den top,

daer en mach ghfin paert op,

fin man mochter opgaen te voet..

And at 1628 seq. is described the brazen statue of a dorper, 1
standing outside the porch of a door :

het dede maken fin gigant,

die daer wilen woende int lant (see Suppl.).

Giant' 8-mountains, giant? s-hills, hiinen-beds may be so named
because popular legend places a giant's grave there, or sees in
the rock a resemblance to the giant's shape, or supposes the
giant to hare brought the mountain or hill to where it stands.

We have just had an instance of the last kind : the Edda
accounts for all the hein-rocks by portions of a giant's club having
dropt to the ground, which club was made of smooth whinstone.
There is a pleasing variety about these folk-tales, which to my
thinking is worth closer study, for it brings the living conception
of giant existence clearly before us. One story current in the
I. of Hven makes Grimild and Hvenild two giant sisters living
in Zealand. Hvenild wants to carry some slices of Zealand to
Schonen on the Swedish side ; she gets over safely with a few
that she has taken in her apron, but the next time she carries off
too large a piece, her apron-string breaks in the middle of the
sea, she drops the whole of her load, and that is how the Isle of
Hven came to be (Sjoborg's Nomenkl. p. 84). Almost the same
story is told in Jutland of the origin of the little isle of
Worsoekalv (Thiele 3, 66). Pomeranian traditions present dif-
ferences in detail : a giant in the Isle of Riigen grudges having
to wade through the sea every time to Pomerania; he will build
a causeway across to the mainland, so, tying an apron round him,
he fills it with earth. When he has got past Rodenkirchen with

1 This dorper gr6t again we are tempted to take for the old thnndergod, for it
aayB : * hi hilt van $tdU (of steel) enen kamer in sine hant.'

VOL. II. • H

Digitized by VjOOQIC



536 GIANTS.

his load, his apron springs a leak, and the earth that drops out
becomes the nine hills near Rambin. He darns the hole, and
goes further. Arrived at Gustow, he bursts another hole, and
spills thirteen little hills ; he reaches the sea with the earth that
is left, and shoots it in, making Prosnitz Hook and the peninsula
of Drigge. But there still remains a narrow space between
Riigen and Pomerania, which so exasperates the giant that he
is struck with apoplexy and dies, and his dam has never been
completed (E. M. Arndt's Marchen 1, 156). Just the other way,
a giant girl of Pomerania wants to make a bridge to Riigen, ' so
that I can step across the bit of water without wetting my bits
of slippers/ She hurries down to the shore with an apronful of
sand ; but the apron had a hole in it, a part of her freight ran
out 'tother side of Sagard, forming a little hill named Dubber-
worth. € Dear me ! mother will scold/ said the hiine maiden, but
kept her hand under, and ran all she could. Her mother looked
over the wood : ' Naughty child, what are you after ? come, and
you shall have the stick/ The daughter was so frightened she let
the apron slip out of her hands, the sand was all spilt about, and
formed the barren hills by Litzow. 1 Near VI in Kallasocken lies
a huge stone named Zechiel's stone after a giantess or merwoman.
She lived at Edha castle in Hogbysocken, and her sister near the
Skaggenas (shag-ness) in Smaland. They both wished to build
a bridge over the Sound; the Smaland giantess had brought
Skaggenas above a mile into the sea, and Zechiel had gathered
stones in her apron, when a man shot at her with his shafts, so
that she had to sit down exhausted on a rock, which still bears
the impress of her form. But she got up again, and went as far
as Pesnassocken, when Thor began to thunder (da hafver gogubben
begynt at aka) ; she was in such a fright that she fell dead,
scattering the load of stones out of her apron higgledy-piggledy
on the ground ; hence come the big masses of rock there of two
or three men's height. Her kindred had her buried by the side
of these rocks (Ahlqvist's Oland, 2, 98-9). These giants* dread
of Thor is so great, that when they hear it thunder, they hide
in clefts of rocks and under trees : a hogbergsgubbe in Gothland,

1 Lothar's Volkssagen, Leipz. 1625, p. 65. Temme's Pomm. sagen, noe. 190-1 ;
see Barthold's Pommern 1, 560, who spells Dobberwort, and explains it by the Pol.
wor (sack).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 537

whom a peasant, to keep him friendly, had invited to a christen-
ing, refused, much as he would have liked to share in the feast,
because he learnt from the messenger that not only Christ, Peter
and Mary, but Thor also would be there ; he would not face him
(Nyerup's Morskabslasning, p. 243), A giant in Fladsoe was on
bad terms with one that lived at Nestved. He took his wallet to
the beach and filled it with sand, intending to bury all Nestved.
On the way the sand ran out through a hole in the sack, giving
rise to the string of sandbanks between Fladsoe and Nestved.
Not till he came to the spot where Husvald then stood, did the
giant notice that the greater part was spilt ; in a rage he flung
the remainder toward Nestved, where you may still see one sand-
bank by itself (Thiele 1, 79). At Sonnerup lived another giant,
Lars Krands by name, whom a farmer of that place had offended.
He went to the shore, filled his glove with sand, took it to the
farmer's and emptied it, so that the farmhouse and yard were
completely covered ; what had run through the five finger holes of
the glove made five hills (Thiele 1, 33). In the Netherlands the
hill of Hillegersberg is produced by the sand which a giantess
lets fall through een schortehleed (Westendorp's Mythol. p. 187).
— And these tales are not only spread through the Teutonic
race, but are in vogue with Finns and Celts and Greeks. Near
Fajande in Hattulasocken of Tawastoland there stand some rocks
which are said to have been carried by giant's daughters in their
aprons and then tossed up (Ganander's Finn. myth. pp. 29. 30).
French traditions put the holy Virgin or fays (p. 413) in the place
of giantesses. Notre dame de C16ry, being ill at ease in the
church of Mezidres, determined to change the seat of her adora-
tion, took earth in her apron and carried it to a neighbouring
height, pursued by Judas : then, to elude the enemy, she took
a part of the earth up again, which she deposited at another place
not far off: oratories were reared on both sites (M6m. de l'acad.
celt. 2, 218). In the Charente country, arrond. Cognac, comm.
Saintf ront, a huge stone lies by the Ney rivulet ; this the holy
Virgin is said to have carried on her head, beside four other
pillars in her apron ; but as she was crossing the Ney, she let one
pillar fall into Saintfront marsh (M6m. des antiquaires 7, 31).
According to a Greek legend, Athena was fetching a mountain
from Pallene to fortify the Acropolis, but, startled at the ill news



Digitized by VjOOQIC



538 GIANTS.

brought by a crow, she dropt it on the way, and there it remains
as Mount Lykabettos. 1 As the Lord God passed over the
earth scattering stones, his bags burst over Montenegro, and the
whole stock came down (Vuk. 5).

Like the goddess, like the giants, the devil takes such burdens
upon him. In Upper Hesse I was told as follows : between
Grossfelden and Wetter there was once a village that has now
disappeared, Elbringhausen; the farmers in it lived so luxuriously
that the devil got power over them, and resolved to shift them
from their good soil to a sandy flat which is flooded every year
by the overflowing Lahn. So he took the village up in his
basket, and carried it through the air to where Sarenau stands :
he began picking out the houses one by one, and setting them
up side by side ; by some accident the basket tipped over, and the
whole lot tumbled pellmell on the ground ; so it came about, that
the first six houses at Sarenau stand in a straight row, and all
the others anyhow. Near Saalfeld in Thuringia lies a village,
Langenschade, numbering but 54 houses, and yet a couple of
miles long, because they stand scattered and in single file. The
devil flew through the air, carrying houses in an apron, but a
hole in it let the hQuses drop out one by one. On looking back,
he noticed it and cried ' there's a pity (schade) ! ' (see Suppl.).

The pretty fable of the giant's daughter picking up the plough-
ing husbandman and taking him home to her father in her apron
is widely known, but is best told in the Alsace legend of Nideck
castle :

Im waldschlo88 dort am wasserfall In forest-castle by waterfall

sinn d'ritter rise gsinn (gewesen) ; the barons there were giants ;

a mol (einmal) kummt's fraole hrab ins once the maiden comes down into the

thai, dale,

unn geht spaziere drinn. and goes a-walking therein,

sie that bis schier noch Haslach gehn, She doth as far as Haslach go ;

vorm wald im aokerf eld outside the wood, in the cornfield

do blibt sie voll yerwundmng stehn she stands still, fall of wonder,

nnn sieht, wie's feld ward bestellt. and sees how the field gets tilled,

sie luegt dem ding a wil so zu ; She looks at the thing a while,

der pflui, die rw, die lUtt the plough, the horses, the men

ischer ebs (ist ihr etwas) neas ; sie geht are new to her ; she goes thereto

derzu

i Antigoni Carystii hist, mirab. cap. 12, Lips. 1791 p. 22 : rf & 'Aftp? , fapotc-g
r> 6pos, tvvp KaXeiTcu Av/ra/fyn-fa, Kopujv^v tpyalv drcwrfyrcu koI elveip, Sri 'fyiglAitot
ir 4>avtp$ • t^p ft dtcoOo-affav fdrf/m rb 6pos, Stov vvv icri' rf ft KQpwvQ 6tA rip Kaxay-
yeVap elvciw, <bs eft dicpdirokw o& $4fus oAtq S<rrai dQucfodu.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS.



539



nun denkt • die nimm i mit.'

D'rno hunrt sie an de bode hin

unn ipreit ihrfilrti use,

fangt alles mit der hand, that's 'niin,

ann lauft gar froh noch has.

aie springt de felswei 'nuf ganz frisch,

dort wo der berg jetzt isoh so gah

nnn me (man) so krattle mns in d'h5h,

macht sie nor eine sohritt.

Der ritter sitzt just noch am tisch :

* min kind, was bringste mit ?

d' freud luegt der zn de auge 'nuss ;
se krom nor gesehwind din f urti ass ;
was hest so zaweliehs drin ? '

* o vatter, spieldings gar ze nett,

i ha nooh nie ebs sehdns so g'hett,'
ann stelltem (ihm) alles hin.
Unn of de tisch stellt sie den pflui,
d* bure nnn ihri ros,
lauft dram heram ann laoht derzu,
ihr fread isch gar ze gross.

* Ja, kind, diss isch ken tpieldings nitt,
do hest ebs schons gemacht '

saht der herr ritter glioh and laoht,
< geh nimm's nor widder mit I
die bare sorje ans fur brot,
tansch sterbe mir de hangertod ;
trah alles widder fart ! '
*s fraale krint, der vatter sehilt :
« a bar mir nitt als spieldings gilt,
i liid (ioh leide) net dass me morrt.
pack alles sachte widder iin
ann trail's ans namli platzel hin,
wo dee (da's) genamme hest.
bant nit der bar sin aokerfeld,
se fehlt's hi ans an brot ann geld
in anserm felsennest.'



and thinks * I'll take them with me.'
Then plumps down on the ground
and spreads her apron out,
grasps all in her hand, pops it in,
and runs right joyful home ;
leaps up the rook-path brisk,
where the hill is now so steep
and men must scramble up,
she makes but one stride. .
The baron sits just then at table :

* my child, what bringst with thee ?
joy looks out at thine eyes ;

undo thine apron, quick,

what hast so wonderful therein ? '

1 father, playthings quite too neat,

I ne'er had aught so pretty/

and sets it all before him.

On the table she sets the plough,

the farmers and their horses,

runs round them and laughs,

her joy is all too great.

' Ah child, this is no plaything,

a pretty thing thou hast done ! '

saith the baron quick, and laughs,

* go take it back 1

the farmers provide us with bread,
else we die the hunger-death ;
carry it all away again. 1
The maiden cries, the father scolds :
1 a farmer shall be no toy to me.
I will have no grumbling ;
pack it all up softly again
and carry it to the same place
where thou tookst it from.
Tills not the farmer his field,
we are short of bread and money
in our nest on the rock.'



Similar anecdotes from the Harz and the Odenwald are given
in Dent. sag. nos. 819. 324. In Hesse the giant's daughter
is placed on the Hippersberg (betw. Kolbe, Wehrda and Gross-
felden) : her father rates her soundly, and sets the ploughman
at liberty again with commendations. The same story is told at
Dittersdorf near Blankenburg (betw. Rudolstadt and Saalfeld).
Again, a hiinin with her daughter dwelt on Hiinenkoppe at the
entrance of the Black Forest. The daughter found a peasant
ploughing on the common, and put him in her apron, oxen, plough
and all, then went and showed her mother 'the little fellow

Digitized by VjOOQIC



540 GIANTS.

and his pussy-cats* The mother angrily bade her carry man,
beast and plough directly back to where she found them : € they
belong to a people that may do the hunes much mischief/ And
they both left the neighbourhood soon after. 1 Yet again : when
the Griingrund and the country round about were still inhabited
by giants, two of them fell in with an ordinary man : s what sort
of groundworm is this ? ' asked one, and the other answered,
' these groundworms will make a finish of us yet I ' (Mone's Anz.
8, 64). Now sentiments like these savour more of antiquity than
the fair reasons of the Alsatian giant, and they harmonize with
a Finnish folk-tale. Giants dwelt in Kemisocken, and twenty
years ago 9 there lived at Bouwwanjemi an old woman named
Gaisa, who told this tale : A giant maiden (kalewan tyttaren)
took up horse and ploughman and plough (bewosen ja kyntajan
ja auran) on Iter lap, carried them to her mother and asked,
' what kind of beetle (sontiainen) can this be, mother, that I found
rooting up the ground there ? ' The mother said, ' put them
away, child ; we have to leave this country, and they are to live
here instead/ The old giant race have to give way to agri-
cultural man, agriculture is an eye-sore to them, as it is to dwarfs
(p. 459). The honest coarse grain of gianthood, which looks
upon man as a tiny little beast, a beetle burrowing in the mud,
but yet is secretly afraid of him, could not be hit off more
happily than in these few touches. I believe this tradition is
domiciled in many other parts as well (see Suppl.).

Not less popular or naive is the story of the giant on a journey
being troubled with a little stone in his shoe : when at last he
shakes it out, there is a rock or hill left on the ground. The
Brunswick Anzeigen for 1759 inform us on p. 1636 : ' A peasant
said to me once, as I travelled in his company past a hill on the
R. Elm : Sir, the folk say that here a hiine cleared out his shoe,
and that's how this hill arose/ The book € Die kluge trodelfrau '
by E. J. G. P. N. 1682, p. 14, mentions a large stone in the
forest, and says: 'Once a great giant came this way with a
pebble in his shoe that hurt him, and when he untied the shoe 9
this stone fell out/ The story is still told of a smooth rock near
Goslar, how the great Christopher carried it in his shoe, till he

1 L. A. Walther's Einl. in die thiir. sohwarzb. gesch., Rudolst. 1788, p. 52.
* In Ganander'B time (Finn. myth. p. 80).

Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 541

felt something gall his foot ; he pulled off the shoe and turned it
down, when the stone fell where it now lies. Such stones are
also called crumb-stones. On the Soiling near Uslar lie some
large boundary-stones, 16 to 20 feet long, and 6 to 8 thick : time
out of mind two giants were jaunting across country ; says the
one to the other, ' this shoe hurts me, some bits of gravel I think
it must be/ with that he pulled off the shoe and shook these stones
out. In the valley above Ilfeld, close to the Bahr, stands a huge
mass of rock, which a giant once shook out of his shoe, because
the grain of sand galled him. I am confident this myth also has
a wide circulation, it has even come to be related of a mere set
of men : r The men of Sauerland in Westphalia are fine sturdy
fellows ; they say one of them walked to Cologne once, and on
arriving at the gate, asked his fellow-traveller to wait a moment,
while he looked in his shoe to see what had been teazing him so
all the while. " Nay " said the other, " hold out now till we get
to the inn." The Sauerlander said very well, and they trudged
up and down the long streets. But at the market-place he could
stand it no longer, he took the shoe off and threw out a great lump
of stone, and there it has lain this long while to prove my words/
A Norwegian folk-tale is given by Hammerich (om Ragnaroks-
mythen, p. 98) : a jutel had got something into his eye, that
pricked him ; he tried to ferret it out with his finger, but that
was too bulky, so he took a sheaf of corn, and with that he
managed the business. It was a fir-cone, which the giant felt
between his fingers, and said : ' who'd have thought a little thing
like that would hurt you so ? ' (see Suppl.).

The Edda tells wonderful things of giant Skr^mir/ in the
thumb of whose glove the god Th6rr found a night's lodging.
Skr^mir goes to sleep under an oak, and snores; when Thdrr
with his hammer strikes him on the head, he wakes up and asks
if a leaf has fallen on him. The giant lies down under another
oak, and snores so that the forest roars ; Thdrr hits him a harder
blow than before, and the giant awaking cries, ' did an acorn fall
on my face ?' He falls asleep a third time, and Thdrr repeats
his blow, making a yet deeper dint, but the giant merely strokes
his cheek, and remarks, ' there must be birds roosting in those

1 In the Far5e dialect Sknymli (Lyngbye, p. 480). ON. skraumr blateroi
babbler.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



; 542 GIANTS.

boughs; I fancied, when I woke, they dropt something on my
head/ Sn. 51-53. These are touches of genuine gianthood,
and are to be met with in quite different regions as well. A
Bohemian story makes the giant Scharmak sleep under a tower,
which his enemies undermine, so that it tumbles about his ears ;
he shakes himself up and cries : ' this is a bad place to rest in,
the birds drop things on your head. 9 After that, three men drag
a large bell up the oaktree under which Scharmak is asleep,
snoring so hard that the leaves shake; the bell is cut down, and
comes crashing on the giant, but he does not even wake. A .
German nursery-tale (1, 307) has something very similar; in
another one, millstones are dropt on a giant in the well, and he
calls out, € drive those hens away, they scratch the sand up there,
and make the grains come in my eyes ' (2, 29) - 1

A giantess (g^gr) named Hyrrokin (igne fumata) is mentioned
in the Edda, Sn. 66 on occasion of Baldr's funeral : nothing
could set the ship Hringhorn, in which the body lay, in motion ;
they sent to the giants, and Hyrrokin came riding on a wolf,
with a snake for bridle and rein ; she no sooner stept up to the
vessel and touched it with her foot, than fire darted out of the
beams, and the firm land quaked. I also find in a Norwegian
folk-tale (Faye, p. 14), that a giantess (djurre) by merely kicking
the shore with her foot threw a ship into the most violent agita-
tion.

Rabelais ' and Fischart have glorified the fable of Qargantua.
It was, to begin with, an old, perhaps even a Celtic, giant-story,
whose genuine simple form may even yet be recoverable from
unexpired popular traditions. 8 Gargantua, an enormous eater
and drinker, who as a babe had, like St. Christopher, taxed
the resources of ten wetnurses, stands with each foot on a high
mountain, and stooping down drinks up the river that runs between

1 Conf. the story of the giant Audsoh in Hammer's Rosenol 1, 114.

9 Rabelais took his subject-matter from an older book, printed already in the
15th century, and published more than once in the 16th : Les chroniques admirables
du puissant roi Gargantua s. 1. et a. (gothique) 8 ; Lyon 1532. 4 ; La plaisante et
ioyeuse histoire du grand Gargantua. Valence 1547. 8 ; at last as a chap-book :
La vie du fameux Gargantua, le plus terrible geant qui ait amais paru sur la terre.
Conf. Notice sur les chroniques de Garg., par l'auteur des nouv. reoh. bibl. Paris
1834.

1 A beginning has been made in Traditions de l'anoien duohe 1 de Betz, sur Garg.
(M6m. de l'acad. celt. 5, 892-5), and in Volkssagen auB dem Greyersland (Alpen-
rosen 1824, pp. 57-8). From the latter I borrow what stands in the text.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 543

(see Suppl.). A Westphalian legend of the Weser has much the
same tale to tell : On the R. Soiling, near Mt. Eberstein, stands
the Hiinenbrink, a detached conical hill [brink = grassy knoll].
When the hiine who dwelt there of old wanted to wash his face
of a morning, he would plant one foot on his own hill, and with
the other stride over to the Eichholz a mile and a half away, and
draw from the brook that flows through the valley. If his neck
ached with stooping and was like to break, he stretched one arm
over the Bnrgberg and laid hold of Lobach, Negenborn and
Holenberg to support himself. *

We are often told of two giant comrades or neighbours, living
on adjacent heights, or on two sides of a river, and holding con-
verse. In Ostergotland, near Tumbo in Ydre-harad, there was a
jatte named Tumme ; when he wished to speak to his chum Oden
at Hersmala two or three miles off, he went up a neighbouring
hill Hogatoft, from which you can see all over Tdre (Widegren's
Ostergotland 2, 897). The first of the two names is apparently
the ON. Jmmbi (stultus, inconcinnus, conf. p. 528), but the other
is that of the highest god, and was, I suppose, introduced in
later legend by way of disparagement. German folktales make
such giants throw stone hammers and axes to each other (Deut.
sag. no. 20), which reminds one of the thundergod's hammer.
Two hunes living, one on the Bberstein, the other on Hombnrg,
had but one axe between them to split their wood with. When
the Eberstein hiine was going to work, he shouted across to
Homburg four miles off, and his friend immediately threw the axe
over ; and the contrary, when the axe happened to be on the
Eberstein. The same thing is told in a tradition, likewise West-
phalian, of the hunes on the Hunenkeller and the Porta throwing
their one hatchet. 1 The hunes of the Brunsberg and Wiltberg,
between Godelheim and Amelunxen, played at bowls together
across the Weser (Deut. sag. no. 16). Good neighbours too were
the giants on Weissenstein and Remberg in Upper Hesse ; they
had a baking-oven, in common, that stood midway in the field, and
when one was kneading his dough, he threw a stone over as a
sign that wood was to be fetched from his neighbour's fort to
heat the oven. Once they both happened to be throwing at the

1 Bedek6r*s Westfalische eagen, no. 86.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



544 GIANTS.

same time, the stones met in the air} and fell where they now
lie in the middle of the field above Michelbach, each with the
marks of a big giant hand stamped on it. Another waj of
signalling was for the giant to scratch his body, which was done
so lond that the other heard it distinctly. The three very ancient
chapels by Sachsenheim, Oberwittighansen and Griinfeldhausen
were built by giants, who fetched the great heavy stones in tlieir
aprons. Wheh the first little church was finished, the giant
flung his hammer throngh the air : wherever it alighted, the next
building was to begin. It came to the ground five miles off, and
there was erected the second church, on completing which the
giant flung the hammer once more, and where it fell, at the same
distance of five miles, he built the third chapel. In the one at
Sachsenheim a huge rib of the builder is preserved (Mone's Anz.
8, 63). The following legends come from Westphalia : Above
Nettelstadt-on-the-hill stands the Hiinenbrink, where hiines lived
of old, and kept on friendly terms with their fellows on the Stell
(2± miles farther). When the one set were baking, and the
other wanted a loaf done at the same time, they just pitched it
over (see Suppl.). A hiine living at Hilverdingsen on the sonth
side of the Schwarze lake, and another living at Hille on the
north side, used to bake tlieir bread together. One morning the
one at Hilverdingsen thought he heard his neighbour emptying
his kneading-trough, all ready for baking ; he sprang from his
lair, snatched up his dough, and leapt over the lake. But it was
no such thing, the noise he had heard was only his neighbour
scratching his leg. At Altehiiffen there lived hunen, who had but
one knife at their service; this they kept stuck in the trunk of a
tree that stood in the middle of the village, and whoever wanted
it fetched it thence, and then put it back in its place. The spot
is still shown where the tree stood. These hiines, who were also
called duties, were a people exceedingly scant of wit, and to them
is due the proverb c Altehiiffen dumme dutten. 9 As the surround-
ing country came more and more under cultivation, the hiinen
felt no longer at ease among the new settlers, and they retired.
It was then that the duttes of Altehiiffen also made up their minds
to emigrate; but what they wanted was to go and find the

1 Like Hrfingni's hein and Thdr's hammer, p. 583.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 545

entrance into heaven. How they fared on the way was never
known, but the joke is made npon them, that after a long march
they came to a great calm, clear sheet of water, in which the
bright sky was reflected ; here they thought they could plunge
into heaven, so they jumped in and were drowned. 1 Prom so
remarkable a consensus * we cannot but draw the conclusion, that
the giants held together as a people, and were settled in the
mountains of a country, but that they gradually gave way to
the human race, which may be regarded as a nation of invaders.
Legend converts their stone weapons into the woodman's axe or
the knife, their martial profession into the peaceable pursuit of
baking bread. It was an ancient custom to stick swords or
knives into a tree standing in the middle of the yard (Pornald.
sog. 1, 120-1) ; a man's strength was proved by the depth to
which he drove the hatchet into a stem, RA. 97. The jumping
into the blue lake savours of the fairy-tale, and comes before us
in some other narratives (Kinderm. 1, 343. 3, 112).

Bat, what deserves some attention, Swedish folktales make the
divine foe of giants, him that hurls thunderbolts and throws
hammers, himself play with stones as with balls. Once, as Thor
was going past Linneryd in SmSland with his henchman (the
Thi&lfi of the Edda), he came upon a giant to whom he was not
known, and opened a conversation : c Whither goes thy way ? '
e I go to heaven to fight Thor, who has set my stable on fire/
' Thou presnmest too much ; why, thou hast not even the strength
to lift this little stone and set it on the great one/ The giant
clutched the stone with all his might, but could not lift it off the
ground, so much weight had Thor imparted to it. Thorns servant
tried it next, and lifted it lightly as he would a glove. Then
the giant knew it was the god, and fell upon him so lustily that
he sank on his knees, but Thor swung his hammer and laid
the enemy prostrate.

All over Germany there are so many of these stories about
stones and hammers being hurled, and giant's fingers imprinted

1 The last four tales from Bedeker, nos. 37 to 40. Dutten means stulti, and is
farther intensified by the adj. In the Teutonist dod—gawk, conf. Biohthofen sub
t. dad, and supra, p. 528 on tumbo. Similar tales on the Bhdn mts., only with
everything giant-like effaced, about the tollen dittisser (Bechstein pp. 81-91).

* I do not know that any tract in Germany is richer in giant-stories than West-
phalia and Hesse. Conf. also Kuhn's Markische sagen, nos. 22. 47. 107. 132. 141.
149. 158. 202. Temme's Pommersohe sagen, nos. 175-184. 187.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



546 GIANTS.

on hard rock, that I can only select one here and there as samples
of the style and spirit of the rest. Bains of a castle near Hom-
berg in Lower Hesse mark the abode of a giantess ; five miles
to one side of it, by the village of Gombet, lies a stone which
she hurled all the way from Homberg at one throw, and yon see
the fingers of her hand imprinted on it. The Scharfenstein by
Gudensberg was thrown there by a giant in his rage. On the
Tyrifjordensstrand near Buru in Norway is a large stone, which
one jutul fighting with another is said to have flung obliquely
across the bay, and plain marks of his fingers remain on the stone
(Faye, p. 15). Two or three miles from Dieren in the Meissen
country there lie a block of guwrtz and one of granite ; the former
was thrown by the giant of Wantewitz at the giant of Zadel, the
latter by the Zadeler at the Wantewitzer ; but they both missed,
the stones having fallen wide of the mark. 1 So two combatants
at Befnas and Asnas threw enormous stones at each other, one
called sortensteen, the other blak, and the latter still shews the
finger 8 of the thrower (Thiele 1, 47). A kind of slaty stone in
Norway, says Hallager 53*, is called jyvrikling, because the jyvri
(giantess) is said to have smeared it over with butter, and you
may see the dint of her fingers on it. Two giants at Nestved
tried their hands at hurling stones ; the one aimed his at Biislov
church, but did not reach it, the other threw with such force that
the 8 tone flew right over the Stein wald, and may still be seen
on the high road from Nestved to Bingsted (Thiele 1, 80 ; conf.
176). In the wood near Palsgaard lies a huge stone, which a
jette flung there because the lady of the. manor at Palsgaard,
whom he was courting, declined his proposals ; others maintain
that a jette maiden slung it over from Funen_u;#/i lier garter
(Thiele 3, 65-6; conf. 42).

When giants fight, and one pursues another, they will in their
haste leap over a village, and slit their great toe against the
church-spire, so that the blood spirts out in jets and forms a
pool (Deut. sag. no. 825); which strikingly resembles Waina-
moinen, rune 3. In leaping off a steep cliff, their foot or their
horse's hoof leaves tracks in the stone (ibid. nos. 818-9). Also,
when a giant sits down to rest on a stone, or leans against a rock,

1 Preusker in Kruse's Deutseh. alterth. iii. 8, 37.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 547

his figure prints itself on the hard surface, 1 e.g. Starcather's in
Saxo Gram. 111.

It is not as smitlis, like the cyclops, that giants are described
in German legend, and the forging of arms is reserved for dwarfs.
Once in our hero-legend the giant Aspri&n forges shoes (Roth.
2029) ; also the giant Vade makes his son Yelint learn smith*
work, first with MJmir, then with dwarfs.

As for smidr in the ON. language, it does not mean faber, but
artificer in general, and particularly builder ; and to be accom-
plished builders is a main characteristic of giants, the authors of
those colossal structures of antiquity (p. 534). On the nine giant-
pillars near Miltenberg the common folk still see the handmarks
of the giants who intended therewith to build a bridge over the
Main (Dent. sag. no. 19).

The most notable instancy ojccurs in the Edda itself. A iotunn
had come to the ftses, professing, to be a smrSr, and had pledged
himself to build them a strong castle within a year and a half, if
they would let him have Freyja with the sun and moon into the
bargain. The gods took counsel, and decided to accept his offer,
if he would undertake to finish the building by himself without
the aid of man, in one winter; if on the first day of summer
anything in the castle was left undone, he should forfeit all his
claims. How the ' smith/ with no help but that of his strong
horse Svaffilfari, had nearly accomplished the task, but was
hindered by Loki and slain by Thdrr, is related in Sn. 46-7.

Well, this myth, obeying that wondrous law of fluctuation so
often observed in genuine popular traditions, lives on, under new
forms, in other times and places. A German fairy tale puts the
devil in the place of the giant (as, in a vast- number of tales, it is
the devil now that executes buildings, hurls rocks, and so on,
precisely as the giant did before him) : the devil is to build a
house for a peasant, and get his soul in exchange ; but he must
have done before the cock crows, else the peasant is free, and the
devil has lost his pains. The work is very near completion, one
tile alone is wanting to the roof, when the peasant imitates the

1 Herod. 4, 82 : tx?ot 'H/>airMof <pakov<rt h Th-py b*6v % rb ofce ftir popart aVtydt,
fen Si rb fUyadot Mrw» **<V* rAr Tfywfi' xorafltiv, in Scythia. (Footprint of
Heraklee in stone, like a man's, bnt two cubits long.)



Digitized by VjOOQIC



548 GIANTS.

•
crowing of a cock, and immediately all the cocks in the neigh-
bourhood begin to crow, and the enemy of man loses his wager.
There is more of the antique in a Norrland saga : l King Olaf of
Norway walked 'twixt hill and dale, buried in thought ; he had
it in his heart to build a church, the like of which was nowhere
to be seen, but the cost of it would grievously impoverish his
kingdom. In this perplexity he met a man of strange appearance,
who asked him why he was so pensive. Olaf declared to him
his purpose, and the giant (troll) offered to complete the building
by his single self within a certain time ; for wages he demanded
the sun and moon, or St. Olaf himself. To this the king agreed,
but projected such a plan for the church, as he thought impossible
of execution: it was to be so large, that seven priests could
preach in it at once without disturbing each other ; pillar and
ornament, within and without, must be wrought of hard flint,
and so on. Erelong such a structure stood completed, all but
the roof and spire. Perplexed anew at the stipulated terms,
Olaf wandered over hill and dale ; suddenly inside a mountain he
heard a child cry, and a giant-woman (jatteqvinna) hush it with
these words : ' tyst, tyst (hush) ! 2 to-morrow comes thy father
Wind- and- Weather home, bringing both sun and moon, or saintly
Olaf s self/ Overjoyed at this discovery, 8 for to name an evil
spirit brings his power to nought, Olaf turned home : all was
finished, the spire was just fixed on, when Olaf cried : ' Vind och
Veder! du har satt spiran sneder (hast set the spire askew)/
Instantly the giant, with a fearful crash, fell off the ridge of
the church's roof, and burst into a thousand pieces, which were
nothing but fiintstones. According to different accounts, the
jatte was named Blaster, and Olaf cried : € Blaster, satt spiran
vaster (set the spire west-er) ! ' or he was called Slatt, and the
rhyme ran : ' Slatt, satt spiran ratt (straight) ! ' They have the
same story in Norway itself, but the giant's name is Skalle, and
he reared the magnificent church at Nidaros. In Schonen the
giant is Finn, who built the church at Lund, and was turned into

1 Extracted, from Zetterstrdm's collection, in the third no. of the Iduna, 2 ed.
Stockh. 1816, pp. 60-1. Now included, with others like it, in Afzelius's Sago-
hafder 3, 88-86.

2 Conf. the interj. ' ziss, zisa ! ' in H. Sachs iv. 3, 8 b .

* Almost in the same way, and with similar result, the name of Bumpelstilz is
discovered in Kinderm. 55 ; conf. 3, 98, and supra p. 605 n.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 549

stone by St. Lawrence (Finn Magnusen's Lex. myth. 351-2 ; and
see Suppl.).

It is on another side that the following tale from Conrland
touches the story in the Edda. In Kintegesinde of the Dzervens
are some old wall-stones extending a considerable length and
breadth, and the people say : Before the plague (i.e. time out of
mind) there lived in the district of Hasenpot a strong man (giant)
of the name of Kinte. He could hew out and polish huge masses
of stone, and carted even the largest blocks together with his
one white mare. His dwelling-house he built on rocks, his fields
he fenced with stone ramparts. Once he had a quarrel with a
merchant of Libau; to punish him, he put his white mare to
draw a stone equal to twelve cartloads all the way to Libau,
intending to drop it at the merchant's door. When he reached
the town, they would not let him cross the bridge, fearing it
would break under the load, and insisted on his removing the
stone outside the liberties. The strong man, deeply mortified,
did so, and dropt the stone on the road that goes to Grobin by
Battenhof. There it lies to this day, and the Lettons, as they
pass, point to it in astonishment. 1 Kinte's white mare may stand
for the Scandinavian smith's S va'Silfari ; the defeat of the giant's
building designs is effected in a different way.

King Olaf brooked many other adventures with giants and
giantesses. As he sailed past the high hills on the Horns-herred
coast, in which a giantess lived, she called out to him :

S. Olaf med dit rode skiag,

du seilar for nar ved min kjeldervag !

(St. Olaf with thy red beard, thou sailest too near my cellar wall).
Olaf was angry, and instead of steering his vessel between the
cliffs, he turned her head on to the hill, and answered ;

hor du kjerling med rok og med teen,
her skal du sidde og blive en steen !

(hear, thou carlin with distaff and spool, here shalt thou sit and
become a stone). He had scarce finished speaking, when the hill
split open, the giantess was changed into a stone, and you still
see her sitting with spindle and distaff on the eastern cliff; a

1 Communio. by Watson in Jahresverhandl. der kuil. gecellsoh. 2, 811-2.

Digitized byV^jOOQlC



550 GIANTS.

sacred spring issued from the opposite cliff. 1 According to a
Swedish account, Olaf wished to sail through Varmeland and by
L. Vaner to Nerike, when the troll shouted to him :

kong Olaf med dit pipuga skagg (peaky beard),

du seglar for nar min badstuguvagg (bathroom wall) 1

Olaf replied :

du troll med din rak och ten

skal bli i sten

och aldrig mer gora skeppare men !

(shalt turn to stone, and never more make skipper moan). The
giantess turned into stone, and the king erected a cross at Dalky
church in Elfdals herred. 8 The Danish rhyme is also quoted as
follows :

hor du Oluf rodeskjag,

hvi seiler du igjennem vor stuevag (through our chamber wall) ?

And:

stat du der og bliv til steen,

og (gjor) ingen dannemand (no Dane) mere til meen ! 8

In Norway itself the legend runs thus : The Hornelen Mountains
in Bremanger were once connected with Maroe, but are now
divided from it by a sound. St. Olaf sailed up to them, and
commanded the cliffs to part and let him pass through. They
did so, but instantly a giantess leapt out of the mountain and
cried :

sig (see), du mand med det hvide skag (white beard),

hvi splitter du saa min klippevag ?

Olaf:

stat (stand) trold nu evig der i steen,

saa gjor du ei nogen mand (not any man) meer meen.

His word came to pass, and the stone figure stands yet on the
cliff (Faye 124). OlaPs red beard (like those of our hero-kings
Otto and Friedrich) reminds us of Th6rr the foe of giants (p. 177) ;
' pipuga skagg' is apparently the same as the pipskagg, wedge-

1 Donate viser 2, 12-8. Thiele 1, 82 ; conf. Faye, 116-9.

2 Fernow's Varmeland, p. 228.

» Nyerup'u Karakterifltik af Christian 4, p. 17.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



tHANTS. 551

like or peaked beard, quoted by Ihre ; but the Norwegian rhyme
has white beard (the barbe fleurie of Charlemagne). Such
divergences, and the changes rung on 'cellar wall, bathroom
wall, cliff wall/ vouch for the popular character of the tradition
(see Suppl.). It will surprise no one, if I produce a still older
type of the whole story from the Bdda itself. When Brynhildr
in her decorated car was faring the € hel-veg/ she went past
the dwelling of a gygr ; the giantess accosts her with the words
(S®m. 228*> :

skaltu i gognom ganga eigi

gridti studda garSa mtna !

(shalt not go through my stone-built house). This brings on a
dialogue, which is closed by Brynhildr with the exclamation:
'seykstu g^gjarkynl* (conf. p. 49 7n.). The giantess's house is
of stones skilfully put together, and the later rhymes speak of
cellar and bathroom: she herself is quite the housewife with
distaff and spindle. The sacred rights of domesticity are in-
fringed, when strangers burst their way through. There are
other instances in which the giantess, like the elfin, is described
with spindle and distaff : ' tolv troldqvinder (12 trold-women) de
Btode for hannem med role og ten * (Danske viser 1, 94) }

Close to the Bomsdalshorn in Norway is a mountain called
Troldtinder, whose jutting crags are due to giants whom Olaf
converted into stones, because they tried to prevent his preaching
Christianity in Komsdal.*

It would appear, from Saem. 145 b , that giants, like dwarfs,
have reason to dread the daylight, and if surprised by the break
of day, they turn into stone : € dagr er nfl/ cries Atli to HrtmgerSr,
* hafnar mark J^yckir hlcegeligt vera, pars J>u % steins liki stendr.'

Grotesque humanlike shapes assumed by stalactite, flint and
flakestone on the small scale, and by basalt and granite rocks on
the great, have largely engendered and fed these fancies about



1 The Celtic fay carries huge stones on her spindle, and spins on as she walks,
KeighUey 2, 286. Conf. supra, p. 418.

1 Faye 124, who follows Schoning's Reise 2, 128. Sanct Olafs saga p& svenske
rim, ed. Hadorph. p. 87 : 'ell troll, som draap X man, han giordit i ttena, ooh
atander an ; Here troll han och bortdref, sidan folckit i frijd blef.* Certain round
pot-ahaped holes found in the mountains, the Norwegian people believe to be the
work of giants. They call them jUUegryter. troldgryttr, yet also S. Oles gryter
(Hallager 53*).

VOL. II. I

Digitized by VjOOQIC



552 GIANTS.

petrified giants. Then the myth about stone-circles accounts for
their form by dances of giants ; l many rocks have stories attached
to them of wedding-folk and dancing guests being turned into
stone (see Suppl.). The old and truly popular terminology of
mountains everywhere uses the names of different parts of the
body ; to mountains are given a head, brow, neck, back, shoulder,
knee, foot, etc. (RA. 541).

And here we come across numerous approximations and over-
lappings between the giant-legend and those of dwarfs, schrats
and watersprites, as the comprehensive name troll in Scandinavian
tradition would of itself indicate. Dwarfs of the mountain* are,
like giants, liable to transformation into stone, as indeed they
have sprung out of stone (p. 532-3). Bosmer havmand (merman)
springs or flies, as the graphic phrase is, into stone.*

Then on the other side, the notion of the giant gets a good deal
mixed up with that of the hero, usually his opposite. Strong
Jack in our nursery- tales assumes quite the character of a giant ;
and even Siegfried, pure hero as he is in the Mid. Age poems,
yet partakes of giant nature when acting as a smith, like Wielant,
who is of giant extraction. Moreover, both Siegfried slightly,
and Strong Jack more distinctly, acquire a tinge of that Edlen-
spiegel or Riibezahl humour (p. 486) which is so amusing in the
Finnish stories of Kalewa, IZm, and especially Soini (conf.
Kalewala, rune 19). This Soini or Kullervo bears the nickname
of Kalki (schalk, rogue) ; when an infant three days old, he tore
up his baby-linen ; sold to a Carelian smith, and set to mind the
baby, he dug its eyes out, killed it, and burnt the cradle. Then,
when his master ordered him to fence the fields in, he took whole
fir-trees and pines, and wattled them with snakes ; after that, he

1 Stonehenge, AS. StAnhenge (-hanging), near Salisbury, in Welsh Choirgaur,
Lat. chorea gigantum ; ace. to Giraldus Cambr. cap. 18, a cairn brought by giants
from Africa to Spain (Palgrave's Hist, of AS., p. 50) ; conf. Diefenbach's Celtica
ii. 101. In Trist. 5887, Gurmnn is said to be * born of Africa.'

* Danske viser 1, 223 : * nan sprang saa vildt i bjerget om, og bier iftjlintesten
sorte.* 1, 228 : ' han blev til en kampesteen graa.' 1, 233 : 'saa j&j han bort i
rb" den flint, og blev saa borte mod alle.' 1, 185 of a cruel stepm6ther : * hun sprang
bort ifiintesteen.' But H. Sachs too has, iii. 3, 31*. 426, • vor zorn zu einem stein
springen ; » ib. 68 b , ' vor sorg zu eim stein springen ; • iv. 3, 97 d , * vor leid wol zu eim
stein mdcht springen.* Overpowering emotions make the life stand still, and curdle
it into cold stone. Conf. Chap. XXXII. on the heroes entrapped in mountains, and
Suppl.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 553

had to pasture the flock, bat the goodwife having baked a stone
in his bread, Soini was in such a rage that he called bears and
wolves to aid him, who tore the woman's legs and worried the
flock. The Esthonians also tell of a giant's son (Kallewepoeg),
who furrowed up grassy lands with a wooden plough, and not a
blade has grown on them since (see Suppl.). This trickiness of
the Finnish giants is a contrast to the rough but honest ways
of the German and Scandinavian.

Above all, there is no clear line to be drawn between giants
and the wild hairy woodsprites dealt with in pp. 478-486. In the
woods of the Bingenheim Mark are seen the stone seats of the
wild folk (conf. p. 482) who once lived there, and the print of
their hands on the stones (Deut. sag. no. 166). In the vale of
Gastein, says Muchar, p. 137, wild men have lived within the
memory of man, but the breed has died out since ; one of them
declared he had seen the forest of Sallesen near Mt. Stubner-
kogel get 'mair' (die out and revive again) nine times : he could
mind when the Bocksteinkogl was no bigger than a kranawetvogl
(crossbill ?), or the mighty Schareck than a twopenny roll. Their
strength was gigantic : to hurl a ploughshare the whole breadth
of the valley was an easy throw for them. One of these ' men '
leant his staff against the head farmer's house, and the whole
house shook. Their dwelling was an inaccessible cavern on the
left bank of the Ache, at the entrance to the Klamm ; outside
the cave stood some appletrees, and with the apples they would
pelt the passers-by in fun ; remains of their household stuff are
still to be seen. To the inhabitants of the valley they were
rather friendly than otherwise, and often put a quantity of butter
and milk before their house-doors. This last feature is more of a
piece with the habits of dwarfs and elves than of giants.

Just as the elves found the spread of agriculture and the clear-
ing of their forests an abomination, which compelled them to
move out ; so the giants regard the woods as their own property,
in which they are by no means disposed to let men do as they
please. A peasant's son had no sooner begun to cut down a
bushy pinetree, than a great stout trold made his appearance
with the threat : ' dare to cut in my wood, and I'll strike thee
dead ' (Asbiornsen's Moe, no. 6) ; the Danish folk-song of Eline
af Yillenskov is founded on this, D.Y. 1, 175. And no less do

Digitized by VjOOQIC



554 GIANTS.

giants (like dwarfs, p. 459) hate the ringing of bells, as in the
Swedish tale of the old giant in the mountain (Afzelius 8, 88) ;
therefore they sling rocks at the belfries. Gargantua also carries
off bells from churches.

In many of the tales that have come before us, giant and devil
are convertible terms, especially where the former has laid aside
his clumsiness. The same with a number of other resemblances
between the two. The devil is described as many-headed like
the giant, also, it is true, like the dragon and the hellhound.
Wherever the devil's hand clutches or his foot treads, indelible
traces imprint themselves even on the hardest stone. The titans
chased from Olympus resemble the angels thrust out of heaven
and changed into devils. The abode of the giants, like that of
heathens and devils in general (p. 34), is supposed to be in the
north : when Freyr looks from heaven toward Iotunheim (Saem.
81) and spies the fair giantess, this is expressed in Snorri 89 by
' Freyr leit i nordroett.' In the Danish folk-song of the stolen
hammer, Thorr appears as Tord (thunder) af Hafsgaard (sea-
burgh), while the giant from whom Loke is to get the hammer
back dwells in Nordenfjeld; the Swedish folk-song says more
vaguely € trolltrams gard/ *

But what runs into gianthood altogether is the nature of the
pnan-eating huorco or ogre (p. 486). Like him the stone-hurling
cyclops in the Odyssey hanker after human flesh ; and again a
Tartar giant Depeghoz (eye on top of head) 8 stands midway be-
tween Polyphemus, who combs with a harrow and shaves with a
scythe (Ov. Metam. 18, 764), and Gargantua. As an infant he
sucks all the nurses dry, that offer him the breast ; when grown
up, the Oghuzes have to supply him daily with 2 men and 500
sheep. Bissat, the hero, burns out his eye with a red-hot knife ;
the blinded giant sits outside the door, and feels with his hands
each goat as it passes out. An arrow aimed at his breast would
not penetrate, he cried € what's this fly here teazing me?' The
Laplanders tell of a giant Stalo, who was one-eyed, and went
about in a garment of iron. He was feared as a man-eater, and

1 To wiBh a man « nordan HU fittUs * (Arvidsson 2, 163) is to wish him in a
disagreeable quarter (Germ. ' in pepperland,' at Jericho).

9 Dies : The newly discovered Oghuzian cyclop compared with the Homeric.
Halle <fc Berlin 1816.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 555

received the by-name of yityatya (Nilsson 4, 32). The Indian
Mah&bh&rata also represents Hidimbas the r&kshasa (giant) * as
a man-eater, misshapen and red-bearded : man's flesh he smells
from afar* and orders Hidimba his sister to fetch it him ; but
she, like the monster's wife or daughter in the nursery-tales,
pities and befriends the slumbering hero (see Suppl.) .

Our own giant-stories know nothing of this grim thirst for
blood, even the Norse iotunn is nowhere depicted as a cannibal,
like the Greek and Oriental giants ; our giants are a great deal
more genial, and come nearer to man's constitution in their
shape and their way of thinking : their savagery spends itself
mainly in hurling huge stones, removing mountains and rearing
colossal buildings.

Saxo Gram. pp. 10. 11 invests the giantess Harthgrepa with
the power to make Iierself small or large at pleasure. This is a
gift which fairy-tales bestow on the ogre or the devil, and folk-
tales on the haulemutter (Harrys 2, 10 ; and Suppl.).

It is in living legend (folktale) that the peculiar properties of
our native giants have been most faithfully preserved ; the poets
make their giants far less interesting, they paint them, espe-
cially in subjects borrowed from Romance poetry, with only
the features common to all giants. Harpin, a giant in the
Iwein, demands a knight's daughter, hangs his sons, and lays
waste the land (4464. 4500) : 8 when slain, he falls to the ground
like a tree (5074) . 4 Still more vapid are the two giants intro-
duced at 6588 seq. Even in the Tristan, the description of giant
Urg&n (15923) is not much more vivid : he levies blackmail on
oxen and sheep, and when his hand is hewn off, he wants to heal

1 Tevetat's second birth (Beinhart oclzxzi.) is a r&kshast, giantess, not a
beast.

* * Mightily works man's smell, and amazingly quickens my nostrils,' Arjtma's
Journey, by Bopp, p. 18. The same in oar fairy-tales (supra, p. 486). Epithets
of these Indian demons indicate that they walk about by night (Bopp's gloss.
91. 97).

3 One giant is * hagel al der lande,' hail-storm to all lands, Bit. 6482.

4 N.B., his bones are treasured up outside the castle-gate (5881), as in Fischart's
Garg. 41* : 'they tell of riesen and haunen, shew their bones in churches, under
town halls.' So there hangs in a church the skeleton of the giantess struck by
lightning (p. 531 n.), the heathen maiden's dripping rib (Deut. sag. 140), and her yellow
locks (ibid. 317) ; in the castle is kept the giant's bone (ibid. 324). At Alpirsbach
in the Black Forest a giant's skeleton hangs outside the gate, and in Our Lady's
church at Arnstadt the • riesenribbe,' Bechst. 8, 129; conf. Jerichow and Werben
in Ad. Euhn, no. 56. The horns of a giant ox nailed up in the porch of a temple
(Xiebuhr's Bom. Hist. 1, 407).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



556 GIANTS.

it on again (16114) , l The giants shew more colour as we come
to poems in the cycle of our hero-legend. Kuper&n in the Hum.
Sifrit (Ciipri&n of the Heldens. 171) rules over 1000 giants, and
holds in durance the captive daughter of a king. The Bother
brings before us, all alive, the giants Aspri&n, Grimme, Widolt,
the last straining like a lion at his leash, till he is let loose for
the fight (744. 2744. 4079) ; in the steel bar that two men could
not lift he buries his teeth till fire starts out of it (650. 4658-74),
and he smites with it like a thunderbolt (2734) ; the noise of his
moving makes the earth to quake (5051), his hauberk rings
when he leaps over bushes (4201) ; he pitches one man over the
heads of four, so that his feet do not touch the ground (1718),
smashes a lion against the wall (1144-53), rubs fire out of mill-
stones (1040), wades in mould (646. 678) up to the knee (935),
a feature preserved in Vilk. saga, cap. 60, and also Oriental
(Hammer's Rosenol 1, 36). Aspri&n sets his foot on the mouth
of the wounded (4275). And some good giant traits come out in
Sigendt: when he breathes in his sleep, the boughs bend (60) , 2
he plucks up trees in the fir-wood (73-4), prepares lint-plugs
(schiibel) of a pound weight to stuff into his wounds (113), takes
the hero under his armpit and carries him off (110. 158. Hag. 9,
Lassb.). A giantess in the Wolfdiet. picks up horse and hero,
and, bounding like a squirrel, takes them 350 miles over the
mountains to her giant cell; another in the folk-song (Aw. 1,
161) carries man and horse up a mountain five miles high, where
are two ready boiled and one on the spit (a vestige of androphagi
after all) ; she offers her daughter to the hero, and when he
escapes, she beats her with a club, so that all the flowers and
leaves in the wood quiver. Giant Welle's sister Eiitze in the
Heldenbuch takes for her staff a whole tree, root and branch,
that two waggons could not have carried; another woman r of
wild kin ' walks over all the trees, and requires two bullocks'
hides for a pair of shoes, Wolfd. 1513. Giant Langbein (Danske
viser 1, 26) is asleep in the wood, when the heroes wake him up
(see Suppl.).
A good many giant-stories not yet discovered and collected

1 The Romance giants are often porters and bridge-keepers, conf . the dorper in
Fergut (supra, p. 535) ; yet also in Nib. 457, 4. 458, 1 : • rise portenare. 1

9 The same token of gianthood is in Vilk. saga, cap. 176, and in a Servian lay.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



GIANTS. 557

must still be living in the popular traditions of Norway and
Swfeden, 1 and even we in Germany may gather something from
oral narration, though not much from books. The monk of St.
Gall (Pertz 2, 756) has an Eishere {i.e. Egisheri, terribilis) of
Thurgau, but he is a giant-like hero, not a giant. 2

Of sacrifices offered to giants (as well as to friendly elves and
home-sprites), of a worship of giants, there is hardly a trace.
Yet in Kormakssaga 242 I find blotrisi, giant to whom one
sacrifices; and the buttered stone (p. 546) may have been smeared
far the giantess, not by her, for it was the custom of antiquity to
anoint sacred stones and images with oil or fat, conf. p. 63. As
to the ' gude lubbe ' whose worship is recorded by Bp. Gebhard
(p. 526), his gianthood is not yet satisfactorily made out. Fasolt,
the giant of storm, was invoked in exorcisms ; but here we may
regard him as a demigod, like ThorgerSr and Irpa, who were
adored in Scandinavia (see Suppl.) .

The connexion pointed out between several of the words for
giant and the names of ancient nations is similar to the agree-
ment of certain heroic names with historic characters. Mythic
traits get mysteriously intergrown with historic, and as Dietrich
and Charles do duty for a former god or hero, Hungarians and
Avars are made to stand for the old notion of giants. Only we
must not carry this too far, but give its due weight to the
fact that iotunn and jmrs 8 have in themselves an intelligible
meaning.

1 Hulphers 3, 47 speaks of • ISjlige bora ttelse om fordna j&ttarj without going
into them.

* It is quite another thing, when in the debased folktale Siegfried the hero
degenerates into a giant (Whs. heldensage, pp. 301-16), as divine Oden himself
(p. 155) and ThOrr are degraded into duvels and dolts. A still later view (Altd. bL
1, 122) regards riese and reoke (hero) as all one.

3 Schafarik (Slov. star. 1, 258) sees nothing in them but Geta and Thyrsus ;
at that rate the national name Thussaget© must include both.



Digitized by



Google



CHAPTER XIX.
CREATION.

Now that we have treated of gods, heroes, elves, and giants,
we are at length prepared to go into the views of ancient times
on cosmogony. And here I am the more entitled to take the
Norse ideas for a groundwork, as indications are not wanting of
their having equally prevailed among the other Teutonic races.

Before the creation of heaven and earth, there was an immense
chasm called gap (hiatus, gaping), or by way of emphasis gap
ginnunga (chasm of chasms), corresponding in sense to the Greek
^tto?. 1 For, as X"* * m^ 118 both abyss and darkness, so gin-
nunga-gap seems also to denote the world of mist, out of whose
bosom all things rose. How the covering and concealing r hel '
was likewise conceived of as 'nift-hel* with yawning gaping jaws,
has been shewn above, pp. 312-314.

Yet this void of space had two extremities opposed to one
another, muspell (fire) the southern, and nijl (fog) the northern ;
from Muspellsheim proceed light and warmth, from Niflheim
darkness and deadly cold. In the middle was a fountain HvergeU
mir, out of which flowed twelve rivers named elivagar. When
they got so far from their source, that the drop of fire contained

1 X(£oj, from xalw—OHG. gtnan, ON. gtna=Lat. hiare; conf. OHG. gimraga,
hiatuB. Bat we need not therefore read ' gap ginunga,' for the ON. ginna, which
has now only the sense of allicere, must formerly have had that of findere, secare,
which is still found in OHG. inginnan, MHG. enginnen (see above, p. 403, Ganna} :
Otfried iii. 7, 27 says of the barleycorn, * thoh findu ih melo th&r inne, inthiu ih
es biginne (if I snlit it open) ; inkinnan (aperire), Graff 4, 209 ; ingunnen (sectus),
N. Ar. 95. So in MHG., * sin herze wart ime engunnen ' (fissum), Fundgr. 2,
268 ; enginnen (secare), En. 2792. 5722 ; engunnen (secuerunt), En. 1178. Nearly
related is ingeinan (fissiculare), N. Cap. 136. From a literal ' splitting open * must
have arisen the more abstract sense of * beginning,' Goth, duginnan, AS. onginnan,
OHG. inkinnan, pikinnan. Then gtna hiare, gin hiatus, further suggest gin
(ampins), and ginregin (p. 320). Singularly Festus, in discussing inchoare, comes
upon chaos, just as * begin * has led us to ginan. Cokus, from which some derive
incohare—inchoare, is no other than chaos. Feat, sub v. cohum. [Nearly all
the above meanings appear in derivatives of the Mongol, root khag, khog to crack,
etc., including khoghoson empty, chaos]. ' Beside gtnan, the OHG. has a chinan
hiscere (Graff 4, 450), Goth, keinan, AS. cine (rima, chine, chink). The AS. has
also a separate word dwolma for hiatus, chaos. — Extr. from Scppl.

558



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CREATION. 559

in them hardened, like the sparks that fly oat of flame, they
turned into rigid ice. Touched by the mild air (of the south) t
the ice began to thaw and trickle : by the power of him who
sent the heat, the drops quickened into life, and a man grew out
of them, Ymir, called Orgelmir by the Hrlmjmrses, a giant and
evil of nature.

Ymir went to sleep, and fell into a sweat, then under his left
hand grew man and wife, and one of his feet engendered with
the other a six-headed son; hence are sprung the families of
giants.

But the ice dripped on, and a cow arose, Auffumbla, from
whose udder flowed four streams of milk, conveying nourishment
to Ymir. Then the cow licked the salty ice-rocks, and on the
evening of the first day a man's hand came forth, the second
day the man's head, the third day the whole man ; he was beau-
tiful, large, strong, his name was Buri, and his son's name Borr
(p. 849) .* Borr took to him Bestla, the giant BolJ>orn's daughter,
and begat three sons, O&inn, Vili, Ve (p. 162), and by them was
the giant Ymir slain. As he sank to the ground, such a quantity
of blood ran out of his wounds, that all the giants were drowned
in it, save one, Bergelmir* who with his wife escaped in a lfrSr
(Seem. 35 b , Sn. 8), and from them is descended the (younger)
race of giants (see Suppl.). 3

The sons of Borr dragged the dead Ymir's body into the mid-
dle of ginnunga-gap, and created out of his blood the sea and
water, of his flesh the earth, of his bones the mountains, of his
teeth and broken bones the rocks and crags. Then they took his
skull and made of it the sky, and the sparks from Muspellsheim
that floated about free they fixed in the sky, so as to give light
to all. The earth was round, and encircled by deep sea, 4 on



1 In the Zend system, the firs man proceeds from the haunch of the primeval
bull Kayomer.

* Ymir, i.e. , Orgelmir, begot Tftrttifgelmir, and he Bergelmir.

* The meaning of WSr has not been ascertained; elsewhere it stands for
culeus, tuba, here it is supposed to be a mill-chest. The OHG. Itidara f. means
a cradle (Graft 2, 201) as well as pannus, involucrum (swaddling-band), and this
would fit remarkably well, as some accounts of the Deluge do make the rescued
child float in its cradle. True, Snorri speaks not of a child, but of a grown-up
^iant, who sits in the ltfSr with his wife ; this may be a later version. [Slav, lot
is shallow basket, trough, tray.]

4 Snorri at all events conceived the earth to be round, he says p. 9: *hon er
krtnglOtt utan, ok frar utan urn liggr hinn diupi si&r.' So in the Luoidarius : ' di»e



Digitized by VjOOQIC



560 CBBATION.

whose shore the giants were to dwell ; but to guard the inland
parts of the earth against them, there was built of Ymir's brows
a castle, Miffgarft. The giant's brain was thrown into the air,
and formed the clouds, Sn. 8, 9.

SsBmund's account 45 b (conf . 33 b ) differs in some points :

or Tmirs holdi var ior$ um scoput,

enn or sveita s®r,

biorg or beinorn-, b&Smr or hart,

enn or hausi himinn,

enn or hans bram gerSo bli$ regin

mi'SgarS manna sonom,

enn or hans heila voro J?au in harSmdSgo

sk£ 611 um scoput.

Here the teeth are not made use of, but we have instead the
formation of trees out of the giant's hair.

When all this was done, the sons of Borr went to the seashore,
and found two trees, out of which they created two human beings,
Askr and Embla. To these OSinn gave soul and life, Vili wit
and feeling (sense of touch), Ve countenance (colour?), speech,
hearing and sight, Sn. 10. More exactly in Sasm. 3 b :

unz J?rir komo or J?vt lHSi

oflgir ok &stgir ©sir at susi (uproar).

f undo & landi litt megandi

Ash ok Emblo orloglausa :

ond (spirit) J?au ne &tto, 6"8 (mind) J?au ne hofSo,

IS, (blood) ne laeti, ne lito (colours) gofta.

ond gaf OSinn, 6$ gaf Hoenir,

1& gaf LoSr ok litu gdSa.

In this account the three &ses are named OSinn, Hoenir, LoBr
(p. 241) instead of OSinn, Vili, Ve (p. 162) ; they come to the
roaring (of the sea, ad aestum, nrapa 6lva iro\v<f>\ol<r/3oio da-
Tuurarf^), and find Askr and Embla powerless and inert. Then

welt ist sinwel (spherical), and umbeflozzen mit dem wendelmer, darin swebt die
erde als daz tutter in dem wizen dee eiiet ist/ conf. Berthold p. 287, and Wackern.
Basel MSS. p. 20. The creation of heaven and earth out of the parts of an egg ia
poetically painted in Kalewala, rune 1 (see Suppl.). — * Indian legend has likewise
a creation ont of the egg, heaven and earth being eggshells, Somadeva 1, 10. Conf.
the birth of Helen and the Dioscuri ont of an egg.'— Extr. from Suppl.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CREATION. 561

OSinn endowed them with spirit, Hcenir with reason, LoSr with
blood and complexion (see SuppL).

The creation of dwarfs is related in two passages which do not
altogether agree. Sn. 15 tells us, when the gods sat in their
chairs judging, they remembered that in the dust and the earth
dwarfs had come alive, as maggots do in meat (see SuppL).
They were created and received life first of all in Ymi^s flesh.
By the decree of the gods these maggots now obtained under-
standing and human shape, but continued to live in the earth
and in stones. Sasm. 2 says on the contrary, that the holy gods
in their chairs consulted, who should make the nation of dwarfs
oat of Brimir's flesh and his black bones ; then sprang up
Motsognir, prince of all dwarfs, and after him Durinn, and they
two formed a multitude of manlike dwarfs out of the earth.

Taking all these accounts together, it is obvious in the first
place, that only the men and dwarfs are regarded as being
really created, while the giants and gods come, as it were, of
themselves out of chaos. To the production of men and dwarfs
there went a formative agency on the part of gods ; giants and
gods, without any such agency, made their appearance under the
mere action of natural heat and the licking of a cow. Giants
and gods spring out of a combination of fire with water, yet
so that the element converted into ice must recover its fluidity
before it becomes capable of production. The giant and the cow
drip out of the frost, Buri slowly extricates himself in three days
from the thawing mass of ice. This dripping origin reminds us
of some other features in antiquity ; thus, OSinn had a gold ring
Draupnir (the dripper), from which every ninth night there
dripped eight other rings of equal weight (S®m. 84*. Sn. 66).
Sasm. 195 b speaks, not very lucidly, of a hausi HerSdraupnis
(cranio stillantis) ; Styrian legend commemorates a giant's rib
from which a drop fails once a year (D.S. no. 140) . l And Eve
may be said to drip out of Adam's rib. With the giant's birth
out of ice and rime we may connect the story of the snow-child
(in the Modus Liebinc), and the influence, so common in our
fairy-tales, of snow and blood on the birth of a long wished for
child. All this seems allied to heathen notions of creation, conf.

1 No doubt the familiar name Bibbentrop is founded on some such tradition.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



562 CREATION.

Chap. XXX. Also I must call attention to the terms eitrdropi
S»m. 85*, eitrqvikja Sn. 5, qvikvdropi Sn. 6 : it is the vivifying
fiery drop, and we do bestow on fire the epithet ' living/ Eitr
is our eiter, OHG. eitar, AS. &tor, coming from OHGh eit, AS.
&d ignis ; and its derivative sense of venenum (poison, <t>dpfjLaxov)
seems inapplicable to the above compounds.

It tallies with the views expressed at p. 816 on the gods having
a beginning and an end, that in this system of creation too they
are not described as existing from the first : the god appears in
ginnfingagap after a giant has preceded him. It is true, Snorri
6 makes use of a remarkable phrase: 'sv& at qviknafti meS
krapti jress er til sendi hitann/ the quickening is referred to the
might of him that sent the heat, as if that were an older eternal
God who already ruled in the chaos. The statement would have
more weight, were it forthcoming in the Voluspa or any of the
Eddie songs themselves ; as it is, it looks to me a mere shift of
Snorri's own, to account for the presence and action of the heat,
and so on a par with the formulas quoted in pp. 22-3-4. 1 Buri,
who is thawed into existence out of ice, to set limits to the rude
evil nature of the giant that was there before him, shews himself
altogether an ancestor and prototype of the heroes, whose mission
it was to exterminate the brood of giants. From him are de-
scended all the &ses, OSinn himself being only a grandson.

Again, there is no mistaking the distinct methods by which
giants, gods and men propagate their kind. Only one giant had
sprung out of ice, he has to beget children of himself, an office
performed by his hands and feet together, as in other ways also
the hand and foot are regarded as akin and allied to one another. 3
Ymir's being asleep during the time is like Adam's sleep while
Eve was fashioned out of his rib ; Eve therefore takes her rise
in Adam himself, after which they continue their race jointly.
How Buri begat Borr we are not informed, but Borr united him-
self to a giant's daughter, who bore him three sons, and from
them sprang the rest of the fises. It was otherwise with men,



1 We might indeed imagine that regin and ginregin ruled before the arrival
of the &ses, and that this force of heat proceeded from them. But the Edda must
first have distinctly said so.

* Conf. Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 156-7. Brahma too makes a man out of his own
arm, Poiier 1, 168.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CBEATION. 563

who were not created singly, like the giant or the god, but two
at once, man and wife, and then jointly propagate their species.

While the huge mass of the giant's body supplied the gods
with materials, so that they could frame the whole world out of
his different parts, and the dwarfs swarmed in the same giant's
flesh as worms ; mankind are descended from two trees on the
seashore, which the gods endowed with breath and perfect life.
They have therefore no immediate connexion with giants.

In the ases we see a superior and successful second prodnct,
in contrast with the first half-bungled giant affair. On the giants
an undue proportion of inert matter had been expended ; in the
&ses body and soul attained a perfect equilibrium, and together
with infinite strength and beauty was evolved an informing
and creative mind. To men belongs a less full, yet a fair,
measure of both qualities, while dwarfs, as the end of creation,
form the antithesis to giants, for mind in them outweighs the
puny body. Our Heldenbuch on the contrary makes the dwarfs
come into being first, the giants next, and men last of all.

As the giants originated in the ice of streams that poured out
of the fountain Hvergelmir, we may fairly assume some connexion
between it and the names Ch'gdmvr, Thruffgelmir, Bergelmir. I
derive gelmir from gialla (stridere), and connect it with the
OHG. galm (stridor, sonitus). Hvergelmir will therefore mean a
roaring cauldron ; and the same notion of uproar and din is
likely to be present in the giants' names, which would support
the derivation of Tmir from ymja, p. 532. The reading Orgemlir
would indeed accord with the notion of great age associated with
the giant nature (p. 524), but would sever tbe link between
giants and the cauldron of chaos.

Thus far the Scandinavian theory : now to prove its general
diffusion.

Though the word ginnftngagap has no exact parallel in OHG.
or AS., it may for all that be the thing described in the follow-
ing verses of the Wessobrunn Prayer :

Dat gafregin ih mit firahim firiwizzo meista (wisest men),
dat ero ni was noh Afhimil (earth was not, nor sky),
noh paum (tree) nohheinig noh pereg (mountain) ni was,
noh sunn& ni scein [noh sterno ni cleiz (glistened)],

Digitized by VjOOQIC



564 CREATION.

no m&no (moon) ni liuhta noh der mareos&o (sea).

d6 dar niwiht ni was enteo ni wenteo,

enti d6 was der eino almahtico Cot (Almighty God alone).
The last line may sound completely christian, and the preceding*
ones may have nothing directly opposed to christian doctrine ;
yet the juxtaposition of earth and heaven, tree and mountain,
sun [and star], moon and sea, also the archaic forms ero (terra),
Afhimil (ccBlum), mareosdo (mare, Goth, maris&ivs), which must
be thrown into the scale, — all have a ring of the Bdda :

Vara sandr ne saer, ne svalar unnir,
iorS fanz 89va ne upphiminn,
gap var ginnfmga, enn gras hvergi.
sdl j>at ne vissi hvar hon sali &tti,
stiornor j?at ne visso hvar J?»r 8ta"Si fttto,
m&ni J?at ne vissi hvat hann megins &tti.

The words ' niwiht ni was enteo ni wenteo ' give in roundabout
phrase exactly the notion of ginnflngagap. 1

These hints of heathenism have gained additional force, now
that OHG. and OS. songs are found to retain the technical term
nwwpilli = ON. muspell ; the close connexion between nifl, NijU
heim, and the Nibelungen so intergrown with our epos (p. 372) does
not in any case admit of doubt. Now if these two poles of the
Scandinavian chaos entered into the belief of all Teutonic nations,
the notion of creation as a whole must have been as widely
spread. It has been shewn that the Old-German opinion about
giants, gods, men and dwarfs closely agreed with the Norse ; I
am now able further to produce, though in inverted order, the
same strange connexion described in the Edda between a giant's
body and the world's creation.

Four documents, lying far apart in respect of time and place
(and these may some day be reinforced by others) transmit to us
a notable account of the creation of the first man. But, while
the Edda uses up the giant's gutted and dismembered frame to
make a heaven and earth, here on the contrary the whole world
is made use of to create man's body.

* Gonf. also Otfr. ii. 1, 3 : « 6r si ioh himil wurti, ioh erda ouh ad herti,' and
the description of chaos in Cffidmon 7. 8, particularly the term heoUtersceado 7,
11 ; though there is little or nothing opposed to Bible doctrine. Conf. Aristoph.
Aves 693-4.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CBEATION. 565

The oldest version is to be found in the Kitnale ecclesiae
Dunelmensis (Lond. 1839), in which a scribe of the 10th century
has interpolated the following passage, an AS. translation being
interlined with the Latin :

Oeto pondera, de quibus factus JEhte pundo, of jraBin ftworden

est Adam, pondus limi, inde is Adam, pund l&mes, of )>on

factus (sic) est caro; pondus ftworden is flcesc; pund fires,

ignis, inde rubens est sanguis of j?on read is blod and h&tj

et calidus ; pondus salis, inde pund saltes, of J?on sindon salto

sunt salsae lacrimae; pondus tehero ; pund }>e&wes, of j?on

roris, unde factus est sudor; ftworden is swat; pund bl6st-

pondus floris, inde est varietas mes, of J?on is f&gung egena;

oculorum ; pondus nubis, inde pund wolcnes, of J?on is onstyd-

est instabilitas rnentium ; pon- fullnisse J?ohta; pund windes,

dus venti, inde est anhela fri- of j?onis oro& cald; pund 1 gefe,

gida ; pondus l gratiae, inde est of j?on is poht monnes.
sensus hominis.

A similar addition is made to a MS. of the Code of Emsig (Richt-
hofen, p. 211): — 'God sc6p thene firesta meneska, thet was Adam,.
fon achta wendern. thet benete fon tha st6ne, thet flask fon there
erthe, thet blod fon tha wetere, tha herta fon tha winde, thene
thochta fon tha wolken, thene suet fon tha dawe, tha lokkar fon
tha gerse, tha agene fon there sunna, and tha blSrem on (blew
into him) thene helga 6m (breath), and tha scop he Eva fon
sine ribbe, Adames liana/ The handwriting of this document
is only of the 15th cent., but it may have been copied from an
older MS. of the Emsig Code, the Code itself being of the 14th
cent.

1 This * pound of grace' comes in bo oddly, that I venture to guess an omission
between the words, of perhaps a line, which described the 8th material. The two
accounts that follow next, after naming eight material ingredients, bring in the holy
breath or spirit as something additional, to which this gift of • grace ' would fairly
correspond. Another AS. version, given in Suppl. , from the Saturn and Solomon
(Thorpe's AnaL p. 95, ed. Kemble p. 180), is worth comparing: here 'foldan
pund ' becomes % JUt$e f fyres pund bldd, windes p. a&ung, wolcnes p. mdSet un-
stattelfsstnes, gyfe p. fat and gejwng, bl6stmena p. e&gena missenlfonist, deawes
p. * lrdt, sealtes p. Uaras. 1 — Here ' gyfe ' is right in the middle of the sentence : can
it be, that both * gefe ' and * gyfe ' are a corruption of Geofon the sea god, gif en the
sea (supra, p. 289), which in christian times had become inadmissible, perhaps
unintelligible ? It would be strange if water, except as dew, were made no use of ;
and the 'sea supplying thought' would agree with the French account, which
ascribes wisdom to him that has an extra stock of sea in him. — Tbans.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



666 CBBATION.

The third passage is contained in a poem of the 12th cent,
on the four Gospels (Diemer 320, 6-20 ; conf. the notes to 95,
18. 27, and 320, 6) :

Got mit siner gewalt

der wrchet zeichen vil manecvalt,

der worhte den mennischen einen

uzzen von aht teilen :

von dem leime gab er ime daz fleisch,

der tow bec£chenit den sweihc (sweat),

von dem steine gab er im daz pein (bone),

des nist zwtvil nehein (is no doubt),

von den wrcen (worts) gab er ime di ddren (veins),

von dem grase gab er ime daz hdr,

von dem mere gab er ime d&zplut (blood),

von den wolchen (clouds) daz mut (mood, mind),

du habet er ime begnnnen

der ougen (eyes) von der sannen.

Er verlfih ime sinen atem (his own breath),

daz wir ime den behilten (keep it for him)

nnte stnen gesin (and be his)

daz wir ime imer wuocherente stn (ever bear fruit) .

Lastly, I take a passage from Godfrey of Viterbo's Pantheon,
which was finished in 1187 (Pistorii Scriptor. 2,53): — 'Cum
legimus Adam de limo terrae formatum, intelligendum est ex
quatuor elementis. mundus enim iste major ex quatuor elementis
constat, igne, aere, aqua et terra, humanum quoque corpus dicitur
inicrocosmus, id est minor mundus. habet namque ex terra
carnem, ex aqua humores, ex aere flatum, ex igne calorem. caput
autem ejus est rotundum sicut coelum, in quo duo sunt oculi, tan-
quam duo luminaria in coelo micant. venter ejus tanquam mare
continet omnes liquores. pectus et pulmo emittit voces, et
quasi coelestes resonat harmonias. pedes tanquam terra sustinent
corpus universum. ex igni coelesti habet visum, e superiore aere
habet auditum, ex inferiori habet olfactum, ex aqua gustum, ex
terra habet tactum. in duritie participat cum lapidibus, in
0S8tbu8 vigorem habet cum arboribus, in capillis et unguibus
decorem habet cum graminibus et floribus. sensus habet cum
brutis animalibus. ecce talis est hominis substantia corporea.' —



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CREATION. 567

Godfrey, educated at Bamberg, and chaplain to German kings,
most have heard in Germany the doctrine of the eight parts ; he
brings forward only a portion of it, such as he could reconcile
with his other system of the four elements ; he rather compares
particular parts of the body with natural objects, than affirms
that those were created out of these.

Not one of the four compositions has any direct connexion
with another, as their peculiarities prove ; but that they all rest
on a common foundation follows at once from the ( octo pondera,
achta wendem, aht teilen/ among which the alleged correspond-
ences are distributed. They shew important discrepancies in
the details, and a different order is followed in each. Only three
items go right through the first three accounts, namely, that lime
(loam, earth) was taken for the flesh, dew for the sweat, clouds
for the mind. But then the MHG. and Frisian texts travel much
further together ; both of them make bone spring out of stone,
hair (locks) from grass, eyes from the sun, blood from the sea
(water), none of which appear in the AS. Peculiar to the MHG.
poem is the derivation of the veins from herbs (wiirzen), and to
the AS. writer that of the blood from fire, of tears from salt, of
the various colours in the eye from flowers, 1 of cold breath from
wind, and of sense from grace; which last, though placed
beyond doubt by the annexed translation, seems an error not-
withstanding, for it was purely out of material objects that
creation took place ; or can the meaning be, that man's will is
first conditioned by the grace of God ? Fitly enough, tears are
likened to salt (salsae lacrimae) ; somewhat oddly the colours of
the eye to flowers, though it is not uncommon to speak of an
opening flower as an eye. The creation of hearts out of wind
is found in the Frisian account alone, which is also the only one
that adds, that into this mixture of eight materials God blew his
holy breath, and out of Adam's rib created his companion Eve
[the MHG. has : * imparted his breath '] . 2

1 Variegated eyes are the oculi varii, Pro?, vain huelhs (Rayn. sub v. var),
O.Fr. vairs iez (Roquef. sab v.). We find in OHG. bluom/efc, and ' gevehet nan
tien bluomon,' Graff 3, 426 ; the AS. fdgung above.

* Well, here is already our fifth version, from a Paris M3. of the 15th century
(Panlin Paris, M88. francais de La, bibl. da roi 4, 207) : • Adam fa forme oa champ
damacien, et fa fait si eomme nous trouvons de huit parties de ehoses : du limon de
la terre, de la mer, du scleil, des nuts, du vent, des pierrts, du saint esprit, et de la
eUrU du monde. De la terre fu la char, de la mer fu le tang, da soleil furent les



VOL. II. K

Digitized by



Google



568 CEEATION.

If now we compare all the statements with those taken from
the Edda, their similarity or sameness is beyond all question :
blood with sea or water, flesh with earth, bone with stone, hair
with trees or grass, are conpled together in the same way here.
What weighs more than anything with me is the accordance of
r brain and clonds ' with f thoughts and clouds/ The brain is the
seat of thought, and as clouds pass over the sky, so we to
this day have them flit across the mind ; r clouded brow ' we say
of a reflective pensive brooding one, and the Grimnism&l 45 b
applies to the clouds the epithet harSm6$agr, hard of mood. It
was quite in the spirit of the Edda to make the skull do for
the sky, and the eyebrows for a castle ; but how could sky or
castle have furnished materials for the human frame ? That the
striking correspondence of the sun to the eye should be wanting
in the Edda, is the more surprising, as the san, moon and stars
are so commonly spoken of as eyes (Superst. 614), and antiquity
appears even to have seen tongues in them, both of which points
fall to be discussed in Chap. XXII. ; meanwhile, if these enu-
merations are found incomplete, it may be that there were plenty
more of such correspondences passing current. If Thorr flung
a toe into the sky as a constellation, there may also have been
tongues that represented stars.

The main difference between the Scandinavian view and all
the others is, as I said before, that the one uses the microcosm as
material for the macrocosm, and the other inversely makes the
universe contribute to the formation of man. There the whole
of nature is but the first man gone to pieces, here man is put
together out of the elements of nature. The first way of think-
ing seems more congenial to the childhood of the world, it is all

yeulxy des nues farent lea penstes, du vent furent les attaints, des pierres furent les
02, du saint esprit fu la vt«, la darte* du monde aignifie Crist et aa creance. Saichez
que so il y a en l'omme plus de limon de la terre, il sera paresoeux en touted man-
ures ; et Be il y a plus de la mer, il sera sage ; et se il y a plus de soleil, il sera
beau ; et se il y a plus de nuee, il sera pensis ; et se il y a plus du vent, il sera
ireux ; et se il y a plus de pierre, il sera dur, avar et larron ; et se il y a plus de
saint esprit, il sera gracieux ; et se il y a plus de la darte" du monde, il sera beaux

et amez.' These eight items are again somewhat different from the preceding,

though six are the same : earth, sea, oloud, wind, stone and sun ; the Holy Ghost
and the light of the world are peculiar, while veins, hair, tears, and motley eyea
are wanting. The * champ damacien ' is * ager plaamationis Ad©, qui dioitur ager
damascenus,' oonf. FeL Fabri Evagator, 2, 841. [Is ' du monde ' the mistranslation
of a Germ. ' des mondes,' the moon's ? Like the sun, it bestows * beauty, 1 and
that has nothing to do with Christ, who is however * the light of the world. 1 — Ta.]



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CREATION. 569

in keeping to explain the sun as a giant's eye, the mountains as
his bones, the bushes as his hair ; there are plenty of legends
still that account for particular lakes and marshes by the
gushing blood of a giant, for oddly-shaped rocks by his ribs
and marrow-bones ; and in a similar strain the waving corn was
likened to the hair of Sif or Ceres. It is at once felt to be more
artificial for sun and mountain and tree to be put into requisition
to produce the human eye and bones and hair. Yet we do speak
of eyes being sunny, and of our flesh as akin to dust, and why
may not even the heathens have felt prompted to turn that cos-
mogonic view upside down ? Still more would this commend
itself to Christians, as the Bible expressly states that man was
made of earth or loam, 1 without enlarging on the formation of
the several constituent parts of the body. None of the Fathers
seem to be acquainted with the theory of the eight constituents
of the first man; I will not venture to decide whether it was
already familiar to heathen times, and maintained itself by the
side of the Eddie doctrine, or first arose out of the collision of
this with christian teaching, and is to be regarded as a fuller
development of the Adamic dogma. If Adam was interpreted
to mean clay, it was but taking a step farther to explain, more
precisely, that the flesh only was borrowed from earth, but
the bones from stones, and the hair from grass. It is almost
unscriptural, the way in which the MHG. poetizer of Genesis
(Fundgr. 2, 15) launches out into such minutiae: — 'Duo Got
zeinitzen stucchen den man zesamene wolte rucchen, duo nam er,
sdsich wane, einen leim zahe (glutinous lime), da er wolte daz
daz lit zesamene solte (wished the limbs to come together),
streich des unterzuisken (smeared it between), daz si zesamene
mohten haften (stick), denselben letten (clay) tet er ze adaren
(made into veins), uber ieglich lit er zdeh denselben leim zach,
daz si vasto chlebeten, zesamene sich habeten. uz hertem Imme
(hard lime) tet er daz gebeine, uz proder erde (crumbly earth)
hiez er daz fleisk werden, uz letten deme zdJien machet er die
adare. duo er in alien zesamene gevuocte, duo bestreich er in
mit einer slote (bedaubed him with a slime), diu selbe slote wart
ze dere hute (became the skin), duo er daz pilede (figure) firlich

1 * Die leindnen,' the loamen folk, Geo. 3409, is said of men, as we say • e luto,
ex meliori Into fioti.'

Digitized by VjOOQIC



570 CREATION.

gelegete fare Bich, duo stuont er ime werde obe der selben erde.
sinen geist er in in blies, michelen sin er ime firliez, die &dare
alle wnrden pluotes folle, ze fleiske wart diu erde, ze peine der
him herte, die &dare pugen sich sw& spesamene gie daz lit (blew
his spirit in, imparted mickle sense, the veins filled with blood,

the earth became flesh, the hard lime bone, etc.).' These

distinctions between lime, clay, earth and slime have a tang of
heathenism ; the poet durst not entirely depart from the creation
as set forth by the church, but that compounding of man out of
several materials appears to be still known to him. And traces
of it are met with in the folk-poetry. 1

It is significant how Greek and, above all, Asiatic myths of
the creation coincide with the Norse (and what I believe to have
been once the universal Teutonic) view of the world's origin out
of component parts of the human body : it must therefore be
of remote antiquity. The story lasts in India to this day, that
Brahmft was slain by the other gods, and the sky made out of his
skull : there is some analogy to this in the Greek notion of Atlas
supporting on his head the vault of heaven. According to one
of the Orphic poets, the body of Zeus is understood to be the
earth, his bones the mountains, and his eyes the sun and moon. 9
Cochin-Chinese traditions tell, how Buddha made the world out
of the giant Banio's body, of his skull the sky, of his eyes the
sun and moon, of his flesh the earth, of his bones rocks and hills,
and of his hair trees and plants. Similar macrocosms are met
with in Japan and Ceylon; Kalmuk poems describe how the
earth arose from the metamorphosis of a mountain-giantess, the
sea from her blood (Finn Magn. Lex., 877-8, and Suppl.).

But Indian doctrine itself inverts this macrocosm, making the
sun enter into the eye, plants into the hair, stones into the bones,
and water into the blood of created man, so that in him the

1 The giants mould a man ont of clay (leir), Sn. 109. The Finnish god II-
marinen hammers himself a wife out of gold, Rune 20. Pintosmauto is baked of
sugar, spice and scented water, his hair is made of gold thread, his teeth of pearls,
his eyes of sapphires, and his lips of rubies, Pentam. 5, 8. In a Servian song
(Vuk no. 110), two sisters spin themselves a brother of red and white silk, they
make him a body of boxwood, eyes of precious stones, eyebrows of sea-urchins,
and teeth of pearls, then stuff sugar and honey into his mouth : ' Now eat that,
and talk to us (to nam yedi, pa nam probesedi) 1 * And the myth of Pygmalion is
founded on bringing a stone figure to life (see Suppl.).

8 "Ofifutra 8' #Xio* re iced dj>n6wa o-eXiJin;. Euseb. UporapaaK. c&ayy. 3, 9.
Lobeck, De microo. et macroo. p. 4.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CREATION. 571

whole world is mirrored back. According to a Chaldean cos-
mogony, when Belus had cat the darkness in twain, and divided
heaven from earth, he commanded his own head to be struck off,
and the blood to be let ran into the ground; out of this arose
man gifted with reason. Hesiod's representation is, that Pandora
was formed by Hephaestus out of earth mingled with water, and
then Hermes endowed her with speech, "ILpya 61-79. The
number of ingredients is first reduced to earth and blood (or
water), then in the 0. T. to earth alone.

And there are yet other points of agreement claiming our
attention. As Ymir engendered man and wife out of his hand,
and a giant son out of his foot, we are told by the Indian Manas,
that Brahm& produced four families of men, namely from his
mouth the first brahman (priest), from his arm the first kshatriya
(warrior), from his thigh the first vizh (trader and husbandman), 1
from his foot the first sudra (servant and artizan). And so, no
doubt, would the Eddie tradition, were it more fully preserved,
make a difference of rank exist between the offspring of Ymir's
hand and those of his foot ; a birth from the foot must mean a
lower one. There is even a Caribbean myth in which Luguo,
the sky, descends to the earth, and the first parents of mankind
come forth from his navel and thigh, in which he had made an
incision. 9 Beading of these miraculous births, who can help
thinking of Athena coming out of Zeus' s head (rpiToyeveia) , and
Dionysus out of his thigh (jirjpoppacfyijs) ? As the latter was
called SifujTwp (two-mothered), so the unexplained fable of the
nine mothers of Heimdallr (p. 234) seems to rest on some
similar ground (see Suppl.).

From these earlier creations of gods and giants the Edda and,
as the sequel will shew, the Indian religion distinguish the crea-
tion of the first human pair. As with Adam and Eve in Scrip-
ture, so in the Edda there is presupposed some material to be
quickened by God, but a simple, not a composite one. Tr6
means both tree and wood, askr the ash-tree (fraxinus) ; the
relation of Askr to the Isco of heroic legend has already been
discussed, p. 350. If by the side of Askr, the man, there stood



1 E femoribus natus—ftravya, tiruja, Bopp's Gloss. 54*.
1 Major's Mythol. taschenbuoh 2, 4.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



572 CREATION.

an Eskja, the woman, the balance would be held more evenly ;
they would be related as Meshia and Meshiane in the Persian
myth, man and woman, who likewise grew out of plants. Bub
the Bdda calls them Askr and Embla : embla, emla, signifies a
busy woman, OHG. emila, as in fiur-emila (focaria), a Cinderella
(Graff 1, 252), from amr, ambr, ami, ambl (labor assiduus),
whence also the hero's name Amala (p. 370). As regards Askr
however, it seems worthy of notice, that legend makes the first
king of the Saxons, Aschanes (Askanius), grow up out of the
Harz rocks, by a fountain-head in the midst of the forest. See-
ing that the Saxons themselves take their name from sahs (saxnm,
stone), that a divine hero bears the name of Sahsnot (p. 203),
that other traditions derive the word Germani from germinare,
because the Germans are said to have grown on trees ; 1 we have
here the possibility of a complex chain of relationships. The
Geogr. of Ravenna says, the Saxons removed from their ancient
6eats to Britain ' cum principe suo, nomine Anchis.' This may
be Hengist, or still better his son Oesc, whom I have identified
with Askr. 8

Plainly there existed primitive legends, which made the first
men, or the founders of certain branches of the Teutonic nation,
grow out of trees and rocks, that is to say, which endeavoured
to trace the lineage of living beings to the half -alive kingdom of
plants and stones. Even our leut (populus), OHG. liut, has for
its root liotan (crescere, pullulare), OS. liud, liodan ; s and the
sacredness of woods and mountains in our olden time is height-
ened by this connexion. And similar notions of the Greeks fit
in with this. One who can reckon up his ancestors is appealed
to with the argument (Od. 19, 163) :

ov yap dirb Spvo? iaat irakaufrarov ovf? airb ireTprj? •

for not of fabled oak art thou, nor rock ; 4 and there must have

1 D. S. no. 408. Aventin 18 b ; conf. the popular joke, prob. ancient, on the
origin of Swabians, Franks and Bavarians, Schm. 3, 524.

3 In the Jewish language, both learned and vulgar, Ashkenaz denotes Ger-
many or a German. The name occurs in Gen. 10, 8 and Jer. 51, 27 ; how early
its mistaken use began, is unknown even to J. D. Miohaelis (Spicil. geogr. Hebr.
1. 59) ; it must have been by the 15th century, if not sooner, and the rabbis may
very likely have been led to it by hearing talk of a derivation of the Germans from
an ancestor Askanius, or else the Trojan one.

9 PCpuluB however is unconn. with populus a poplar.

4 Such an * e quercu aut saxo natus,' who cannot name his own father, is vul-



Digitized by VjOO^IC



CREATION. 573

been fairy tales about it, which children told each other in con-
fidential chat (oapige/JLevcu anrb Spvbs rjS* airb irerpr)?, II. 22, 126. 1
aXXa rvq poi ravra irepl Bpvv fj irepl ireTprjv; Hes. Theog. 35).
In marked unison with the myth of Askr is the statement of
Hesiod, that Zeus formed the third or brazen race out of ash-
trees {etc fieXtav, Op. 147) ; and if the allusion be to the stout
ashen shafts of the heroes, why, Isco or Askr may have bran-
dished them too. One remembers too those wood-wives and fays,
who, like the Greek meliads and dryads, had their sole power of
living bound up with some particular oak or ash, and, unlike the
tree-born man, had never got wholly detached from the material
of their origin. Then, a creation out of stones is recorded in
the story of Deucalion, whom after the deluge Hermes bade
throw stones behind his back : those that he threw, all turned
into men, and those that his wife Pyrrha threw, into women. As
in the Edda, after the great flood comes a new creation ; only in
this case the rescued people are themselves the actors. 2 Even
the Jews appear to have known of a mythical creation out of
stones, for we read in Matth. 3, 9 : on hvvarcu 6 ©eo<? itc r&v
\{0<ov roirav eyelpac rixva r£ Afipadp, (see Suppl.).

The creation of dwarfs is described ambiguously in the Edda :
according to one story they bred as worms in the proto-giant's
flesh, and were then endowed by the gods with understanding
and human shape ; but by the older account they were created
out of the flesh and bones of another giant Brimir. All this has
to do with the black elves alone, and must not be extended to
the light ones, about whose origin we are left in the dark. And
other mythologies are equally silent.

It is important and interesting to get a clear view of the grada-
tion and sequence of the several creations. That in the Edda
•giants come first, gods next, and then, after an intervening deluge,



garly spoken of as one * whose father got drowned on the apple (or nnt) tree.' Also,
* not to have sprang from an oak-stem/ Etner's Unw. doot. 685. * Min gof ist an
nud abbem nossbom aba ohoh,' * and my dad didn't come off the nut-tree,' Tobler
337 b , who wrongly refers it to the Christmas-tree.

1 Homer's phrase is : • chat from oak or rook, as youth and maiden do.' —
Tbaks.

2 As Deucalion and Pyrrha create the race of men, so (aec. to a myth in the
Beinhartsaage, whose source I never could discover) do Adam and Eve create that
of beasts by smiting the sea with rods. Only, Adam makes the good beasts, Eve
the bad ; so in Parsee legend Ormuzd and Ahriman hold a creating match.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



574 CREATION.

men and dwarfs are created, appears in surprising harmony with
a theological opinion largely adopted throughout the Mid. Ages,
according to which, though the 0. T. begins with the work of
the six days, yet the existence and consequently the creation of
angels and the apostasy of devils had gone before, and then were
produced heaven and earth, man and all other creatures. 1 After-
wards, it is true, there comes also a destructive flood, but does
not need to be followed by a new creation, for a pious remnant
of mankind is saved, which peoples the earth anew. The Muham-
medan eblis (by aphraresis from dieblis, diabolus) is an apostate
spirit indeed, but created after Adam, and expelled from Para-
dise. Our Teutonic giants resemble at once the rebel angels
(devils) and the sinful men swept away by the flood ; here deli-
verance was in store for a patriarch, there for a giant, who after
it continues his race by the side of men. A narrative preserved
in the appendix to our Heldenbuch offers some fragments of
cosmogony : three creations -follow one another, that of dwarfs
leading the way, after whom come giants, and lastly men ; God
has called into being the skilful dwarfs to cultivate waste lands
and mountain regions, the giants to fight wild beasts, and the
heroes to assist the dwarfs against disloyal giants ; this connexion
and mutual dependence of the races is worthy of note, though on
the manner of creating there is not a word. Lastly, the threefold
arrangement of classes instituted by Heimdallr 2 may, I think, be
regarded as a later act in the drama of creation, of which perhaps
a trace is yet to be seen even in modern traditions (p. 234) . s

Another thing I lay stress on is, that in the Edda man and
woman (Askr and Embla) come into existence together, but the



1 Conf. the poetical representations in Caedmon and Fundgr. 2, 11. 12; of
course they rest on opinions approved or tolerated by the church. Scripture, in its
account of the creation, looks only to the human race, leaving angels and giants
out of sight altogether, though, as the narrative goes on, they are found existing.

8 The Mid. Ages trace the origin of freemen to Shem, that of knights and serfs
to Japhet and Ham; Wackern. Bas. MSS. 2, 20.

8 I have since lighted on a Muhammedan legend in Wolfg. Menzel's MythoL
forschungen 1, 40 : Eve had so many children, that she was ashamed, and once,
when surprised by God, she hid some of them away. God then called the children
to him, and divided all the goods and honours of the earth among them. Those
that were hidden got none, and from them are descended beggars and fakirs.
Unfortunately no authority is given, but the agreement with the German drama of
the 16th cent, is undeniable, and makes me doubt the supposed connexion of the
latter with the ON. fable. That the concealed children are not called up, U at
variance with all German accounts.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CREATION. 575

Bible makes two separate actions, Adam's creation coming first,
and Eve's being performed afterwards and in a different manner. 1
So, by Hesiod's account, there already existed men descended
from the gods themselves, when the first woman Pandora, the all-
gifted, fair and false, was formed out of earth and flood (p. 571).
It is difficult to arrive at the exact point of view in the Hesiodic
poems. In the Theogony, there ascend out of chaos first Gaia
(earth) the giantess, then Erebus (corresp. to Niflheim) and
Night ; but Gaia by herself brought forth Uranus (sky) and seas
and mountains, then other children by Uranus, the last of them
Kronus the father of Zeus and ancestor of all the gods. As
the Edda has a Buri and Borr before OSinn, so do Uranus and
Kronus here come before Zeus ; with Zeus and OSinn begins the
race of gods proper, and Poseidon and Hades complete the fra-
ternal trio, like Vili and Ve. The enmity of gods and titans is
therefore that of fees and giants; at the same time, there is just
as much resemblance in the expulsion of the titans from heaven
(Theog. 813) to the fall of the rebel angels into the bottomless
pit ; so that to the giant element in the titans we may add a
daemonic. When the * Works and Days ' makes the well-known
five races fill five successive ages, the act of creation must needs
have been repeated several times ; on which point neither the
poem itself nor Plato (Cratyl. 897-8, Steph.) gives sufficient
information. First came the golden race of blissful daimones,
next the silver one of weaker divine beings, thirdly, the brazen
one of warriors sprung from ash-trees, fourthly, the race of
heroes, fifthly, the iron one of men now living. The omission
of a metal designation for the fourth race is of itself enough to
make the statement look imperfect. Dimmest of all is the second
race, which also Plato passes over, discussing only daemons, heroes
and men : will the diminutive stature of these shorter-lived genii
warrant a comparison with the wights and elves of our own
mythology ? In the third race giants seem to be portrayed, or
fighters of the giant sort, confronting as they do the rightful

1 The rabbinic myth supposes a first woman, Lilith, made out of the ground
like Adam. [The Bible, we know, has two different accounts of man's creation :
the first (Elohistic) in Gen. 1, 27, * male and female created he them ; ' the second
(JehoTistio) in Gen. 2, 7, * formed man of the dust/ and in w. 21. 22, • took one of
his ribs, . . . and the rib . . . made he a woman. 1 The first account seems to
imply simultaneous creations. — Tbanb.]



Digitized by VjOOQIC



576 CEEATION.

heroes of the fourth. The latter we might in Mosaic language
call sons of Elohim, and the former sons of men ; at the same
time, their origin from the ash would admit of their being placed
beside the first- created men of the Bdda. The agreement of the
myths would be more striking if we might bestow the name of
stone race on the third, and shift that of brazen, together with
the creation from the ash, to the fourth ; stones being the natural
arms of giants. Apollodorus however informs us it was the
brazen race that Zeus intended to destroy in the great flood from
which Deucalion and Pyrrha were saved, and this fits in with the
Scandinavian overthrow of giants. The creation of Askr and
Embla has its parallel in the stone-throwing of the Greek myth,
and the race of heroes might also be called stone-created (see
Suppl.).

It will be proper, before concluding, to cast a glance at the
Story of the Deluge : its diffusion among the most diverse nations
of the earth gives a valuable insight into the nature of these
myths. 1

From the sons of God having mingled with the daughters of
men sprang robbers and wrongdoers \ and it repented Jehovah
that he had made man, and he said he would destroy everything
on earth. But Noah found favour in his eyes, and he bade him
build a great ark, and enter therein with his household. Then
it began to rain, until the waters rose fifteen cubits above the
highest mountains, and all that had flesh and breath perished,
but the ark floated on the flood. Then Jehovah stayed the rain,
the waters returned from off the earth, and the ark rested on the
mountains of Ararat But Noah let out first a raven, then a
dove, which found no rest for her foot and returned into the ark ;
and after seven days he again sent forth a dove, which came back
with an olive leaf in her mouth ; and after yet other seven days
he sent forth a dove, which returned not any more.* Then Noah
came out on the dry earth, and offered a clean burntoffering, and



1 Ulph. renders jraraxW/u6t by midjasveipdins, sveipan meaning no doubt the
name as Mpeiv, to flash, rinse, conf . AS. sw&pan verrere. Diluvium is in OHG.
unmezfluot or rinfluot flike sinw&ki gorges, MHG. rinwaege) ; not so good is the
OHG. and MHG. sintvluot, and our sundfluth (rin-flood) is a blunder.

8 Sailors let birds fly, Pliny 6 X 22. Three ravens fly as guides, Landn&mabdk 1, 2.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



DELUGE, SINFLUT. 577

Jehovah made a covenant with man, and set his bow in the cloud
for a token of the covenant.

After this beautiful compact picture in the O. T., the Eddie
narrative looks crude and unpolished. Not from heaven does the
flood rain down, it swells up from the blood of the slain giant,
whose carcase furnishes material for creating all things, and the
human race itself. The insolence and violence of the annihilated
giants resemble those of the sons of Elohim who had mingled
with the children of men ; and Noah's box (ki/3q>to<;) is like
Bergelmi's HVSr. But the epic touches, such as the landing on
the mountain, the outflying dove, the sacrifice and rainbow, would
surely not have been left out, had there been any borrowing here.

In the Assyrian tradition, 1 Kronos warns Sisuthros of the
coming downpour, who thereupon builds a ship, and embarks
with men and beasts. Three days after the rain has ceased, birds
are sent out, twice they come flying back, the second time with
slime on their feet, and the third time they staid away. Sisuthros
got out first with his wife and daughter and pilot, they prayed,
sacrificed, and suddenly disappeared. When the rest came to
land, a voice sounded in the air, saying the devout Sisuthros had
been taken up to the gods ; but they were left to propagate the
human race. Their vessel down to recent times lay on the
mountains of Armenia. 2 Coins of Apamea, a city in Phrygia,
show an ark floating on the water, with a man and woman in it ;
on it sits a bird, another comes flying with a twig in its claws.
Close by stand the same human pair on firm land, holding up
their right hands. Beside the ark appear the letters NI2 (Noah),
and this Apamea is distinguished by the by-name of /ecfioyTos*

According to Greek legend, Zeus had determined to destroy
mankind; at the prompting of Prometheus, Deucalion built an
ark, which received him and Pyrrha his wife. Zeus then sent a
mighty rain, so that Hellas was flooded, and the people perished.
Nine days and nights Deucalion floated on the waters, then landed
on Farnas8U8, and offered sacrifice to Zeus ; we have seen how
this couple created a new generation by casting stones. Plutarch
adds, that when Deucalion let a dove out of the ark, he could tell

1 Buttmann On the myth of the Deluge, p. 21.

3 Conf . the Annolied SOS seq., which brings the Bavarians from Armenia.

» AH this in Buttmann, pp. 24-27.



Digitized by



Google



578 CBEATION.

the approach of storm by her flying back, and of fair weather by
her keeping away. Lucian (De dea Syria, cap. 12. 13) calls him
JevtcaXlcova top 2/cvdea (the Scythian) ; if that sprang oat of
2uru0ea, 1 it may have long had this altered form in the legend
itself. Some branches of the Greek race had their own stories
of an ancient flood, of which they called the heroes Ogyges and
Ogygos ;* but all these accounts are wanting in epic details. 8

A rich store of these opens for us in the Indian Mah&bh&rata. 4
King Manns stood on a river's bank, doing penance, when he
heard the voice of a little fish imploring him to save it. He
caught it in his hand and laid it in a vessel, but the fish began to
grow, and demanded wider quarters. Manus threw it into a large
lake, but the fish grew on, and wished to be taken to Gang& the
bride of the sea. Before long he had not room to stir even there,
and Manus was obliged to carry him to the sea; but when
launched in the sea, he foretold the coming of a fearful flood,
Manus was to build a ship and go on board it with the seven
sages, and preserve the seeds of all things, then he would shew
himself to them horned. Manus did as he was commanded, and
sailed in the ship; the monster fish appeared, had the ship
fastened to his horn by a rope, and towed it through the sea for
many years, till they reached the summit of the Himavdn, there
he bade them moor the ship, and the spot to which it was tied
still bears the name of Naubcundhanam (ship-binding). Then
spake the fish : I am Brahmft, lord of created things, a higher
than I there is not, in the shape of a fish have I delivered you ;

1 CETOEA from CICT6EA is Buttmann's acute suggestion ; but he goeB
farther, taking this Sisythes or Sisuthros to be Sesothris, Sothis, Seth ; and Noah
to be Dionysos, and a symbol of water.

8 Buttm. p. 45 seq., who connects it with Okeanos and Ogenos.

8 It is remarkable, that in a beautiful simile, therefore without names or places,
Homer depicts a kind of Deluge, II. 16, 384 :

un 5' foro XoCKclti xcwra ffcXcwj) fiippiSe x$w
Iffiar dxcvpivif, ore XafipbraTov x&i tidtap
Zetfj, ore t-fi jt fo6p€(r<ri Koreao-dficvot xaXemjpp,
at ply elv ayopfi axoXcds Kplvtaai dtfxurras,
4k 8e dlKTjy iXdauxn, BeQv 6x& ovk dXtyovres.
fitpfflci 6V re tpy avBpuvutP.

Even as orouohes the darkening land, overcrowed by the tempest, All on a summer's
day, when Jove doth the down-rushing water Suddenly pour, and wreak his wrath
on the proud men, Men of might, who sit dealing a crooked doom in the folkmote,
Forcing justice aside, unheeding of gods and their vengeance ; (rivers swell, etc.)
and the works of man are all wasted.
4 Bopp's Die sundflut, Berl. 1829.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



DELUGE. 579

now shall Manas make all creatures, gods, asuris and men, and
all the worlds, things movable and immovable. And as he had
spoken, so it was done.

In the Bh&gavatam, Satydvratas (supra, p. 249) takes the place
of Manns, Yishnns that of Brahma, and the facts are embellished
with philosophy.

The Indian myth then, like the Teutonic, makes the Deluge
precede the real creation, whereas in the Mosaic account Adam
lives long before Noah, and the flood is not followed by a new
creation. The seven rishis in the ship, as Bopp remarks, are
of divine rather than human nature, sons of Brahma, and of an
older birth than the inferior gods created by Man us or their
enemies the asuris (elsewhere daityas and d&navas = titans,
giants). But it is a great point gained for us, that Manns (after
whom manushyas, homo, is named) comes in as a creator; so
that in our German Mannus (whence manna and manniskja,
homo) we recognise precisely Borr and his creator sons (p. 349).
Askr and Embla are simply a reproduction of the same idea of
creation, and on a par with Deucalion and Pyrrha, or Adam and
Eve.

I must not pass over the fact, that the first part of the Indian
poem, where Brahma as a fish is caught by Manus, and then
reveals to him the future, lingers to this day in our nursery tale
of the small all-powerful turbot or pike, who gradually elevates
a fisherman from the meanest condition to the highest rank"; and
only plunges him back into his pristine poverty, when, urged by
the counsels of a too ambitious wife, he desires at last to be
equal with God. The bestowal of the successive dignities is in
a measure a creation of the different orders. 1

One more story of the Deluge, which relates the origin of the
Lithuanians, deserves to be introduced. 9 When Pram£imas the
most high god looked out of a window of his heavenly house
(like Wuotan, p. 135) over the world, and perceived nothing but
war and wrong among men, he sent two giants Wandu and
Weyas (water and wind) upon the sinful earth, who laid all
things waste for twenty nights and days. Looking down once

1 Conf. the capture of the soothsaying marmennil, p. 434.
* Daieje staroiytne narodu Litewskiego, przez Th. Narbutta. Wilno 1835.
1,2.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



580 CREATION.

more, when he happened to be eating celestial nuts, Pramiimas
dropt a nutshell, and it lighted on the top of the highest moun-
tain, to which beasts and several human pairs had fled for refuge.
They all climbed into the shell, and it drifted on the flood which
now. covered all things. But God bent his countenance yet a
third time upon the earth, and he laid the storm, and made the
waters to abate. The men that were saved dispersed themselves,
only one pair remained in that country, and from them the
Lithuanians are descended. But they were now old, and they
grieved, whereupon God sent them for a comforter (linxmine)
the rainbow, who counselled them to leap over the earth's bones :
nine times they leapt, and nine couples sprang up, founders of
the nine tribes of Lithuania. This incident reminds us of the
origin of men from the stones cast by Deucalion and Pyrrha ; and
the rainbow, of the Bible account, except that here it is intro-
duced as a person, instructing the couple what to do, as Hermes
(the divine messenger) did Deucalion. It were overbold perhaps
to connect the nutshell with that nut-tree (p. 572-3), by which
one vaguely expresses an unknown extraction.

Not all, even of the stories quoted, describe a universal deluge
desolating the whole earth : that in which Deucalion was rescued
affected Greece alone, and of such accounts of partial floods
there are plenty. Philemon and Baucis in Phrygia (where Noah's
ark rested, p. 577), had given shelter to the wayfaring gods, and
being warned by them, fled up the mountain, and saw themselves
saved when the flood rose over the land (Ovid. Met. 8, 620) ;
they were changed into trees, as Askr and Bmbla were trees.
A Welsh folktale says, that in Brecknockshire, where a large
lake now lies, there once stood a great city. The king sent his
messenger to the sinful inhabitants, to prove them ; they heeded
not his words, and refused him a lodging. He stept into a
miserable hut, in which there only lay a child crying in its cradle
(conf. ludara, p. 559 n.) ; there he passed the night, and in going
away, dropt one of his gloves in the cradle. He had not left the
city long, when he heard a noise and lamentation ; he thought of
turning back to look for his glove, but the town was no longer to
be seen, the waters covered the whole plain, but lo, in the midst
of the waves a cradle came floating, in which there lay both child
and glove. This child he took to the king, who had it reared as

Digitized by VjOOQIC



DELUGE. 581

the sole survivor of the sunken city. 1 Conf. the story of Bold at
the end of Ch. XXXII. Another and older narrative, found even
in the British Triads, comes much nearer to those given above :
When the lake of Llion overflowed and submerged all Britain,
the people were all drowned save Dwyvan and Dwyvach, who
escaped in a naked (sailless) ship, and afterwards repeopled the
land. This ship is also named that of Nevydd n&v neivion, and
had on board a male and female of every creature ; again it is
told, that the oxen of Hu Oadarn dragged the avanc (beaver)
ashore out of the Llion lake, and it has never broken out since. 2

Of still narrower limits are our German tales, as that of the
dwarf seeking a lodging at Ralligen on L. Thun (no. 45), which
is very like the Philemon-myth; of Arendsee (no. Ill), where
again only a husband and wife are saved; of Seeburg (no. 131) ;
and Frauensee (no. 239). A Danish folktale is given by Thiele

1, 227. Fresh and graceful touches abound in the Servian lay of
the three angels sent by God to the sinful world, and the origin
of the Plattensee or Balatino yezero, Vuk 4, 8-13 (2nd ed. 1,
no. 207). 8

There is above all a dash of German heathenism about the
lakes and pools said to have been formed by the streaming blood
of giants (Deut. sag. no. 325), as the destructive Deluge arose
from Ymir's blood.

It appears to me impossible to refer the whole mass of these
tales about the great Flood and the Creation of the human species
to the Mosaic record, as if they were mere perversions and dis-
tortions of it ; the additions, omissions and discrepancies peculiar
to almost every one of them are sufficient to forbid that. And
I have not by a long way exhausted this cycle of legends (see
Suppl.) : in islands of the Eastern Archipelago, in Tonga and
New Zealand, among Mexicans and Caribs there start up ac-
counts, astonishingly similar and yet different, of creation and
the first human pair, of a flood and deliverance, and the murder
of a brother. 4

i Edw. Davies's Brit. Mythol. 146-7.

* Ibid. 95. 129. Villemarque, Contes bretons 2, 294. Mabinogion 2, 341. 881.
1 Sole example of a Deluge- story among Slavs, by whom eosmogonio ideas in
general seem not to have been handed down at all.

4 W. von Humboldt's Eawispraehe 1, 240. 8, 449. Majer's Mythol. taschenb.

2, 5. 131.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CHAPTER XX.
ELEMENTS.

Prom gods, half-gods and heroes, from the whole array of
friendly or hostile beings that, superior to man in mind or
body, fill up a middle space betwixt him and deity, we turn our
glance to simple phenomena of nature, which at all times in their
silent greatness wield an immediate power over the human
mind. These all-penetrating, all-absorbing primitive substances,
which precede the creation of all other things and meet us again
everywhere, must be sacred in themselves, even without being
brought into closer relation to divine beings. Such relation is
not absent in any mythology, but it need not stand in the way
of the elements receiving a homage to some extent independent
of it and peculiar to themselves.

On the other hand, it is not the religion, properly speaking, of
a nation, that ever springs from the soil of this elemental worship ;
the faith itself originates in a mysterious store of supersensual
ideas, that has nothing in common with those substances, but
subj agates them to itself. Yet faith will tolerate in its train
a veneration of elements, and mix it up with itself; and it may
even chance, that when faith has perished or is corrupted, this
veneration shall keep its hold of the people longer. The multi-
tude will give up its great divinities, yet persist for a time in the
more private worship of household gods; even these it will
renounce, and retain its reverence for elements. The history of
the heathen and christian religions shews, that long after the one
was fallen and the other established, there lived on, nay there
live still, a number of superstitious customs connected with the
worship of elements. It is the last, the all but indestructible
remnant of heathenism ; when gods collapse, these naked sub-
stances come to the front again, with which the being of those
had mysteriously linked itself (see Suppl.).

To this effect I have already expressed myself (pp. 82-84) in

&82

Digitized by VjOOQIC



WATER. 583

speaking of a worship of nature by our ancestors, which is indeed
supported by early testimonies, but these are often perverted
into an argument against the heathen having had any gods.
The gods stood and fell from other causes.

Water the limpid, flowing, welling up or running dry; Fire
the illuminating, kindled or quenched ; Air unseen by the eye,
but sensible to ear and touch; Earth the nourishing, out of
which everything grows, and into which all that has grown dis-
solves; — these, to mankind from the earliest time, have appeared
sacred and venerable; ceremonies, transactions and events in
life first receive their solemn consecration from them. Working
as they do with never-resting activity and force on the whole of
nature, the childlike man bestows on them his veneration, without
any particular god necessarily intervening, though he too will
commonly appear in combination with it. Even to-day the
majesty and might of these eldest born of things awakes our
admiration ; how could antiquity have forborne its astonishment
and adoration ? Such a worship is simpler, freer and more dig-
nified than a senseless crouching before pictures and idols.

All the elements are cleansing, healing, atoning, and the proof
by ordeal rests mainly upon them ; but man had to secure them
in their purest form and at the most seasonable times.

We will consider them one by one.

1. Water. 1

Passages proving that the Alamanns and Franks worshipped
rivers and fountains are cited at pp. 100-1 and in the Appendix. 2

1 Goth. i?a*0, ON. vatn, OHG. wazar, OS. watar, AS. water, Dan. vand, Slav.
vodd, Lith. wandU, Lett, uhdent, Gr. VSwp ; then, corresp. in form to Lat. aqua, but
meaning fluvius, Goth, akva, OHG. aha, AS. ed, ON. d ; the Goth, vegs, OHG.
vfdc wages ™fluctu8, flow.

* When here and elsewhere I use Bp. Burchard'B Coll. of Decrees as authority
for German superstitions, I do not forget that in most cases (not all) it is drawn
from councils not held in Germany, but in Gaul, Italy or Spain. Yet, if we con-
sider that German nations had been spreading themselves all over those countries
down to the 8-9th cent., that the AS. and Lombard Laws, to say nothing of
Capitularies, declaim equally with those Decrees of Council against water, tree and
stone worship, that Agathias and Gregory of Tours expressly charge the Alamanns
and Franks with such worship ; these superstitions are seen to be something com-
mon to the Italian, Gallic and German nationalities, of which none of them can be
acquitted. Some have tried to make out from Agathias, that our forefathers had
a mere nature-worship, and no gods. It would be about as uncritical to do what
is to some extent the reverse, and suspect Agathias and Gregory of having adopted
their assertions out of church-prohibitions that were never meant for Germany at

VOL. II. Iu



Digitized by



Google



584 ELEMENTS.

The people prayed on tlie river's bank ; at the fountain's brink
they lighted candles and laid down sacrificial gifts. It is called
'fontibus venerationem exhibere, ad fontanas adorare (conf. Legg.
Liutpr. 6, 80), ad fontes votam facere, reddere, exsolvere, orare
ad fontes, offerre ad fontes, mnnus deferre, ad fontes luminaria
facere, candelam deferred This last no doubt was done only or
chiefly at night, when the flame reflected from the wave would
excite a religious awe. 1 The Saxons also were fonticolae : wyllas
and flotwceter are named in the AS. laws as objects of rever-
ence. Beside the passage from Cnut (p. 102), the Poenitentiale
Ecgberti says 2, 22 : ' gif hwilc man his ralmessan geh&te o$Se
bringe t& hwilcon wylle 9 ; 4, 19 : ' gif hw& his w&ccan »t senigum
wylle hesbbe (vigilias suas ad aliquem fontem habeat) ' ; the
Canones Edgari § 16 forbid wilweor&tmga ( well- worship) . I am
not sure that a formal worship of water in Scandinavia is implied
in the saga quoted above (p. 102), where votn is mentioned;
but that water was held sacred is a thing not to be doubted.
A lay in the Edda has near the beginning the remarkable words :
c hnigo heilog votn af himinfiollom/ fell holy waters from heaven's
hills. The Sclaveni as early as Procopius (B. Goth. 3, 14)
<rij3ov<ri 7roTa/xov5 (worship rivers) ; and as late as Helmold
(1, 47) it is said of the Slavs at Faldera : lucorum et fontium
ceterarumque superstitionum multiplex error apud eos habetur
(see Suppl.).

Above all was the place honoured, where the wondrous element
leaps up from the lap of earth ; a spring is in our older speech
ursprinc (-ges), and also prunno. 2

Often enough the first appearing of a spring is ascribed to
divine agency or a miracle : Wuotan, Balder, Charles the Great,
each made the reviving fountain flow out of earth for his fainting
host (p. 226) . Other springs are charmed out of the rock when
struck by a staff or a horse's hoof; 3 a saint plants a bough in

all. Into secular codes such prohibitions seem to have found their way first
through the Capitularies ; the older codes had no penalties for idolatry, only the
AS. ddmas of Wihtr®d cap. 13 impose them on deofolgild in general
1 At Christmas people look into their well* with candle*.

* From prinnan (ardere), as idt, another word for well, comes from siodan
(fervere), welle (ductus) from wallan (fervere), sual (subfrigidus) from suelan (ardere),
conf. Gramm. 2, 29. 34 ; sprudeln to bubble up is from spruhen to fly off as sparks
d j. In such words fire and water get wedded together.

* The Heliconian horse-fount {JtrvoKp-fyni) was struck open by Pegasus : ' novi



Digitized by VjOOQIC



WATEB. HBILAWAO. 585

the ground, and water bubbles up. But there are two theories
even more generally received : that the water of sacred brooks
and rivers is in the first instance poured by gods and superior
beings out of bowls or urns; and that springs and wells are
guarded by snakes or dragons lying near them (see Suppt).

Water drawn at a holy season, at midnight, before sunrise,
and in solemn silence, bore till a recent time the name of heilawdc,
heilwdc, heilwcege. The first form, retaining the connecting
vowel after a long syllable, proves the antiquity of the word,
whose sacred meaning secured it against change. MS. 2, 149 b :
' man seit (saith) von heilawdge uns vil, wie heil, wie guot ez si,
wie gar vollekomen der 6ren spil, wie gar sin kraft verheilet swaz
wundes an dem man versfiret ist/ how good for healing wounds,
etc. Martina 116 : € Got, du froude fliizzic Jieilawac,' and in a
like sense 248. 283. Applied to Christ and his cross, Mar. 224 :
'der bourn ist gemeizzen, d& daz heilwcege von bechumet, daz aller
werlte gefrumet/ the tree whence cometh h. And more gener-
ally, 'ein heilwage/ Diut. 1, 352; much later, in Anshelm's
Chron. of Bern 1, 308, € heilwag ' among other charms and magic
appliances. Lastly, in Phil, von Sittewald (Strasb. 1677) 1,
483 : € running spring-water, gathered on holy Christmas night,
while the clock strikes twelve, and named heilwag, is good for
pain of the navel/ Superst. 804. In this heilaw&c we discover
a very early mingling of heathen customs with christian. The
common people believe to this very day, that at 12, or between
11 and 12, on Christmas or Easter night, spring-water changes
into wine (Superst. 54. 792), 1 Wieselgren p. 412 ; and this belief
rests on the supposition that the first manifestation of the
Saviour's divinity took place at the marriage in Cana, where he
turned water into wine. Now at Christmas they celebrated both
his birth (epiphany, theophany, p. 281) and his baptism, and
combined with these the memory of that miracle, to which was

forOit Dura meduasi qnem prepetis ungula rupit,' Or. Met. 5, 257 seq. So the
vein of gold in a hill is laid open by a blow from a hoof. Rhea opens a spring in
Arcadia with her staff :

drrartitraffa 0ed fx4yay hp6$i x^w

vXifecp Spot CKfyrrw rb Si ol &x a *w\b Scion?,

ix ft* {gcer fUya get/fia. Oallimach. hy. Jov. 28.

i Zehn ehen eines weibes (her ten marriages), Leipz. 1735, p. 235.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



586 ELEMENTS.

given a special name, bethphania. 1 As far back as 387, Chry-
sostom preaching an Epiphany sermon at Antioch says that
people at that festival drew running water at midnight, and kept
it a whole year, and often two or three (no doubt for thaumaturgic
uses), and it remained fresh and uncorrupted. 8 Superstitious
Christians then believed two things, a hallowing of the water at
midnight of the day of baptism, and a turning of it into wine
at the time of the bethphania : such water the Germans called
heilawac,* and ascribed to it a wonderful power of healing diseases
and wounds, and of never spoiling (see Suppl.).

Possibly even in Syria an old pagan drawing of water became
veiled under new christian meanings. In Germany other cir-
cumstances point undisguisedly to a heathen consecration of
water: it was not to be drawn at midnight, but in the morn-
ing before sunrise, down stream and silently (Superst. 89.. 775),
usually on Easter Sunday (775-6) to which the above explana-
tions do not so well apply ; this water does not spoil, it restores
youth, heals eruptions, and makes the young cattle strong. 4
Magic water, serving for unchristian divination, is to be collected
before sunrise on a Sunday in one glass from three flowing springs;
and a taper is lighted before the glass, as before a divine being
(Superst. H. c. 55-57) . 6 Here I bring in once again the Hessian

i The first manifestation of Christ was his birth, the second his baptism
(Candlemas), the third the marriage in Cana : ' Tertia apparitio fait postea similiter
eodem die anno revoluto, cam esset 30 annoram et 13 dierum, sive qaando
manifestavit se esse Denm per mutationem aquae in vinum, quod rait primnm
miraculum apertum, quod Dominus fecit in Cana Galilaeae, vel simpliciter primum
quod fecit. Et haec apparitio dicitur bethphania a /tyrw, quod est domus, et <pdv€w y
quod est apparitio, quia ista apparitio facta fuit in domo in nuptiis. De his tribus
apparitionibus fit solemnitas in hac die.' Durantis Bation. div. offic. 6, 16. The
onurch consolidated the three manifestations into one festival.

8 Tom. 2 (ed. Montfauc, Paris 1718), p. 369 : Bid rot rouro xal fiecopviniv Kara
t^p ioprty tw&ttip faravres vBpewrdfUPOi oticaBc tA yd/xara ArorldevTat, teal els ipiavrbv
6\6k\tipov <pv\drTowrt t are B^ r/jpepop aytcurOipTWP tup vBdrw xal to trrjueiw yberai
tvapyh, oti BuKpOctpofUprjs ttJs tup vSdruv liceLvwv ffoewt t# fi-fjicci tov XP° V0V * &^
eh iptavrbp 6\6ic\ripop kcU Svta xal rpia try tov ffijfiepop &PT\if84pros ixepalov xal
ptapod fitpOPTOS, kcU ftera twfovtop yjpbpop rots Apri t&p mjyQp i^apxaffBeurw OScwur
afuKKufUpov.

• And also heilateint Frauenlob MS. 2, 213 b on the 'garden that bears
Keilvfin: Altd. bl. 2, 294.

4 Jul. Schmidt's Beichenf. p. 121. At Cassel I have heard bathing in the
1 drusel ' water commended as wholesome, but you must draw with the current, not
against. Probably the right time for it is Walburgis or Midsummer.

* The rite, like others cited by Hartlieb (who wrote in 1455)*, may be of classic
origin. In yampofrnprela, i.e. divining by a bellied jar (ydurrpy) filled with water,
there also occurs the torch and the innocent boy (Hartl.'s • ain rain kind '). Potter's
Antiq., 1, 764. Fabricii Bibliogr. antiq., ed. 3, p. 600.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



WATEB. HBILAWAC. 587

custom mentioned at p. 58 : on Easter Monday youths and
maidens walk to the Hollow Rock in the mountains, draw water
from the cool spring in jugs to carry home, and throw flowers in
as an offering. Apparently this water- worship was Celtic like-
wise; the water of the rock-spring Karnant makes a broken
sword whole again, but

du muost des nrspringes h&n

nnderm velse, e in beschin der tac (ere day beshine it).
Parz. 254, 6. Tit. 5456. 5732. 1 Curious customs shew us in
what manner young girls in the Pyrenees country tell their own
fortunes in spring water on May-day morning.

We need not suppose that the peculiar properties of medicinal
springs are the point here ; no, it is the normal efficacy of the
refreshing, strengthening, re-animating element. 8 Many places
in Germany are called Heilbrunn, Heilborn, Heiligenbrunn, from
the renewing effect of their springs, or the wonderful cures that
have taken place at them. Heilbronn on the Neckar is called
Heilacprunno in the oldest documents. 8 But certain springs and
wells may have stood in especial repute. Of high renown are
the ON. Mimisbrunnr and Urffarbrunnr (p. 407), which Sn. 17
calls ' brunnr mioc heilagr.' A Danish folksong (1, 318) tells of a
Maribokilde, by whose clear waters a body hewn in pieces is put to-
gether again. Swedish lays celebrate Ingemos Italia (Vis. 1, 244-5).
We remember that old Frisian fount of Forseti, 'whence none
drew water save in silence, 9 pp. 229, 230 (see Suppl.). Sacrifices
were offered at such springs. Of the salutary effect of hot and
chalybeate springs people must have been aware from immemorial
time, witness the Aquae Mattiacae in the Roman time and those



i The hardening and repairing of sworda in water (sverS herfla, Sam. 136 b )
was certainly believed in by the Germans too. The VilMnasaga, cap. 40 p. 100,
Bays: when dwarf Alberioh had fashioned Nailring, he searched nine kingdoms
before he found the water in which the sword could be tempered ; at last he arrived
at the water Trey a, and there it was tempered. Our Eckenlied, str. 81, agrees with
this, but is still more precise : ' dannoch was ez niht vollebr&ht, dd fuorten'z zwei
wildiu getwero wol durch niun kunecriche, biz daz si kftmen zuo der Drdl, din d&
ze Troige rinnet, daz swert daz was s6 liehtgem&l: si harten'z in der Dr&le, des
wart ez als6 fin ' (dwarfs bring it to the Drfil, that runs by Troige, etc.). Who can
doubt any longer of real German lays forming the groundwork of the Vilk. saga ?

8 A man bitten by an adder will not die, if he can leap over the nearest water
before the adder does so. Lenz's Schlangenkunde, p. 208.

1 Bohmer's Reg. Karolor. nr. 740 (an. 841) ; Ecc. Fr. orient. 2, 893 ; • der
Necker vliuzet fur Heilicbrunnen (flows past Holy-well),' MS. 2, 68 b .



Digitized by



Google



588 ELEMENTS.

'aquae calidae' near Luxeuil (p. 83). When the Wetterau
people begin a new jug of chalybeate, they always spill the first
drop or two on the ground, they say € to clear the dust away/
for the jugs stand open, but it may have been once a libation to
the fountain-sprite. 1 Not only medicinal, but salt springs were
esteemed holy : ancient accounts of these will be presented in a
later chapter. The Mid. Ages cherished the notion of a jun g-
brunnen : * whoever bathes in it is both cured of diseases and
guarded from them ; in it Kauchels shed her shaggy skin, and
became the beauteous Sigeminne (p. 483-4) ; such a spring has
sometimes the power even to change the bather's sex (see
Suppl.). 8

In a spring near Nogent men and women bathed on St.
John's eve (Superst. L. 33); Holberg*s comedy of Kilde-reisen
is founded on the Copenhagen people's practice of pilgriming to
a neighbouring spring on S. Hans aften, to heal and invigorate
themselves in its waters. On Midsummer eve the people of
Ostergotland journeyed according to ancient custom to Lagman's
bergekalla near Skeninge, and drank of the well (Broocman 1,
187. 2, 676). In many parts of Germany some clear fountain is

* Where the Heathens ascribed the miraculous power of a spring to their wood
or water sprites, the Christians afterwards transferred it to their saints. I take an
instance from the Miracnla S. Agili, written in the 12th century: Marvellous cures
were wrought at the brook of St. Agilus. Sed interim qnorundam vesaniae occur-
rere libet, qui in digito Dei nequaquam haeo fieri aestimantes, daemoniacae, pro
nefas, attribuunt potestati. Cumque miracnla diffiteri nequeunt, id solum in
causam calumniae adsumunt, quod in agresti fiunt loco, ubi nullus Dei cultus, uhi
nulla© sanctorum memoriae. O prudentiam ! verentur homines sublimi ingenio,
ne ad ludibrium mortalium &faunu, vywphis vel satyrii, ceterisve ruris numinibw,
res geratur ejusmodi. Nam ut de fabulis taceam, apud quos historiographorum
veterum sen modernorum legitur daemones -visum coecis, mentem amentibus,
manus debilibus, gressum claudioantibus restaurasse? (Acta Bened. sec. 2, p. 333.)
The Swedish people ascribe the healing power of some springs to white makes. In
1809 there flocked thousands from Halland and VestergStland to the wonder-work-
ing Helfljo, a small lake near Bampegarde ; they said, some children tending cattle
on the shore had often during the year seen a beautiful maiden sit on the bank,
holding a snake in her hand and shewing it to them. It is only every hundredth
year that this water-maiden with the snake appears (Bexell's Halland 2, 820 ; 3,
303). Multitudes from Norway and Halland visited a spring named S. Olafskidlla,
dropt money-offerings in, and carried on other superstition (Odman's Bahuslan p.
169). In christian times healing fountains are believed to spring up near the
tombs of holy men, Bex. Hall. 8, 69 ; or from under a saint's body, Flodoard. re-
mens. 2, 8. I think it is with the hot baths at Aix that we must connect the water-
maiden with whose myth Charles the Great is mixed up, p. 435.

* Synonymously the OHG. quecprunno, MHG. quecprunne, Parz. 613, 9.
Fragm. 18, 267.

* Conf. the passages quoted in Mus. fur altd. lit. 1, 260-3 from Montevilla*
from the Titurel and from H. Saoha.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



WATEB. HEILAWAC. 589

visited at Whitsuntide, and the water drunk in jugs of a peculiar
shape. Still more important is Petrarch's description of the
annual bathing of the women of Cologne in the Rhine : it de-
serves to be quoted in full, 1 because it plainly proves that the
cult prevailed not merely at here and there a spring, but in
Germany's greatest river. Prom the Italian's unacquaintance
with the rite, one might infer that it was foreign to the country
whence all church ceremonies proceeded, and therefore altogether
unchristian and heathenish. But Petrarch may not have had
a minute knowledge of all the customs of his country; after his
time at all events we find even there a lustration on St. John's
day [described as an ancient custom then dying out] . Benedict
de Falco's Descrizione de luoghi antiqui di Napoli (Nap. 1580)
has the statement: 'in una parte populosa dell a citta giace la
chiesa consegrata a S. Giovan battista, chiamata S. Giovan a
mare. Era una antica usanza, hoggi non al tutto lasciata, che
la vigilia di 8. Giovane, verso la sera e '1 securo del di, tutti
huomini e donne andare al mare, e nvdi lavarsi; persuasi pur-
garsi de loro peccati, alia focchia degli antichi, che peccando
andavano al Tevere lavarsi.' And long before Petrarch, in
Augustine's time, the rite was practised in Libya, and is de-

1 Franc. Petrarchae De rebus familiar, epistolae, lib. i. ep. 4: Aquis digressum,
sed prius, uncle ortum oppidi nomen putant, aquis bajano more tepentibus ablutum,
exoepit Agrippina Colonia, quae ad sinistrum Bheni latus sita est, locus et situ et
flumine clarus et populo. Mirum in terra barbarica quanta civilitas, quae urbis
species, quae virorum gravitas, quae munditiae matronarum. Forte Johannis
baptUtae vigilia erat dum illuc applicui, et jam ad occidentem sol vergebat : con-
festim amicorum monitu (nam et ibi amicos prius mini fama pepererat quam
meritmn) ab hospitio traducor ad fluvium insigne spectaoulum visorus. Nee
fallebar; omnia enim ripa praeclaro et ingenti mulierum agmine tegebatur. Ob-
stupui, dii boni, quae forma, quae facies, quis habitus I amare potuisset quisquis
eo non praeoceupatum animum attulisset. In loco paullum altiore constiteram,
nnde in ea quae gerebantur intenderem. Incredibilis sine offensione conoursus
erat, vioissimque alacres, pars herbis odoriferis incinctae, reductuque post cubitum
manicu, Candidas in gurgite manus ac brachia lavabant, nescio quid blandum pere-
grine murmure coUoquentes, [A few lines omitted.] Unum igitur ex eo [amicorum]
numero admirans et ignarus rerum percunctatus vergiliano illo versiculo : ' Quid
vult oonenrsus ad amnem, quidve petunt animae ? ' responsum accepi : pervetustum
gentis ritum esse, vulgo persuasum, praesertim femineo, omnem totius anni calamita-
tem imminentem ftwiali illius diei ablutione purgari, et deinceps laetiora succedere ;
itaque hutrationem esse annuam, inexhaustoque semper studio cultam colendamque.
Ad haeo ego subridens : ' nimium felioes ' inquam ' Rheni aocolae, quoniam HU
miserias purgat, nostras quidem nee Padus unquam purgare valuit nee TiberU. Yos
Testra mala Britannis Bheno vectore transmittitis ; nos nostra libenter Afris atque
IUyriis mitteremus, Bed nobis (ut intelligi datur) pigriora sunt flumina.' Commoto
risn, sero tandem inde discessimus. [A few lines omitted.] The letter is of 1830,
and addressed to Card. Colonna. We find it quoted so early as by Eaisersberg
(Omeias 85 e ).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



590 ELEMENTS.

nounced by that Father as a relic of paganism : * natali Johannis,
de solenmitate superstitiosa pagana, Ghristiani ad mare veniebant,
et se baptizabant ' (Opp., Paris 1683, torn. 5, p. 903); and again:
' ne alius in festivitate S. Johannis in fontibus ant paludibus ant
in Jluminibu8y nocturnis ant matutinis horis se lavare praesumat,
quia haec infeliz consuetudo adhuc de Paganorum observations
remansit , (Append, to torn. 5 p. 462). Generally sanctioned by
the church it certainly was not, yet it might be allowed here and
there, as a not unapt reminder of the Baptizer in the Jordan,
and now interpreted of him, though once it had been heathen.
It might easily come into extensive favour, and that not as a
christian feast alone : to our heathen forefathers St. John's day
would mean the festive middle of the year, when the sun turns,
and there might be many customs connected with it. I confess,
if Petrarch had witnessed the bathing in the river at some small
town, I would the sooner take it for a native rite of the ancient
Germani; at Cologne, the holy city so renowned for its relics, I
rather suspect it to be a custom first introduced by christian
tradition (see Suppl.). 1

There are lakes and springs whose waters periodically rise and
fall : from either phenomenon mischief is prognosticated, a death,
war, approaching dearth. When the reigning prince is about to
die, the river is supposed to stop in its course, as if to indicate its
grief (Dent. sag. no. 110) ; if the well runs dry, the head of the
family will die soon after (no. 103). A spring that either runs
over or dries up, foreboding dearth, is called hunger quelle, hunger-
brunnen (Staid. 2, 63). Wossingen near Durlach has a hunger-
brunnen, which is said to flow abundantly when the year is going
to be unfruitful, and then also the fish it produces are small. 8

1 In Poland and Silesia, and perhaps in a part of Russia, girls who have over-
slept matin-time on Batter Monday are touted with water by the lads, and flogged
with birch twigs ; they are often palled oat of bed at night, and dragged to a river
or cittern, or a trough filled with water, and are ducked. The Silesians call this
tchmagostern (even Estor's Oberhess. idiot, has tehmakuttern= giving the rod at
Easter); perh. from Pol. smi6, Boh. smyti, so that smigust would be rinsing
[Suppl. says, * better from smagac to flog '] . The Poles say both smi6 and dyngo-
wac\ dyngas, of the splashing each other with water (conf. Hanu6oh, p. 197), and
the time of year seems to be St. John's day as well as Easter. In the Russian gov.
of Archangel, the people bathe in the river on Jane 23, and sprinkle kapalnitsa
(ranunculus acris), Karamzin 1, 73-4 [the same is also a surname of St. Agjrippina,
on whose day, Jane 24, river-bathing (knpalnia) commences]. Everywhere a
belisf in the sacredness of the Easter-bath and St. John's-bath.

8 Hone's Anz. 3, 221. 340, who gives a forced and misleading explanation of the



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HUNGER-SPRING. WATER-GAUGING. 591

Such a hunger-spring there was by Halle on the Saale ; when
the peasants came up to town, they looked at it, and if it ran
over, they said : ' this year, things 'U be dear.' The like is told
of fountains near Rosia in the Siennese, and near Ghateaudun
in the Orleanese. As Hunger was personified, it was easy to
make him meddle with springs. A similar Nornborn was noticed,
p. 405. I insert Dietmar of Merseburg's report (1, 3) of lake
Glomazi in the Slav parts of the Elbe valley : ( Glomazi l est fons
non plus ab Albi quam duo milliaria positus, qui unam de se
paludem generans, mira, ut incolae pro vero asserunt oculisque
approbatum est a multis, saepe operatur. Gum bona pas indigenis
profutura suumque haec terra non mentitur fructum, tritico et
avena ac glandine refertus, laetos vicinorum ad se crebro con*
fluentium efficit animos. Qaando autem saeva belli tempestas
ingruerit, sanguine et cinere certum futuri exitus indicium prae-
monstrat. Hunc omnis incola plus quam ecclesias, spe quamvis
dubia, veneratur et timet. 9 2 But apart from particular fountains,
by a mere gauging of water a season of dearth or plenty, an
increase or decrease of wealth may be divined, according as the
water poured into a vessel rises or falls (Superst. F, 43 ; and no.
958 in Praetor's Saturnalien p. 407). This looks to me like a
custom of high antiquity. Saxo Gram. p. 820 says, the image of
the god Svantovit in Riigen held in its right hand a horn : ' quod
sacerdos sacrorum ejus peritus annuatim mero perfundere con-
sueverat, ex ipso UquoHs habitu sequentis anni copias prospecturus.
. . . Postero die, populo prae foribus excubante, detractum
simulacro poculum curiosius speculatus, si quid ex inditi liquoris
mensura substractum fuisset, ad sequentis anni inopiam pertinere
putabat. Si nihil ex consuetae foecunditatis habitu diminutum
vidisset, ventura agrorum ubertatis tempora praedicabat/ The
wine was emptied out, and water poured into the horn (see Suppl.).



word. Another name is sehdndlebach (beck that brings shame, confusion) : such a
one was pointed out to me on the plain near Cassel, and Simplioiss. 5, 14 mentions
the tch&ndlibach by Oberneheim, which only runs when misfortune befalls the land.
[Suppl. adds the MHG. schantbach, Weisth. 1, 760, and * der schanden bechelin, 1
Frauenlob p. 186] . So, when the Lutterborn by Herbershausen (Helperhusen)
near Gdttingen runs, it is a dear season ; but when the spider builds in Helperhouse
mill, and the swallow in the millwheel, the times are good.

1 Al. * Olomnzi, Zlumici ' ; now the Lommatsch district.

* Gapitul. an. 794 (Pertz 8, 74) : * experimento didicimus, in anno quo ilia
yalida famis irrepsit, ebullire vacuas annonas (empty ears), adaemonibus devoratas.'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



592 ELEMENTS.

Whirlpools and waterfalls were doubtless held in special vene-
ration; they were thought to be put in motion by a superior
being, a river-sprite. The Danube whirlpool and others still
have separate legends of their own. Plutarch (in his Caesar,
cap. 19) and Clement of Alex. (Stromat. 1, 305) assure us that
the German prophetesses watched the eddies of rivers, and by
their whirl and noise explored the future. The Norse name for
such a vortex is fors, Dan. fos, and the Isl. sog. 1, 226 expressly
say, 'blotaSi forsin (worshipped the I.).' The legend of the
river-sprite fossegrim was touched upon, p. 493 ; and in such a
fors dwelt the dwarf Andvari (Sam. 180. Fornald. sog. 1, 152).
But animal sacrifices seem to have been specially due to the
whirlpool (Sivosi), as the black lamb (or goat) to the fossegrim;
and the passages quoted from Agathias on pp. 47, 100, about the
Alamanns offering horses to the rivers and ravines, are to the
same purpose. The Iliad 21, 131 says of the Skamander:

& hif SrjOcL iro\el$ iepevere ravpovs,
£o>ov9 S' iv hlvyat, tcaOiere pA&vvyas Xirnrovv

(Lo, to the river this long time many a bull have ye hallowed,
Many a whole-hoofed horse have ye dropped alive in his eddies) ;
and Pausan. viii. 7, 2 : to Sk dpxalov xaOUcav €9 rrjv Aevvrjv
(a water in Argolis, conn, with 8lvo?) t$ TIoaeiZoyvL Xinrovs oi
Apyeioi k€koc}X€vov<s ^a\«/ot?. Horace, Od. 3, 13: fons
Bandusiae, non sine floribus eras donaberis haedo (see Suppl.).

It is pretty well known, that even before the introduction of
Christianity or christian baptism, the heathen Norsemen had a
hallowing of new-born infants by means of water ; they called
this vatni ansa, sprinkling with water. Very likely the same
ceremony was practised by all other Teutons, and they may have
ascribed a peculiar virtue to the water used in it, as Christians do
to baptismal water (Superst. Swed. 116). After a christening,
the Esthonians will bribe the clerk to let them have the water,
and then splash it up against the walls, to secure honours and
dignities for the child (Superst. M, 47).

It was a practice widely prevalent to turn to strange supersti-
tious uses the water of the millwhsel caught as it glanced off the
paddles. Old Hartlieb mentions it (Superst. H, c. 60), and vulgar
opinion approves it still (Sup. I, 471. 766). The Servians call



Digitized by



Google



MILL-WHEEL WATER. RAIN-MAKING. 593

such water omaya, rebound, from omannti, omakhnuti, to rebound.
Vuk, under the word, observes that women go early on St.
George's day (Apr. 28), to catch it, especially off a small brook-
mill (kashitchara), and bathe in it. Some carry it home the
evening before, and sprinkle it with all manner of broken greens :
they think all evil and harm will then glance off their bodies like
tlie water off the millwheel (Vuk sub v. Jurjev dan). Similar,
though exactly the reverse, is the warning not to* flirt the water
off your hands after washing in the morning, else you flirt away
your luck for the day (Sup. I, 21).

Not only brooks and rivers (p. 585), but rain also was in the
childlike faith of antiquity supposed to be let fall out of bowls by
gods of the sky; and riding witches are still believed to carry
pitchers, out of which they pour storm and hail upon the plains,
instead of the rain or dew that trickled down before. l

When the heavens were shut, and the fields languished in
drought, the granting of rain depended in the first instance on a
deity, on Donar, or Mary and Elias, who were supplicated accord-
ingly (pp. 173-6). * But in addition to that, a special charm
was resorted to, which infallibly procured f rainwater/ and in a
measure compelled the gods to grant it. A little girl, completely
undressed and led outside the town, had to dig up henbane (bilsen-
krant, 0H6. pilisa, hyoscyamus) with the little finger of her
right hand, and tie it to the little toe of her right foot; she was
then solemnly conducted by the other maidens to the nearest
river, and splashed with water. This ceremony, reported by
Burchard of Worms (Sup. C, 201 b ) and therefore perhaps still in
use on the Shine or in Hesse in the 11th cent., comes to us with
the more weight, as, with characteristic differences which put all
direct borrowing out of the question, it is still in force among
Servians and Mod. Greeks. Vuk, under the word 'dodole/
describes the Servian custom. A girl, called the dodola, is stript
naked, but so wrapt up in grass, herbs and flowers, that nothing of

1 The Peruvians believe in a rain-goddess, who sits in the clouds with a pitcher
of water, ready to pour it out at the right time ; if she delays, her brother with
thunder and lightning smites the pitcher in pieces. Garcilaso de la Vega's Histt.
Incarnm peruanorum 11, 27 ; conf. Talvj's Charaoteristik der volkslieder, p. 126.

* I will here add, from Anton's Coll. on the Slavs, the substance of a Walla-
chian song, which the children sing when the corn is endangered by drought :
* Papaluga (father Luga), climb into heaven, open its doors, and send down rain
from above, that well the rye may grow 1 '

Digitized by VjOOQIC



594 ELEMENTS.

her person is to be seen, not even the face. 1 Escorted by other
maidens, dodola passes from honse to house, before each house
they form a ring, she standing in the middle and dancing alone.
The goodwife comes out and empties a bucket of water over the
girl, who keeps dancing and whirling all the while ; her com-
panions sing songs, repeating after every line the burden € oy
dodo, oy dodo le !' The second of these rain-hymns (piesme
dodolske) in Vuk's Coll. nos. 86-88 (184-8 of ed. 2) runs
thus:

To God doth our doda call, oy dodo oy dodo le !

That dewy rain may fall, oy dodo oy dodo le !

And drench the diggers all, oy dodo oy dodo le !

The workers great and small, oy dodo oy dodo le !

Even those in house and stall, oy dodo oy dodo le !

And they are sure that rain will come at once. In Greece, when
it has not rained for a fortnight or three weeks, the inhabitants
of villages and small towns do as follows. The children choose
one of themselves who is from eight to ten years old, usually a
poor orphan, whom they strip naked and deck from head to foot
with field herbs and flowers : this child is called irvp7njpovva. The
others lead her round the village, singing a hymn, and every
housewife has to throw a pailful of water over the pyrperuna's
head, and hand the children a para (i of a farthing). The Mod.
Greek hymn is in Theod. Kind's rpay&Bia t^9 via? 'EXKdSos,
Leipz. 1833, p. 13. Passow, nos. 311-3, p. 627. Neither Greek
nor Slavic will explain why the rain-girl should be called dodola
(caressingly doda) and irvpirqpovva' * Burchard very likely could
have given us a German designation equally inscrutable. But the
meaning of the performance is clear : as the water from the
bucket on the dodola, so is rain out of heaven to stream down on
the earth ; it is the mystic and genuinely symbolic association of
means with end. Just so the rebound off the mill wheel was to
send evil flying, and the lustration in the stream to wash away all

1 Is this covering merely to protect the maiden's modesty, or has it some
further reason ? We shall see that personations of spring and summer were in like
manner enveloped in foliage.

* Kind, pp. 86-7, gives some variant forms, but all the explanations appear to
me farfetched. Both the Greek and the Servian names have the reduplication so
characteristic of folk-words. [Slav, dozhd is rain, and zhd represents either gd or
dd ; if this be the root, dodo-la may be a dimin.]



Digitized by



Google



RAIN-MAKING. DUCKING. 595

future illnesses. Celtic tradition, without bringing in girl or
child, makes the pouring out of water in seasons of great drought
evoke the wished-for rain. The huntsmen go to the fountain of
Barenton in the forest of Breziliande, scoop up the water in their
horns, and spill it on the stones ; immediately the rain-clouds rise
and refresh the land.* The custom, with an addition of church
ceremonial, is kept up to this day. Led by the clergy, amid
chanting and pealing of bells, with five great banners borne in
front, the parish walks in procession to the spring, and the head
of the commune dips his foot crosswise in the fountain of Bar-
enton ; they are then sure of its raining before the procession
arrives home again. 2 The mayor's foot alone is wetted instead of
the child, or a little water only is poured out as a beginning of
that which is to fall in masses from the sky. The scanty offering
brings the great bounty to our door. In Spain, when hot weather
lasts long, an image of the Virgin arrayed in mourning (imagen
cubierta de luto) is solemnly escorted through the villages, to
obtain the blessing of rain, 8 as in the Liege procession (pp.174-5),
with which again that described by Petronius agrees (p. 175) ;
only here the symbolic libation is left out. But of those herbs
that were tied round the child, some most likely were of magic
power; such a use of henbane is otherwise unknown to me.
Lastly, the Bavarian waterbvrd seems identical with dodola and
pyrperuna. The man who is the last to drive out on Whitmonday *
is led by the other workmen into the nearest wood, and tied
round and round with leaves and twigs or rushes; then they ride in
triumph through the village, and everybody that has young legs
follows the procession to the pond or brook, where the waterbird
is solemnly tumbled off his horse into the water (Schm. 1, 320).
In Austria too the village lads elect a Whitsun king, dress him
up in green boughs, blacken his face and pitch him into the brook
(Denis, Lesefr. 1, 130). In these two cases the € votis vocare

1 Boman de Boa, v. 11514 (the passage extracted in the notes to Iwein, pp.
-3).

* Revue de Paris, tome 41, pp. 47-58. Villemar adds, that children throw
pins into the fountain, while they call out : ' ris done, fontaine de Berendon, et je
te donnerai one epingle 1 ' and the fay of the fountain is supposed to be made
friendly by the gift. Conf . * libamina lacui exhibere ', p. 596.

* Don Quixote 1, 52 (Ideler 2, 435). And in other places it was the custom in?
time of drought, to carry the bodies of saints about, Flodoard. rem. 4, 41.

* A.S the girl who oversleeps herself on Easter morning is ducked (p. 690).

Digitized by VjOOQlC



696 ELEMENTS.

imbrem ' has dropt oat altogether, and been replaced by a mere
Whitsun drollery at the cost of the laziest man ; l but I have
little doubt that the same purpose lies at the bottom of the
custom (see Suppl.).

Of goddesses, no doubt the bath-loving Nerthus and Holda
are the most nearly connected with water- worship (Holda lives in
wells, pp. 268, 487) ; and to them must be added swan-maidens,
merminnes (p. 433), water-holdes, spring-holdes (p. 268), water-
muhmes and nixies. To all of them particular rivers, brooks,
pools and springs can be consecrated and assigned as their
abode; Oegir (p. 237) and Ban (pp. 311, 497) ruled in the sea,
and the waves are called their daughters : all this gives a new
stamp to the veneration of the element. Of this very natural,
but not essential, combination of simple rude water-worship with
a faith in higher beings, I will give a few more specimens.

As those who cross a river by ferry or by bridge have to dread
the power of the d»mon that dwells in it (p. 497), so vulgar
opinion in Sweden (Sup. K, 40) holds it advisable, in crossing
any water in the dark, to spit three times, as a safeguard against
evil influences. 9 Precautions are also taken in drawing water from
a well : before drawing any, the Greeks at Mykono salute three
times in honour of Teloni (fountain-sprite). 8 For a thief to throw
in the water a little of what he has stolen (Sup. I, 836), means
sacrificing to the water-sprite. The Vita S. Sulpicii Biturig.
(died 644) relates (Acta Bened. sec. 2, p. 172): 'gurges quidam
erat in Yirisionensium situs agello (Vierzon, in Biturigibus)
aquarum mole copiosas, utpote daemonibus consecratus ; et si
aliqnis causa qualibet ingrederetur eundem, repente funibus
daemoniaci8 circum plexus amittebat crudeliter vitam.' A more
decisive testimony to the worship of water itself is what Gregory
of Tours tells of a lake on Mt. Helanus (De gloria confess.,
cap. 2) : ' Mons erat in Gabalitano territorio (Gevaudan) cogno-
mento Helanus, lacum habens magnum. Ad quern certo tem-
pore multitudo rusticorum, quasi libamina lacui Mi exhibens,

1 Sup. I, 342 : the lasy maid, on carrying home her first grass, is ducked or
splashed, to prevent her going to sleep over grass-cutting.

' The spirits cannot abide tpitting (p. 514).

* Villoison in Maltebrun, Annales de voy. 2, 180. Artemidorns's Oneiroorit.
2 27 (Beifl 1, 189) admits well-nymphs : rtf/t^ot re ydp ehrw t> r$ ^p4aru Fanriel :
rd oroixcibv rod roro/iov.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOLT WATBES. LAKES. 597

Hnteamina projiciebat ac pannos qui ad usum vestimenti virilis
praebentor: nonnulli lanae vellera, plurimi etiam formas casei 1
ac cerae vel panis, diversasque species nnusquisque juxta vires
suae, quae dinumerare perlongum puto. Yeniebant autem cum
plaustris potum cibumque deferentes, mactantes anvmalia et per
triduum epulantes. Quarta autem die cum discedere deberent,
anticipabat eos tempestas cum tonitruo et coruscatione valida; et
in tantum imber ingens cum lapidum violentia descendebat, ut
viz se quisquam eorum putaret evadere. Sic fiebat per singulos
annos, et involvebatur insipiens populus in errore/— No god or
spirit shews his face here, the yearly sacrifice is offered to the
lake itself, and the feast winds up with the coming tempest.
Gervase of Tilbury (in Leibnitz 1, 982) tells of a lake on Mt.
Cavagum in Catalonia: 'in cujus summitate locus est aquam
continens subnigram et in fundo imperscrutabilem. Illio mansio
fertur esse daemonum ad modum palatii dilatata et janua clausa ;
facies tamen ipsius mansionis sicut ipsorum daemonum vul-
garibus est incognita ac invisibilis. In lacum si quis aliquam
lapideam aut aliam solidam projecerit materiam, statim tanquam
ojjfcnsis daemonibus tempestas erumpit.'* Then comes the story
of a girl who is carried off by the watersprites, and kept in the
lake seven years.

Lakes cannot endure to have their depth gauged. On the
Mummelsee, when the sounders had let down all the cord out of
nine nets with a plummet without finding a bottom., suddenly the
raft they were on began to sink, and they had to seek safety in a
rapid flight to land (Simplic. 5, 10). A man went in a boat to
the middle of the Tilisee, and payed out no end of line after the
plummet, when there came out of the waves a terrible cry:
1 Measure me, and I'll eat you up ! ' In a great fright the man
desisted from his enterprise, and since then no one has dared

1 Formages, whence fromages.

* This raising of a storm by throwing stonet into a lake or wellhead is a Teu-
tonic, a Celtic and a Finnish superstition, as the examples quoted shew. The
wotersprite avenges the desecration of his holy stream. Under this head come the
stories of the Mommelsee (Dent sag. no. 59. Simplic. 5, 9), of the Pilatossee
(Lothar's Volkssag. 232. Dobenek 2, 118. Gutslaff p. 288. Mone's Anz. 4, 423),
of L. Caznarina in Sicily (Camarinam movere), and above all, of Berenton well in
Breziliande forest, Iwein 553-672, where however it is the well-water poured on the
well-rock that stirs up the storm : oonf . Bupra, p. 594, and the place in Pontus men-
t oned by Beneke, p. 269. The lapis manalis also conjured up rain, 0. Mutter's Etr.
2,97.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



598 ELEMENTS.

to sound the depth of the lake (Moneys Anz. 8, 536). There is
a similar story in Thiele 3, 73, about Huntsoe, that some people
tried to fathom its depth with a ploughshare tied to the line,
and from below came the sound of a spirit- voice : € i maale vore
vagge, vi skal maale jeres lagge ! ' Pull of terror they hauled
up the line, but instead of the share found an old horse's skull
fastened to it. 1

It is the custom in Esthonia for a newly married wife to drop a
present into the well of the house ; it is a nationality that seems
particularly given to worshipping water. There is a detailed
account of the holy Wohhanda, a rivulet of Livonia. It rises
near Ilmegerve, a village of Odenpii district in Esthonia, and
after its junction with the Medda, falls into L. Peipus. The
source is in a sacred grove, within whose bounds no one dares to
cut a tree or break a twig : whoever does it is sure to die that
year. Both brook and fountain are kept clean, and are put to
rights once a year; if anything is thrown into the spring or
the little lake through which it flows, the weather turns to storm
(see Suppl.).

Now in 1641 Hans Ohm of Sommerpahl, a large landowner
who had come into the country in the wake of the Swedes, built
a mill on the brook, and when bad harvests followed for several
years, the Ehsts laid it all to the desecration of the holy stream,
who allowed no obstructions in his path ; they fell upon the mill,
burnt it down, and destroyed the piles in the water. Ohm went
to law, and obtained a verdict against the peasants ; but to
rid himself of new and grievous persecutions, he induced pastor
Gutslaff, another German, to write a treatise 2 specially com-
bating this superstition. Doubtless we learn from it only the
odious features of the heathenish cult. To the question, how
good or bad weather could depend on springs, brooks and lakes,
the Ehsts replied : ( it is our ancient faith, the men of old have
so taught us (p. 25, 258); mills have been burnt down on this

1 The people about L. Baikal believe it has no bottom. A priest, who could
dive to any depth, tried it, but was so frightened by the Ids (dragons, sea-monsters),
that, if I remember rightly, he died raving mad. — Trans.

* A short account of the holy brook (falsely so called) Wohhanda in Liefland,
whereby the ungodly burning of Sommerpahl mill came to pass. Given from
Christian zeal against unchristian and heathenish superstition, by Joh. Gutslaff,
Pomer. pastor at Urbs in Liefland. Dorpt 1644 (8vo, 407 pp. without the Dedic.
and Pref.). An extract in Kellgren (Suomi 9, 72-92).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOLY LAKES AND STREAMS. 599

brook before now (p. 278), he will stand no crowding/ The Esth.
name, is c poha yogge/ the Lettic ' shv&ti ubbe/ i.e. holy brook.
By means of it they could regulate the weather, and when they
wanted rain, they had only to throw something in (p. 25). Once,
when three oxen were drowned in the lake, there followed snow
and frost (p. 26). At times there came up out of the brook a earl
with blue and yellow stockings : evidently the spirit of the brook.
Another Esthonian story is about If. Eim changing his bed.
On his banks lived wild and wicked men, who never mowed the
meadows that he watered, nor sowed the fields he fertilized, but
robbed and murdered, so that his bright wave was befouled with
the blood of the slain. And the lake mourned ; and one evening
he called his fish together, and mounted with them into the
air. The brigands hearing a din cried : ' the Eim has left his
bed, let us collect his fish and hidden treasure/ But the fish
were gone, and nothing was found at the bottom but snakes,
toads and salamanders, which came creeping out and lodged with
the ruffian brood. But the Eim rose higher and higher, and
swept like a white cloud through the air ; said the hunters in the
woods : € what is this murky weather passing over us f * and t the
herdsmen : 'what white swan is flying in the sky ? ' All night
he hung among the stars, at morn the reapers spied him, how
that he was sinking, and the white swan became as a white ship,
and the ship as a dark drifting cloud. And out of the waters
came a voice: 'get thee hence with thy harvest, I come to dwell
with thee/ Then they bade him welcome, if he would bedew their
fields and meadows, and he sank down and stretched himself in
his new couch. They set his bed in order, built dikes, and planted
young trees around to cool his face. Their fields he made fertile,
their meadows green ; and they danced around him, so that old
men grew young for joy. 1

1 Fr. Thiersch in Taschenbuoh fur Hebe and froundsohaft 1809, p. 179. Mast
not Eim be the same as Embach (mother-beck, fr. emma mother, conf . dim mother-
in-law) near Dorpat, whose origin is reported as follows ? When God had created
heaven and earth, he wished to bestow on the beasts a king, to keep them in
order, and commanded them to dig for his reception a deep broad beck, on
whose banks he might walk ; the earth dug oat of it was to make a hill for the
king to live on. All the beasts set to work, the hare measured the land, the fox's
brush trailing after him marked the coarse of the stream ; when they had finished
hollowing out the bed, God poured water into it out of his golden bowl (Verhandl.
der esthn. gesellschaft, Dorpat 1840. 1, 40-42). The two stories differ as to*1he
manner of preparing the new bed.

VOL. II. H

Digitized by VjOOQIC



600 ELEMENTS.

The Greeks and Romans personified their rivers into male
beings ; a bearded old man pours the flowing spring out of his
urn (pp. 585. 593). Homer finely pictures the elemental strife
between water and fire in the battle of the Skamander with
Hephaestus : the river is a god, and is called ava% y Od. 5, 445.
451. The Indian Ganges too is an august deity. Smaller
streams and fountains had nymphs set over them. 1 In our
language, most of the rivers' names are feminine (Gramm. 3,
384-6), there must therefore have been female watersprites.
Twelve or eighteen streams are specified by name in Ssam. 43 b .
Sn. 4. I single out Le&ptr, by whose clear water, as by Styx or
Acheron, oaths were sworn. Seem. 165*: 'at eno liosa Leiptrar
vatni/ A dromon of the Rhine is nowhere named in our native
traditions, but the Edda calls the Bin (fern.) svinn, askunna
(prudens, a diis oriunda, Ssem. 248*). And in the bosom of the
Rhine lie treasure and gold. The Goths buried their beloved
king Alaric in the bed of a river near Consentia (Cosenza), which
they first dug out of its course, and then led back over the
corpse (Jornandes, cap. 30) ; the Franks, when crossing a river,
offered sacrifice to it (p. 45).

But where the sacred water of a river sweeps round a piece
of meadow land, and forms an ea (aue), such a spot is specially
marked out for the residence of gods ; witness Wunsches ouwe
(p. 140), Pholes ouwa»(p. 225) .* Equally venerable were islands
washed by the pure sea wave, Fosetesland (p. 230), and the island
ofNerthus (p. 251).

In the sea itself dwelt Oegir (p. 237) and Ran (p. 311), and the
waves are their daughters : the Edda speaks of nine waves, and
gives their names (Sn. 124, conf. the riddles in the Hervararsaga,
pp. 478-9) ; this reminds me of the nana unda in the Waltharius
1343, and the 'fluctus decumanus' [every tenth wave being the
biggest, Festas, and Ov. Trist. i. 2, 50]. There must also have
been another god of the sea, Geban (p. 239, conf. p. 311). Then,

1 The Romans appear to have much elaborated their coitus of rivers and
brooks, as may be seen by the great number of monuments erected to river-gods. I
will here add the testimony of Tacitus, Ann. 1, 79 : * sacra et lucos et aras patriu
amnibus dicare.*

* Gallus Ohem's Chronik von Reiehenav (end of 15th cent.) quoted in Schon-
huth's Beichenau, Freib. 1836, p. v. : ' the isle is to this day esteemed honourable
and holy ; unchristened babes are not buried in it, but carried out and laid beside a
small house with a saint's image in it, called the chindli-bild.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



EA, ISLAND. SEA. FIRE. 601

according to the Edda, there lies in the deep sea an enormous
'worm/ mrSgarSs-ormr, biting his own tail and begirding the
whole earth. The immensity of ocean (Goth, marisdivs) is ex-
pressed in the OHG. names endilmeri and wendilmeri (Graff 2,
829) ; conf . enteo and wenteo (p. 564), entil and wentil (p. 375).
An AS. term gdrsecg I have tried to explain in Zeitschr. fur d. a.
1, 578. As the running stream will suffer no evil-doer in it, so
is ' daz iqpr so reine, daz ez keine bdsheit mac geltden/ so clean
that it no wickedness can bear, Wiener merfart 892 (see Suppl.).



2. Fire.

Fire, 1 like water, is regarded as a living being : corresponding
to quecprunno (p. 588 n.) we have a quecfiur, daz quecke fiwer,
Parz. 71, 13 ; Serv. vatra zhiva, ogan zhivi (vivus, Vuk 1, xlvi.
and 3, 8. 20) ; to irvp drjpiov Sptyvxpv of the Egyptians, Herod. 3,
16; ignis animal, Cic. de N. D. 3, 14, i.e. a devouring hungry
insatiable beast, vorax flamma; frekr (avidus), Saem. 50 b ; bitar
fiur, Hel. 78, 22 ; bitar logna 79, 20 ; gr&dag logna (greedy lowe),
130, 23; grim endi gr&dag 133, 11 ; eld unfuodi (insatiabilis) 78,
23 ; it licks with its tongue, eats all round it, pastures, vijierai,
II. 23, 177; the land gets eaten clean by it, irvpl %do>j/ ve/xerat,
2, 780; '16ztu eld eta iofra bygdir, S»m. I42 a ; it is restless,
atcdfunov irvp, II. 23, 52. To be spoken to is a mark of living
things: 'heitr ertu hripuSr!' (hot art thou, Fire), Seem. 40*.
The ancient Persians made a god of it, and the Indian Agni
(ignis) is looked upon as a god. The Edda makes fire a brother
of the wind and sea, therefore himself alive and a god, Sn. 126.
Our people compare the element to a cock flying from house to
house : * I'll set the red cock on your roof is a threat of the incen-
diary ; ' ein roten han aufs stadel setzen,' H. Sachs iv. 3, 86 d ;
voter sehin, Gudr. 786, 2.

An antique heathen designation of the great World-fire, ON.
muspell, OHG. OS. muspUli, mudspelli, mutspelli, has already
been noticed, p. 558. The mythic allusions here involved can
only be unfolded in the sequel ; the meaning of the word seems
to be ligni perditor, as fire in general is also called bani vi&ar,

1 Names for it, Gramm. 3, S52 ; Eddie names, Sam. §0\ Sn. 187-8.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



602 ELEMENTS.

grand iridar (bane, crusher, of wood), Sn. 126, her alls vi&ar,
Seem. 228 b . Another difficult expression is eikin fur, Seem. 83 b .
Of vafrlogi (quivering flame), suggesting the MH6. € daz bibende
fewer* (Tund. 54, 58), I likewise forbear to speak; conf. Chap.
XXXI., Will o* the wisp (see Suppl.).

A regular worship of fire seems to have had a more limited
range than the veneration of water ; it is only in that passage of
the AS. prohibitions quoted p. 102, and in no other, that I find
mention of fire. A part of the reverence accorded to it is no
doubt included in that of the light-giving and warming sun, as
Julius Caesar (p. 103 above) names Sol and Vulcanus together,
and the Edda fire and sun, praising them both as supreme :
1 eldr er beztr med £ta sonum, ok solar sfn/ fire is best for men,
SaBm. 18 b (as Pindar says water is). In Superst. B, 17, I under-
stand ' observatio pagana in foco 9 of the flame on the hearth or in
the oven : where a hearth-fire burns, no lightning strikes (Sup. I,
126) ; when it crackles, there will be strife (322. 534). Compare
with this the Norwegian exposition (p. 242) ; so long as a child
is unbaptized, you must not let the fire out (Sup. Swed. 22), conf.
kasta eld, tagi i elden (24-5. 54. 68. 107). — The Esthonians
throw gifts into fire, as well as into water (Sup. M, 11) ; to
pacify the flame, they sacrifice a fowl to it (82).

A distinction seems to have been made between friendly and
malignant fires ; among the former the Greeks reckoned brimstone
fire, as they call sulphur Oelov, divine smoke (II. 8, 135. Od. 22,
481. 493). In 0. Fr. poems I often find such forms of cursing
as : mal feu arde ! Tristr. 3791 ; maus feus et male flambe
m'arde ! Meon 3, 227. 297. Ren. 19998. This evil fire is what
the Norse Loki represents ; and as Loki or the devil breaks loose,
we say, when a fire begins, that it breaks loose, breaks out, gets out,
as if from chains and prison : ' worde viir los/ Doc. in Sartorius's
Hanse p. 27 ; in Lower Germany an alarm of fire was given in the
words * fur los ! ' ON. ' einn neisti (spark) wartS laus/

Forms of exorcism treat fire as a hostile higher being, whom
one must encounter with might and main. Tacitus (Ann. 13, 57)
tells us how the Ubii suppressed a fire that broke out of the ground :
Besidentibus flammis propius suggressi, icttt fustium aliisque
verberibus ut fera-s (see p. 601) absterrebant, postremo tegmina
corpore direpta .injiciunt, quanto magis profana et usu polluta,



Digitized by



Google



FIRE-WORSHIP. 603

tanto magis oppressura ignes. So, on valuables that have caught
fire, people throw some article of clothing that has been worn
next the skin, or else earth which has first been stamped on with
the foot. Rupertus Tuitiensis, De inoendio oppidi Tuitii (i.e. Deutz,
in 1128), relates that a white altar-cloth (corporate) was thrust
into the middle of the fire, to stifle it, bat the flame hurled back
the cloth. The cloth remained uu injured, but had a red streak
running through it. Similar to this was the casting of clothes
into the lake (p. 596-7). Fire breaking out of the earth (iarS-
eldr) is mentioned several times in Icelandic sagas : in the even-
ing you see a great horrible man rowing to land in an iron boat,
and digging under the stable door; in the night earth-fire breaks
out there, and consumes every dwelling, Landn. 2, 5; 'iarSeldr
rann ofan/ 4, 12 (see Suppl.).

Needfire. — Flame which had been kept some time among
men and been propagated from one fire to another, was thought
unserviceable for sacred uses; as holy water had to be drawn
fresh from the spring, so it made all the difference, if instead of
the profaned and as it were worn out flame, a new one were used.
This was called wild fire, as opposed to the tame and domesti-
cated. So heroes when they fought, 'des fiurs uz den ringen
(harness) hiuwen si genuoc/ Nib. 2215, 1 ; ftz ir helmen daz
wilde fiwer von den siegen vuor entwer/ Alt. bl. 1, 339 ; £ daz
fiur wilde wadlende druze vluoc/ Lanz. 5306 ; ' si sluogen ftf ein-
ander, daz wilde fiur erschien/ Etz9ls hofh. 168 (see Suppl.).
Fire struck or scraped out of stone might indeed have every
claim to be called a fresh one, but either that method seemed
too common (flammam concussis ex more lapidibus elicere, Viba
Severini cap. 14), or its generation out of wood was regarded as
more primitive and hallowed. If by accident such wild fire have
arisen under the carpenter's hand in driving a nail into the mor-
tised timbers of a new house, it is ominous of dknger (Superst. I,
411. 500. 707) . But for the most part there was a formal kindling
of flame by the rubbing of wood, for which the name known from
the oldest times jjvas notfeuer (need fire) , and its ritual can with
scarce a doubt be traced back to heathen sacrifices.

So far back as in the Indiculus superstit. 15, we have mention
* de ignefticato de ligno, id est nodfyr'; the Capitulare Carlomani



Digitized by



Google



604 ELEMENTS.

of 742 § 5 (Pertz 8, 17) forbids ' illos sacrilegos ignes quos nied-
fyr vocant. 1

The preparation of needfire is variously described : I think
it worth the while to bring all such accounts together in this
place. Lindenbrog in the Glossary to the Capitularies says :
' Rusticani homines in multis Germaniae locis, et festo quidem
S. Johannis Baptistae die, palum sepi extrahunt, extracto funem
circumligant, illumque hue illuc ducunt, donee ignem eoncipiat :
quern stipula lignisque aridioribus aggestis curate fovent, ac
cineres collectos supra olera spargunt, hoc medio erucas abigi
posse inani superstitione credentes. Bum ergo ignem nodfeur et
nodfyr, quasi necessarium ignem, vocant/ — Joh. Reiskius, 3 in Un-
tersuchung des notfeuers, Frankf. and Leipz. 1696, 8. p. 51 :
'If at any time a grievous murrain have broke out among
cattle great or small, and they have suffered much harm
thereby ; the husbandmen with one consent make a nothfur
or nothfeuer. On a day appointed there must in no house be
any flame left on the hearth. From every house shall be some
straw and water and bushwood brought ; then is a stout oaken
stake driven fast into the ground, and a hole bored through the
same, to the which a wooden roller well smeared with pifch and
tar is let in, and so winded about, until by reason of the great
heat and stress (nothzwang) it give out fire. This is straightway
catched on shavings, and by straw, heath and bushwood enlarged,
till it grow to a full nothfeuer, yet must it stretch a little way
along betwixt two walls or hedges, and the cattle and thereto the
horses be with sticks and whips driven through it three times or
two. Others in other parts set up two such stakes, and stuff into
the holes a windle or roller and therewith old rags smeared with
grease. Others use a hairen or common light- spun rope, collect
wood of nine kinds, and keep up a violent motion till such time as
fire do drop therefrom. There may be in use yet other ways for
the generating or kindling of this fire, nevertheless they all have
respect unto the healing of cattle alone. After thrice or twice
passing through, the cattle are driven to stall or field, and the



1 Ignorant scribes made it metfratree, the Capitularia spuria Benedicti 1, 2
(Peitz iv. 2, 46) have nedfratres.

> Bector of Wolfenbflttel school, v. Qericke's Schottelins illustrates, Leipz.
171P, p. 66. Eccard's Fr. or. 1, 425.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



NEED-FIBE. 605

collected pile of wood is again palled asunder, yet ix* such wise in
sundry places, that every householder shall take a brand with him,
quench it in the wash or swill tub, and put the same by for a
time in the crib wherein the cattle are fed. The stakes driven in
for the extorting of this fire, and the wood used for a roller, are
sometimes carried away for fuel, sometimes laid by in safety, when
the threefold chasing of the cattle through the flame hath been
accomplished/ — In the Marburg Records of Inquiry, for 1605, it
is ordered, that a new cartwfteel with an unused axle be taken
and worked round until it give fire, and with this & fire be
lighted between the gates, and all the oxen driven through it ;. but
before the fire bo kindled, every citizen shall put his own fire clean
out, and afterward fetch him fire again from the other. 1 Kuhn's
Markische sagen p. 369 informs us, that in many parts of the
Mark the custom prevails of making a nothfeuer on certain occa-
sions, and particularly when there is disease among swine. Before
sunrise two stakes of dry wood are dug into the ground amid solemn
silence, and hempen ropes that go round them are pulled back
and forwards till the wood catches fire ; the fire is fed with leaves
and twigs, and the sick animals are driven through. In some
places the fire is produced by the friction of an old cartwlieel. —
The following description, the latest of all, is communicated from
Hohenhameln, bailiw. Baldenberg, Hildesheim : In many villages
of Lower Saxony, especially in the mountains, it is common, as a
precaution against cattle plague, to get up the so-called wild fire,
through which first the pigs, then the cows, lastly the geese are
driven. 2 The established procedure in the matter is this. The
farmers and all the parish assemble, each inhabitant receives
notice to extinguish every bit of fire in his house, so that not a
spark is left alight in the whole village. Then old and young
walk to a hollow way, usually towards evening, the women carry-
ing linen, the men wood and tow. Two oaken stakes are driven
into the ground a foot and a half apart, each having a hole on the
inner side, into which fits a cross-bar as thick as an arm. The
holes are stuffed mith linen, then the cross-bar is forced in as
tight as possible, the heads of the stakes being held together with

1 Zeitschr. des hess. vereins 2, 281.

3 Not a word about sheep : roppoeing cock* and hens were likewise hunted oyer
the coals, it would explain a hitherto unexplained proverb (Beinhart xciv.).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



606 ELEMENTS.

cords. About the smooth round cross-bar is coiled a rope, whose
long ends, left hanging on both sides, are seized by a number of
men ; these make the cross-bar revolve rapidly this way and that,
till the friction sets the linen in the holes on fire. The sparks are
caught on tow or oakum, and whirled round in the air till they
burst into a clear blaze, which is then communicated to straw, and
from the straw to a bed of brushwood arranged in cross layers in
the hollow way. When this wood has well burnt and nearly done
blazing, the people hurry off to the herds waiting behind, and
drive them perforce, one after the other, through the glowing
embers. As soon as all the cattle are through, the young folks
throw themselves pellmell upon the ashes and coals, sprinkling
and blackening one another ; those who are most blackened and
besmudged march into the village behind the cattle as conquerors,
and will not wash for a long time after. 1 If after long rubbing
the linen will not catch, they feel sure there is still fire somewhere
in the village, and that the element refuses to reveal itself through
friction : then follows a strict searching of houses, any fire they
may light upon is extinguished, and the master of the house
rebuked or chastised. But that the wildfire should be evoked by
friction is indispensable, it cannot be struck out of flint and steel.
Some localities perform the ceremony, not yearly as a preventive
of murrain, but only upon its actually breaking out.

Accurate as these accounts are, a few minor details have
escaped them, whose observance is seen to in some districts at
least. Thus, in the Halberstadt country the ropes of the wooden
roller are pulled by two cha&te boys.* Need fires have remained in
use longer and more commonly in North Germany, 8 yet are not
quite unknown in the South.. Schmeller and Stalder are silent,
but in Appenzell the country children still have a game of rub-
bing a rope against a stick till it catches fire : this they call ' de
tilfel hale* unmanning the devil, despoiling him of his strength.*

1 Is there not also a brand or some light carried home for a redistribution of
fire in the village ?

* Busching's Wdchentliche nachr. 4, 64 ; bo a chaste youth has to strike the
light for curing St. Anthony's fire, Superst. I, 710.

8 Conf. Conring's Epist. ad Baluz. xiii. Gericke's Schottel. p. 70. Dahnert
sub v. noodfur.

4 Zellweger's Gesch. von Appenzell, Trogen 1880. 1, 68 ; who observes, that
with the ashes of the fire so engendered they strew the fields, as a protection
against vermin.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



NEED-FIRE. 607

Bat Tobler 252 b says, what boys call de tufel hala is spinning a
pointed stick, with a string coilectTQund it, rapidly in a wooden
socket, till it takes fire. The name iSfcy^be one of those innu-
merable allusions to Loki, the devil and fire-g&iJjD. 242). Nic.
Gryse, in a passage to be quoted later, speaks of sdtonqi fire out
of wood, as we read elsewhere of symbolically sawing the old
woman in two. The Practioa of Berthol. Carrichter, phys. in
ord. to Maximilian II., gives a description (which I borrow from
Wolfg. Hildebrand on Sorcery, Leipz. 1631. p. 226) of a magic
bath, which is not to be heated with common fiint-and-steel fire :
€ Go to an appletree which the lightning hath stricken, let a saw
be made thee of his wood, therewith shalt thou saw upon a
wooden threshold that much people passeth over, till it be kindled.
Then make firewood of birch-fungus, and kindle it at this fire,
with which thou shalt heat the bath, and on thy life see it go not
out' (see Suppl.).

Notfiur can be derived from not (need, necessitas), whether
because the fire is forced to shew itself or the cattle to tread the
hot coal, or because the operation takes place in a time of need,
of pestilence. Nevertheless I will attempt another explanation :
notfiur, nodfiur may stand for an older hnotfiwr, hnodfiwr, from
the root hniudan, OHG. hniotan, ON. hnio'Sa (quassare, terere,
tundere) ; l and would mean a fire elicited by thumping, rubbing,
shaking.

And in Sweden it is actually called both vrideld and gnideld :
the one from vrida (torquere, circumagere), AS. wrrSan, OHG.
rfdan, MHG. riden ; the other from gnida (fricare), OHG. knitan,
AS. cnldan (conterere, fricare, depsere) .

It was produced in Sweden as with us, by violently rubbing
two pieces of wood together, in some districts even near the
end of last century ; sometimes they used boughs of nine sorts
of wood} The smoke rising from gnideld was deemed salutary,

1 OHG. pihniutit (exoutit), Gl. ker. 251. hnotdt (quassat) 229. hnutten (vibrare)
282 ; N. has fnotdn (quassare), Ps. 109, 6. Bth. 230 ; oonf. nieten, to bump. ON.
still has hnio'Sa in lino's (tudes, malleus), hnotfa (depsere), hnutfla (subigere). It
might be spelt hntofiur or hnotfiur (hnutfiur), ace. as the sing, or pi. vowel-form
was used. Perhaps we need not even insist on a lost h, but turn to the OHG.
niuwan, ON. nua (terere, fricare), from which a subst. ndt might be derived by
suffix. Nay, we might go the length of supposing that n6t, nan>8, nauor, need,
contained from the first the notion of stress and pressure (oonf. Graff 2, 1032. 4,
1125).

* Due's De superstit. p. 98, and Glossary sub. v. wredeld. Finn. Magn.,

Digitized by VjOOQIC



608 ELEMENTS.

fruit-trees or nets fumigated with it became the more productive
of fruit or fish. On this fumigation with vriden eld, and on
driving the cattle out over such smoke, conf. Superst. Swed. 89.
108. We can see that the purposes to which needfire was
applied must have been far more numerous in heathen times : in
Germany we find but a fragment of it in use for diseased cattle,
but the superstitious practice of girls kindling nine sorts of wood
on Christmas eve (Sup. I, 955) may assure us of a wider meaning
having once belonged to needfire (see Suppl.).

In the North of England it is believed that an angel strikes a
tree, and then needfire can be got from it ; did they rub it only
out of windfall wood ? or does striking here not mean felling ?

Of more significance are the Scotch and Irish procedures,
which I am glad to give in the words of the original communica-
tions. The following I owe to the kindness of Miss Austin ; it
refers to the I. of Mull (off the W. coast of Scotland), and to
the year 1767. 'In consequence of a disease among the black
cattle the people agreed to perform an incantation, though they
esteemed it a wicked thing. They carried to the top of Oarn-
moor a wheel and nine spindles of oak wood. They extinguished
every fire in every house within sight of the hill ; the wJieel was
then turned from east to west over the nine spindles long enough
to produce fire by friction. If the fire were not produced before
noon, the incantation lost its effect. They failed for several days
running. They attributed this failure to the obstinacy of one
householder, who would not let his fires be put out for what he
considered so wrong a purpose. However by bribing his ser-
vants they contrived to have them extinguished, and on that
morning raised their fire. They then sacrificed a heifer, cutting
in pieces and burning, while yet alive, the diseased part. Then
they lighted their own hearths from the pile, and ended by feast-
ing on the remains. Words of incantation were repeated by an
old man from Morven, who came over as master of the cere-
monies, and who continued speaking all the time the fire was
being raised. This man was living a beggar at Bellochroy.
Asked to repeat the spell, he said the sin of repeating it once had



Tidskr. for nord. oldk. 2, 294, following Westerdahl. Conf. bjaraan, a magic
utensil, Chap. XXXIV.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



NEED-FIBE. 609

brought him to beggary, and that he dared not say those words
again. The whole country believed him accursed' (see Suppl.).

In the Highlands, and especially in Caithness, they now use
needfire chiefly as a remedy for preternatural diseases of cattle
brought on by witchcraft. 1 'To defeat the sorceries, certain
persons who have the power to do so are sent for to raise the
needfire. Upon any small river, lake, or island, a circular booth
of stone or turf is erected, on which a couple or rafter of a birch-
tree is placed, and the roof covered over. In the centre is set a
perpendicular post, fixed by a wooden pin to the couple, the lower
end being placed in an oblong groove on the floor ; and another
pole is placed horizontally between the upright post and the legs
of the couple, into both of which the ends, being tapered, are
inserted. This horizontal timber is called the auger, being pro-
vided with four short arms or spokes by which it can be turned
round. As many men as can be collected are then set to work,
having first divested themselves of all kinds of metal, and two at
a time continue to turn the pole by means of the levers, while
others keep driving wedges under the upright post bo as to press
it against the auger, which by the friction soon becomes ignited.
From this the needfire is instantly procured, and all other fires
being immediately quenched, those that are rekindled both in
dwelling house and offices are accounted sacred, and the cattle
are successively made to smell them.' Let me also make room
for Martin's description, 8 which has features of its own : ' The
inhabitants here did also make use of a fire called tinegin, i.e. a
forced fire, or fire of necessity, 8 which they used as an antidote
against the plague or murrain in cattle ; and it was performed
thus: all the fires in the parish were extinguished, and then
eighty-one (9 x 9) married men, being thought the necessary
number for effecting this design, took two great planks of wood,
and nine of 'em were employed by turns, who by their repeated
efforts rubbed one of tlie planks against the other until the heat

1 I borrow the description of the process from James Logan's * The Scottish
Gael, or Celtic manners as preserved among the Highlanders/ Lond. 1831. 2, 64;
though here he copies almost verbally from Jamieson's Supplem. to the Scot. Diet,
sub v. neidfyre.

2 Deser. of the Western Islands, p. 118.

* From tin, Ir. teine (fire), and egin, Ir. eigin, eigean (vis, violentia) ; which
seems to favour the old etymology of nothfener, unless it be simply a translation of
the Engl, need&ie [which itself may stand for kneadhie] .

Digitized by VjOOQIC



610 ELEMENTS

thereof produced fire; and from this forced fire each family is
supplied with new fire, which is no sooner kindled than a pot full
of water is quickly set on it, and afterwards sprinkled upon the
people infected with the plague, or upon the cattle that have the
murrain. And this they all say they find successful by ex-
perience : it was practised on the mainland opposite to the south
of Skye, within these thirty years/ As in this case there is water
boiled on the frictile fire, and sprinkled with the same effect, so
Eccard (Pr. or. 1, 425) tells us, that one Whitsun morning he saw
some stablemen rub fire out of wood, and boil their cabbage over
it, under the belief that by eating it they would be proof against
fever all that year. A remarkable story from Northamptonshire,
and of the present century, confirms that sacrifice of the young
cow in Mull, ana shows that even in England superstitious
people would kill a calf to protect the herd from pestilence : Miss

C and her cousin walking saw a fire in a field, and a crowd

round it. They said, 'what is the matter V 'Killing a calf J
'What for?' 'To stop the murrain.' They went away as
quickly as possible. On speaking to the clergyman, .he made
inquiries. The people did not like to talk of the affair, but it
appeared that when there is a disease among the cows, or the
calves are born sickly, they sacrifice {i.e. kill and burn) one for
good luck/ [A similar story from Cornwall in Hone's Daybook
1, 153.]

Unquestionably needfire was a sacred thing to other nations
beside the Teutonic and Celtic. The Creeks in N. America hold
an annual harvest festival, commencing with a strict fast of
three days, during which the fires are put out in all houses. On
the fourth morning the chief priest by rubbing two dry sticks
together lights a new clean fire, which is distributed among all
the dwellings ; not till then do the women carry home the new
corn and fruits from the harvest field. 1 The Arabs have for fire-
friction two pieces of wood called March and Aphar, the one
male, the other female. The Chinese say the emperor Sui was
the first who rubbed wood against wood; the inconvenient
method is retained as a holy one. Indians and Persians turn
a piece of cane round in dry wood, Kanne's Urk. 454-5 (see
Suppl.).

i Fr. Majer's Mythol. tasohenb. 1811, p. 110.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



NEED-FIRE. 611

It is still more interesting to observe how nearly the old
Roman and Greek customs correspond. Excerpts from Festus
(0. Miiller 106, 2) say: 'ignis Vestas si quando interstinctas
esset, virgines verberibns afficiebantar a pontifice, quibus mos
erat, tabulam felicis materiae tarn diu terebrare, qaousque exceptum
ignem cribro aeneo virgo in aedem ferret/ The sacred fire of
the goddess, once extinguished, was not to be rekindled, save by
generating the pare element anew. A plank of the choice
timber of sacred trees was bored, i.e. a pin turned round in it,
till it gave out sparks. The act of catching the fire in a
sieve, and so conveying it into the temple, is suggestive of a
similar carrying of water in a sieve, of which there is some
account to be given further on. Plutarch (in Numa 9) makes
out that new fire was obtained not by friction, but by in-
tercepting the sun's rays in clay vessels destined for the pur-
pose. The Greeks worshipped Hestia. as the pure hearth-flame
itself. 1 But Lemnos, the island on which Zeus had flung down
the celestial fire-god Hephrestus, 3 harboured a fire-worship of
its own. Once a year every fire was extinguished for nine days,
till a ship brought some fresh from Delos off the sacred hearth of
Apollo : for some days it drifts on the sea without being able to
land, but as soon as it runs in, there is fire served out to every
one for domestic use, and a new life begins. The old fire was no
longer holy enough ; by doing without it altogether for a time,
men would learn to set the true value on the element (see
Suppl.). s Like Vesta, St. Bridget of Ireland (d. 518 or 521)
had a perpetual fire maintained in honour of her near Kildare ; a
wattled fence went round it, which none but women durst ap-
proach ; it was only permissible to blow it with bellows, not with
the mouth. 4 The mode of generating it is not recorded.

The wonderful amount of harmony in these accounts, and the
usages of needfire themselves, point back to a high antiquity.
The wheel seems to be an emblem of the sun, whence light and
fire proceed; I think it likely that it was provided with nine

1 Nee tu aliud Vestam qnam vivam wteUige flammam, Ov. Fast. 6, 295.

9 Ace. to the Finnish myth, the fire created by the gods falls on the sea in
balls, it is swallowed by a salmon, and men afterwards find it inside the fish when
caught. Bones pp. 6-22.

5 Philostr. Heroic, pp. 740. Welcker's Trilogie, pp. 247-8.

4 Acta sanotor., calend. Febr. p. 112 b .



Digitized by VjOOQIC



612 ELEMENTS.

spokes : 'thet niugenspetze flal' survives in the Frisian laws, those
nine oaken spindles whose friction against the nave produced fire
signify the nine spokes standing oat of the nave, and the same
sacred number turns up again in the nine kinds of wood, in the
nine and eighty-one men that rub. We can hardly doubt that
the wheel when set on fire formed the nucleus and centre of a
holy and purifying sacrificial flame. Oar weisthiimer (2, 615-6.
693-7) have another remarkable custom to tell of. At the great
yearly assize a cartwheel, that had lain six weeks and three days
soaking in water (or a cesspool), was placed in a fire kindled
before the judges, and the banquet lasts till the nave, which must
on no account be turned or poked, be consumed to ashes. This
I take to be a last relic of the pagan sacrificial feast, and the
wheel to have been the means of generating the fire, of which it
is true there is nothing said. In any case we have here the use
of a cartwheel to feed a festal flame.

If the majority of the accounts quoted limit the use of need-
fire to an outbreak of murrain, yet some of them expressly inform
us that it was resorted to at stated times of the year, especially
Midsummer, and that the cattle were driven through the flames to
guard them beforehand against future sicknesses. Nicolaus Gryse
(Rostock 1598, liii a ) mentions as a regular practice on St. John's
day : ' Toward nightfall they warmed them by St. John's blaze
and needfire (nodfur) that they sawed out of wood, kindling
the same not in God's name but St. John's; leapt and ran
and drave the cattle therethro', and were fulfilled of thousand
joys whenas they had passed the night in great sins, shames
and harms.'

Of this yearly recurrence we are assured both by the Lemnian
worship, and more especially by the Celtic. 1 It was in the great
gatherings at annual feasts that needfire was lighted. These the
Celtic nations kept at the beginning of May and of November.
The grand hightide was the Mayday ; I find it falling mostly on
the 1st of May, yet sometimes on the 2nd or 3rd. This day is
called in Irish and Gaelic la bealtine or beiltine, otherwise spelt
beltein, and corrupted into belton, beltim, belt am. La means day,

1 Hyde remarks of the Guebers also, that they lighted a fire every year.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



NEED-FIKE. BEALTINE. 613

teine or tine fire, and beal, beil, is understood to be the name of
a god, not directly connected with the Asiatic Belus, 1 bnt a deity
of light peculiar to the Celts. This Irish Beal, Beil, Gaelic
Beal, appears in the Welsh dialect as Beli, and his 0. Celtic
name of Belenus, Belinus is preserved in Ausonius, Tertullian and
numerous inscriptions (Forcellini sub v.) . The present custom
is thus described by Armstrong sub v. bealtainn : ' In some parts
of the Highlands the young folks of a hamlet meet in the moors
on the first of May. They cut a table in the green sod, of a
round figure, by cutting a trench in the ground of such circum-
ference as to hold the whole company. They then kindle a fire,
and dress a repast of eggs and milk in the consistence of a
custard. They knead a cake of oatmeal, which is toasted at the
embers against a stone. After the custard is eaten up, they
divide the cake in so many portions, as similar as possible to one
another in size and shape, as there are persons in the company.
They daub one of these portions with charcoal until it is perfectly
black. They then put all the bits of the cake into a bonnet, and
every one, blindfold, draws out a portion. The bonnet-holder is
entitled to the last bit. Whoever draws the black bit is the
devoted person who is to be sacrificed to Baal, whose favour they
mean to implore in rendering the year productive. The devoted
person is compelled to leap three times over the flames/ Here the
reference to the worship of a deity is too plain to be mistaken :
we see by the leaping over the flame, that the main point was, to
select a human being to propitiate the god and make him merci-
ful, that afterwards an animal sacrifice was substituted for him,
and finally, nothing remained of the bodily immolation but a leap
through the fire for man and beast. The holy rite of friction is
not mentioned here, but as it was necessary for the needfire that
purged pestilence, it must originally have been much more in
requisition at the great yearly festival.

The earliest mention of the beiltine is found in Cormac, arch-
bishop of Cashel (d. 908). Two fires were lighted side by side,
and to pass unhurt between them was wholesome for men and
cattle. Hence the phrase, to express a great danger : ' itir dha
theinne beil/ i& between two fires. 3 That the sacrifice was

1 Bel, Bal, Isidor. Etym. 8, 23.

3 O'Flaherty in Transact, of Irish Acad., vol. 14, pp. 100. 122-3.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



614 ELEMENTS.

strictly superintended by priests, we are expressely assured by
Usher (Trias thaumat. p. 125), who founds on Evinus: Lege
etiam severissima cavebatur, ut omnes ignes per universas re-
giones isfca nocte exstinguerentur, et nulli liceat ignem reaccen-
dere nisi prius Temoriae (Tighmora, whom we know from Ossian)
a magis rogus sacrificiorum exstrueretur, et quicunque hano legem .
in aliquo transgrederetur non alia mulcta quam capitis supplicio
commissi delicti poenam luebat. 1

Leo (Malb. gl. i, 35) has ingeniously put forward an antithesis
between a god of war Beal or Bael, and a god of peace Sighe or
Sithich ; nay, by this distinction he explains the brothers Bel-
lovesus and Sigovesus in Livy 5, 84 as servants (vesus = Gaelic
uis, uais, minister) of Beal and Sighe, connecting Sighe with
that silent peaceful folk the elves, who are called sighe (supra,
p. 444n.) : to Beal were offered the May fires, bealtine, to Sighe
the November fires, samhtheine (peace-fire). In Wales too they
lighted fires on May 1 and Nov. 1, both being called coelcerth
(see Suppl.).

I .still hesitate to accept all the inferences, but undoubtedly
Beal must be taken for a divine being, whose worship is likely to
have extended beyond the Celtic nations. At p. 228 I identified
him with the German Phol ; and it is of extraordinary value to
our research, that in the Rhine districts we come upon a Pfultag,
Pulletag (P.'s day), which fell precisely on the 2nd of May
(Weisth. 2, 8. 3, 748). We know that our forefathers very
generally kept the beginning of May as a great festival, and it is
still regarded as the trysting-time of witches, i.e. once of wise-
women and fays; who can doubt that heathen sacrifices blazed
that day? Pholtag then answers to Bealteine* and moreover
Baldag is the Saxon form for Paltar (p. 229).

Were the German May- fires, after the conversion, shifted to
Easter and Midsummer, to adapt them to Christian worship ? Or,
as the summer solstice was itself deeply rooted in heathenism, is
it Eastertide alone that represents the ancient May-fires ? For,
as to the Celtic November, the German Yule or Midwinter might
easily stand for that, even in heathen times.

1 Conf. the accounts in Mone's Geschichte des heidenth. 2, 485.
3 All over England on the 1st of May they set up a May pole, which may be
from pole, pains, AS. pol ; yet Pol, Phol may deserve to be taken into account too.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



BEALTINE. PHOl/S DAY. 615

Whichever way we settle that, our very next investigations
will shew, that beside both needfire and bealtine, other fires are
to be found almost all over Europe.

It is not unimportant to observe, that in the north of Germany
they take place at Easter, in the south at Midsummer. There
- they betoken the entrance of spring, here the longest day ; as
before, it all turns upon whether the people are Saxon or Frank.
All Lower Saxony, Westphalia, and Lower Hesse, Gelders,
Holland, Friesland, Jutland, and Zealand have Easter fires ; up
the Rhine, in Franconia, Thuringia, Swabia, Bavaria, Austria,
and Silesia, Midsummer fires carry the day. Some countries,
however, seem to do homage to both, as Denmark and Garinthia.

Easter Fires. — At all the cities, towns and villages of a country,'
towards evening on the first (or third) day of Easter, there is
lighted every year on mountain and hill a great fire of straw, turf,
and wood, amidst a concourse and jubilation, not only of the
young, but of many grown-up people. On the Weser, especially
in Schaumburg, they tie up a tar-barrel on a fir-tree wrapt round
with straw, and set it on fire at night. Men and maids, and all
who come, dance exulting and singing, hats, are waved, handker-
chiefs thrown into the fire. The mountains all round are lighted
up, and it is an elevating spectacle, scarcely paralleled by any-
thing else, to survey the country for many miles round from one
of the higher points, and in every direction at once to see a vast
number of these bonfires, brighter or fainter, blazing up to heaven.
In some places they marched up the hill in stately procession,
carrying white rods ; by turns they sang Easter hymns, grasping
each other's hands, and at the Hallelujah clashed their rods to-
gether. They liked to carry some of the fire home with them. 1

No doubt we still lack many details as to the manner of keep-
ing Easter fires in various localities. It is worth noting, that at
Braunrode in the Harz the fires are lighted at evening twilight

1 Joh. Timeus On the Easter fire, Hamb. 1590 ; a reprint of it follows Reiske's
Notfeuer. Letzner's Historia S. Bonif., Hildesh. 1602. 4, oap. 12. Leukfeld's
Antiq. gandersh. pp. 4-5. Eberh. Baring's Beschr. der (Lauensteiner) Saala,
1744. 2, 96. Hamb. mag. 26, 302 (1762). Hanndv. mag. 1766, p. 216. Bath-
lef f s Diepholz, Brem. 1767. 8, 36-42. (Pratje's) Bremen and Verden 1, 165.
Bragur vi. 1, 35. Geldersche volksalmanak voor 1835, p. 19. Easter fire is in
Danish pacuke-blus or -Must ; whether Sweden has the custom I do not know, but
Olans Magnus 15, 5 affirms that Scandinavia has Midsummer fires. Still more
surprising that England has no trace of an Easter fire ; we have a report of such
from Carinthia in Sartori's Beise 2, 850.



VOL. II. N

Digitized by



Google



616 ELEMENTS.

of the first Easter day, bat before that, old and young sally out
of that village and Griefenhagen into the nearest woodlands to
hunt up the squirrels. These they chase by throwing stones and
cudgels, till at last the animals drop exhausted into their hands,
dead or alive. This is said to be an old-established custom. 1

For these ignes paschales there is no authority reaching beyond
the 16th century; but they must be a great deal older, if only for
the contrast with Midsummer fires, which never could penetrate
into North Germany, because the people there held fast by their
Easter fires. Now, seeing that the fires of St. John, as we shall
presently shew, are more immediately connected with the Christian
church than those of Easter, it is not unreasonable to trace these
all the way back to the worship of the goddess Ostard or Edstre
(p. 291), who seems to have been more a Saxon and Anglian
divinity than one revered all over Germany. Her name and her
fires, which are likely to have come at the beginning of May,
would after the conversion of the Saxons be shifted back to the
Christian feast. 2 Those mountain fires of the people are scarcely
derivable from the taper lighted in the church the same day : it
is true that Boniface, ep. 87 (Wiirdtw.), calls it ignis paschalis y z
and such Easter lights are still mentioned in the 16th century.*
Even now in the Hildesheim country they light the lamp on
Maundy Thursday, and that on Easterday, at an Easter fire which,
has been struck with a steel. The people flock to this fire, carry-
ing oaken crosses or simply crossed sticks, which they set on fire
and then preserve for a whole year. But the common folk dis-
tinguish between this fire and the wild fire elicited by rubbing
wood. Jager (Ulm, p. 521) speaks of a consecration of fire and
of logs.

1 Ro8enkranz, Neue zeitschr. f. gesch. der germ, volk. i. 2, 7.

2 Letzner Bays (ubi supra), that betwixt Brunetein and Wibbrechtshausen,
where Boniface had overthrown the heathen idol Roto (who may remind us of Beda's
Bheda), on the same Betberg the people * did after sunset on Easter day, even
within the memory of man, hold the Easter fire, which the men of old named
bocks-thorn.' On the margin stands his old authority again, the lost Conradus
Fontanus (supra p. 190). How the fire itself should come by the name of buck's or
goat's thorn, is hard to see ; it is the name of a shrub, the tragacanth. Was bocks-
thorn thrown into the Easter flames, as certain herbs were into the Midsummer
fire? .

8 N.B., some maintain that the Easter candle was ignited by burning-glasses
or crystals (Serrarius ad Epist. Bonif. p. 843).

4 Franz Wessel's Beschreibung des pabstlichen gottesdienates, Stralsund ed. by
Zober, 1837, p. 10.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



EASTER FIRES. 617

Almost everywhere during the last hundred years the feeble-
ness of governments has deprived the people of their Easter fires
(see Suppl.). 1

Midsummer Fires. 2 — In our older speech, the most festive
season of the year, when the sun has reached his greatest height
and must thence decline again, is named sunewende = sunnewende
(sun's wending, solstice), commonly in the plural, because this
high position of the sun lasts several days : ' ze einen sunewenden/
Nib. 32, 4 ; 'zen n»hsten sunewenden/ Nib. 1424, 4. Wigal. 1717;
1 vor disen sunewenden/ Nib. 678, 3. 694, 8 ; € ze sunewenden/
Trist. 5987 (the true reading comes out in Groot's variants) ; € an
sunewenden abent/ Nib. 1754, I ; 'nach sunewenden/ Iw. 2941. 3
Now, as Midsummer or St. John's day (June 24), ' sant Johans
sunewenden tac/ Ls. 2, 708, coincides with this, the fires in
question are called in Up. German documents of the 14- 15th
century sunwentfeuer, sunbentfewr* and even now among the
Austrian and Bavarian peasantry simawetsfoir, sunwentsfeuer.
H. Sachs 1, 423 d : € auch schiirn die bubn (lads poke) sunwent-
feuer/ At this season were held great gatherings of the people :
1 die nativitatis S. Johannis baptistae in conventu papuli maximo '
(Pertz 2, 386) ; this was in 860. In 801 Charles the Great kept
this festival at Eporedia, now Ivrea (Pertz 1, 190. 223) ; and
Lewis the Pious held assemblies of the Empire on the same day
in 824 and 831. Descriptions of Midsummer fires agree with
those of Easter fires, with of course some divergences. At
Gernsheim in the Mentz country, the fire when lighted is blessed
by the priest, and there is singing and prayer so long as it burns ;
when the flame goes out, the children jvmp over the glimmering
coals ; formerly grown-up people did the same. In Superst. I,



1 ' Judic. inquiry reap, the Easter fire burned, contr. to prohib., on the Kogeln-
bergneax Volkmarsen, Apr. 9, 1833/ see Niederhess. wochenbL 1834, p. 2229*.
The older prohibitions allege the unchristian character, later ones the waste of
timber. Even bonfires for a victory were very near being suppressed.

* The best treatise is : Franc. Const, de Khautz de ritu ignis in natali S.
Johannis bapt. accensi, Vindob. 1759, 8vo.

* All the good MSS. have, not sunnewende, but sunewende, which can only
stand for sunwende, formed like suntao. We also find * zu tungihten,* Soheffer's
Haltaus, pp. 109, 110 ; giht here corresp. to Goth, gahts (gressus), and allows us' to
guess an OHG. sunnagaht.

4 Hahn's Monum. 2, 693. Sutner's Beriohtigungen, Munch. 1797, p. 107 (an.
1401).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



618 ELEMENTS.

848 we are told how a garland is plaited of nine sorts of flowers.
Reiske (ufc supra, p. 77) says : ' the fire is made under the open
sky, the youth and the meaner folk leap over it, and all manner
of Jterbs are cast into it ; like these, may all their troubles go off
in fire and smoke ! In some places they light lanterns outside
their chambers at night, and dress them with red poppies or
anemones, so as to make a bright glitter/ At Niirnberg the
lads go about begging billets of wood, cart them to the Bleacher's
pond by the Spital-gate, make a fire of them, and jump over it ;
this keeps them in health the whole year (conf. Sup. I, 918).
They invite passers by to have a leap, who pay a few kreuzers
for the privilege. In the Fulda country also the boys beg for
wood to burn at night, and other presents, while they sing a
rhyme : ' Da kommen wir her gegangen Mit spiessen und mit
stangen, Und wollen die eier (eggs) langen. . Feuerrothe bliime-
lein, An der erde springt der wein, Gebt ihr uns der eier ein
Zum Johannisfeuer, Der haber is gar theuer (oats are so dear).
Haberje, haberjul frifrefrid ! Gebt uns doch ein schiet (scheit,
billet) !' (J. v. u. f. Deutschl. 1790. 1, 313.) Similar rhymes
from Franconia and Bavaria, in Schra. 3, 262. In the Austrian
Donaulandchen on St. John's eve they light fires on the hill, lads
and lasses jump over the flames amid the joyful cries and songs
of the spectators {Reil, p. 41). 'Everywhere on St. John's eve
there was merry leaping over the sonnenwendefeuer, and mead was
drunk over it,' is Denis's recollection of his youthful days (Lesef r.
1, 130). At Bbingen in Swabia they boiled pease over the fire,
which were laid by and esteemed wholesome for bruises and
wounds (Schmid's Schwab, id. 167); conf. the boiling over need-
fires (p. 610). Greg. Strigenitius (b. 1548, d. 1603), in a sermon
preached on St. John's day and quoted in Ecc. Fr. or. i. 425,
observes, that the people (in Meissen or Thuringia) dance and
sing round the Midsummer fires ; that one man threw a horse's
head into the flame, meaning thereby to force the witches to fetch
some of the fire for themselves. Seb. Frank in his Weltbuch
51 b : ' On St. John's day they make a simetfire [corrupt, of sun-
went], and moreover wear upon them, I know not from what
superstition, quaint wreaths of mug wort and monks-hood; nigh
every one hath a blue plant named larkspur in hand, and whoso
looketh into the fire thro y the same, hath never a sore eye all that

Digitized by VjOOQIC



MIDSUMMER FIRES. 619

year; lie that would depart home unto his house, castelh this his
plant into the fire, saying, So depart all mine ill- fortune and be
burnt up with this herb ! ' * So, on the same day, were the waves
of water to wash away with them all misfortune (p. 589). But
in earlier times the polite world, even princes and kings, took
part in these bonfires. Peter Herp's Ann. francof. telf us, ad an.
1489 (Senkenb. Sel. 2, 22) : r In vigilia S. Joh. bapt. rogus ingens
fait factus ante domum consulum inforo (francofiirtensi)*, fuerunt-
que multa vexilla depicta posita in struem lignorum, et vexillum
regis in supremo positum, et circa ligna rami virentes positi.
fuitque magna chorea dominorum, rege inspiciente/ At Augsburg
in 1497, in the Emp. Maximilian's presence, the fair Susanna
Neithard kindled the Midsummer fire with a torch, and with
Philip the Handsome led the first ring-dance round the fire.*
A Munich voucher of 1401 renders account :. ' umb gras und
knechten, die dy piink ab dem haws auf den margt trugen
(carried benches to the market-place) an der sunbentnacht, da
herzog Stephan und sein gemachel (consort) und das frawel auf
dem margt tanzten mit den purgerinen bei dem sunbentfwr,' (Sut-
ner's Berichtig. p. 107). On St. John's eve 1578, the Duke of
Liegnitz had a bonfire made on the Qredisberg, as herr Gotsch
did on the Kynast, at which the Duke himself was present with
his court (Schweinichen 2, 347).

We have a fuller description of a Midsummer fire made in
1823 at Konz, a Lorrainian but still German village on the
Moselle, near Sierk and Thionville. Every house delivers a truss
of straw on the top of the Stromberg, where men and youths
assemble towards evening; women and girls are stationed by the
Burbach spring. Then a huge wheel is wrapt round with straw,

1 On June 20, 1658, the Nurnberg town-council issued the following order :
Whereas experience heretofore hath shewn, that after the old heathenish use, on
John's day in every year, in the country, as well in towns as villages, money and
wood hath been gathered by young folk, and thereupon the so-called sonnenwendt or
zimmet fire kindled, and thereat winebibbing, dancing about the said fire, leaping
over the same, with burning of sundry herbs and flowers, and setting of brands from
the said fire in the fields, and in many other ways all manner of superstitious work
carried on — Therefore the Hon. Council of Nurnberg town neither can nor ought
to forbear to do away with aU such unbecoming superstition, paganism, and peril
of fire on this coming day of St. John (Neuer lit. anz. 1807, p. 818). [Sun wend
fires forbidden in Austria in 1850, in spite of Goethe's ' Fires of John we'll cherish,
Whv should gladness perish? • — Suppl.]

'* Oasseri Ann. august., ad an. 1497, Sohm. 8, 261 ; conf. Ranke's Boman. u.
German, vdlk. 1, 102.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



620 ELEMENTS.

so that none of the wood is left in sight, a strong pole is passed
through the middle, which sticks out a yard on each side, and is
grasped by the guiders of the wheel ; the remainder of the straw
is tied up into a number of small torches. At a signal given
by the Maire of Sierk {who, according to ancient custom, earns
a basket of cherries by the service), the wheel is lighted with a
torch, and set rapidly in motion, a shout of joy is raised, all wave
tlveir torclie8 on high, part of the men stay on the bill, part follow
the rolling globe of fire as it is guided dmonhill to the Moselle. It
often goes out first $ but if alight when it touches the river,
it prognosticates an abundant vintage, and the Konz people have
a right to levy a tun of white wine from the adjacent vineyards.
Whilst the wheel is rushing past the women and girls, they
break out into cries of joy, answered by the men on the hill ; and
inhabitants of neighbouring villages, who have flocked to the
river side, mingle their voices in the universal rejoicing. 1

In the same way the butchers of Treves are said to have yearly
sent down a wheel of fire into the Moselle from the top of the
Paulsberg (see Suppl.). 2

The custom of Midsummer fires and wheels in Prance is
attested even by writers of the 12th and 13th centuries, John
Beleth, a Parisian divine, who wrote about 1162 a Summa de
divinis officiis, and William Durantis, b. near Beziers in Langue-
doc, about 1237, d. 1296, the well-known author of the Rationale
divinor. oific. (written 1286; conf. viii. 2, 3 de epacta). In the
Summa (printed at Dillingen, 1572) cap. 137, fol. 256, and thence
extracted in the Rationale vii. 14, we find: 'Feruntur quoque
(in festo Joh. bapt.) brandae sen faces ardentes et fiunt ignes,
qui significant S. Johannem, qui fuit lumen et lucerna ardens,
praecedens et praecursor verae lucis . . . ; rota in quibusdam
locis voltritur, ad significandum, quod sicut sol ad altiora sui
circuli pervenit, nee altius potest progredi, sed tunc sol descendit
in circulo, sic et fama Johannis, qui putabatur Chris tus, descendit

1 Mem. dee antiquaires de Fr. 5, 888-6.

• ' In memory of the hermit Paulus, who in the mid. of the 7th cent, hurled
the idol Apollo from Mt. Gehenna, near Treves, into the Moselle,' thinks the writer
of the article on Konz, pp. 387-8. If Trithem's De viris illustr. ord. S. Bened. 4,
201, is to vouch for this, I at least can only find at p. 142 of Opp. pia et spirit.
Mogunt. 1605, that Paulus lived opposite Treves, on Cevenna, named Mons Pauli
after him ; but of Apollo and the firewheel not a word [and other authorities are
equally silent] .

Digitized by VjOOQIC



MIDSUMMER FIRES. 621

secundum quod ipse testimonium perhibet, dicens : me oportet
minui, ilium autem crescere/ Much older, but somewhat vague,
is the testimony of Eligius : € Nullus in festivitate S. Johahnis
vel quibuslibet sanctorum solemnitatibus solstitia (?) aut valla-
tiones vel saltationes aut casaulas aut cantica diabolica exerceat.' 1

In great cities, Paris, Metz, and many more, as late as the
15-16-17th centuries, the pile of wood was reared in the public
square before the town hall, decorated with flowers and foliage,
and set on fire by the Maire himself. 2 Many districts in the
south have retained the custom to this day. At Aix, at
Marseille, all the streets and squares are cleaned up on St. John's
Day, early in the morning the country folk bring flowers into the
town, and everybody buys some, every house is decked with
greenery, to which a healing virtue is ascribed if plucked before
sunrise : ' aco soun dherbas de san Jean/ Some of the plants
are thrown into the flame, the young people jump over it, jokes are
played on passers-by with powder trains and hidden fireworks,
or they are squirted at and soused with water from the windows.
In the villages they ride on mules and donkeys, carrying lighted
branches of fir in their hands. 8

In many places they drag some of the charred brands and
charcoal to their homes: salutary and even magical effects are
supposed to flow from these (Superst. French 27. 30. 34).

In Poitou, they jump three times round the fire with a branch of
walnut in their hands (Me'm. des antiq. 8, 451). Fathers of
families whisk a bunch of white mullein (bouillon blanc) and a
leafy spray of walnut through the flame, and both are afterwards
nailed up over the cowhouse door; while the youth dance and
sing, old men put some of the coal in their wooden shoes as
a safeguard against innumerable woes (ibid. 4, 110).

In the department of Hautes Pyr6n£es, on the 1st of May,

1 The Kaiserchronik (Cod. pal. 861, l b ) on the celebration of the Sunday :

Swenne in kom der sunnintac,

s6 vllzete sioh RGme al diu stat (all R. bestirred itself),

wie si den got mohten geeren (to honour the god),

die allirwisisten herren (wisest lords)

vuorten einiz al nmbe die stat (carried a thing round the city)

daz was geschaffen same tin rat (shapen like a wheel)

rrtit brinnenden liehten (with burning lights) ;

fl wie grdze sie den got zierten (greatly glorified the god) !

- Mem. de l'acad. celt. 2, 77-8. 8, 447.

* Millin's Voyage dans le midi 8, 28. 841-5.



Digitized by



Google,



622 ELEMENTS.

every commune looks out the tallest and slenderest tree, a pine or
fir on the hills, a poplar in the plains ; when they have lopped
all the boughs off, they drive into it a number of wedges a foot
long, and keep it till the 23rd of June. Meanwhile it splits
diamond-shape where the wedges were inserted, and is now rolled
and dragged up a mountain or hill. There the priest gives it his
blessing, they plant it upright in the ground, and set »it on fire
(ibid. 5, 387).

Strutt 1 speaks of Midsummer fires in England: they were
lighted on Midsummer Eve, and kept up till midnight, often till
cock-crow ; the youth danced round the flame, in garlands of
motherwort and vervain, with violets in their hands. In Denmark
they are called Sanct Hans aftens blus, but also gadeild (street-
fire), because they are lighted in public streets or squares, and on
hills. [Is not gade conn, with sunna-gaht, p. 617 ?] Imagining
that all poisonous plants came up out of the ground that night,
people avoided lingering on the grass ; but wholesome plants
(chamaemelum and bardanum) they hung up in their houses.
Some however shift these street-fires to May-day eve. 2 Nor-
way also knows the custom: 'S. Hans aften brandes der baal
ved alle griner (hedged country-lanes), hvilket skal fordrive ondt
(harm) fra creaturerne/ Sommerfeldt's Saltdalen, p. 121. But
some words quoted by Hallager p. 13 are worth noting, viz.
brandshat for the wood burnt in the fields, and brising for the
kindled fire ; the latter reminds us of the gleaming necklace of
Freyja (p. 806-7), and may have been transferred from the flame
to the jewel, as well as from the jewel to the flame.

There is no doubt that some parts of Italy had Midsummer
fires : at Orvieto they were exempted from the restrictions laid
on other fires. 8 Italian sailors lighted them on board ship out
at sea, Fel. Fabri Evagat. 1, 170. And Spain is perhaps to
be included on the strength of a passage in the Romance de
Guarinos (Silva, p. 113) :

1 Sports and Pastimes of the People of England, by Job. Strutt. New ed. by
WHone, Lond. 1830, p. 359.

9 Molbech's Dialect. Lex. 150. Lyngbye's Nord. tidskr. for oldk. 2, 352-9. Finn
Magn. Lex. myth. 1091-4. Arndt's Reise durch Schweden 3, 72-3.

3 Statuta urberetana, an. 1491. 3, 51 : Quicunque sine licentia officialis fecerit
ignem in aliqua festivitate de nocte in civitate, in xl sol. denarior. puniatur,
excepts festivitate S. Johannis bapt. de mense Junii, et qui in ilia nocte furatua
fueht vel abstulerit ligna Tel tabulas alterius in lib. x den. puniatur.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



MIDSUMMER FIRES. 623

Vanse dias, vienen dias, venido era el de Sant Juan,
donde Christianos y Moros hazen gran solenidad :
los Christianos echan juncia, y los Moros arrayhan,
los Judios echan eneas, por la fiesta mas honrar.

Here nothing is said of fire, 1 but we are told that the Christians
strew rushes, the Moors myrtle, the Jews reeds ; and the throw-
ing of flowers and herbs into the flame seems an essential part
of the celebration, e.g. mugwort, monks-hood, larkspur (p. 618),
mullein and walnut leaves (p. 621). Hence the collecting of
all such John's-herbs in Germany (Superst. I, 157. 189. 190), and
of S. Hans utter (worts) in Denmark (K, 126), and the like in
France (L, 4). According to Casp. Zeumer's De igne in festo
S. Joh. accendi solito, Jenae 1699, the herb aXiBfia (?) was
diligently sought on that day and hung up over doors.

In Greece the women make a fire on Midsummer Eve, and
jump over it, crying, ' I leave my sins/ In Servia they think the
feast is so venerable, that the sun halts three times in reverence. 2
On the day before it, the herdsmen tie birchbark into torches,
and having lighted them, they first march round the sheepfolds
and cattle-pens, then go up the hills and let them burn out (Yuk
sub v. Ivan dan). Other Slav countries have similar observances.
In Sartori's Journey through Carinthia 8, 849-50, we find the
rolling of St. John's fiery wheel fully described. Midsummer-
clay or the solstice itself is called by the Slovens kres, by the
Croats hresz, i.e. striking of light, from kresati (ignem elicere),
Pol. krzesac ; and as May is in Irish mi-na-bealtine (fire-month),
so June in Slovenic is kresnik. At the kres there were hays of
joy performed at night ; of lighting by friction I find no mention.
Poles and Bohemians called the Midsummer fire sobotka, i.e. little
Saturday, as compared with the great sobdta (Easter Eve) ; the

1 It is spoken of more definitely by Martinus de Aries, canonicns of Pampelnna
(eir. 1510), in his treatise De superstitionibus (Tract, tractatuum, ed. Lugd. 1544.
9, 133) : Cum in die 8. Johannis propter jnounditatem mnlta pie aguntur a
fidelibus, pnta pulsatio eampanarum et ignes jucunditatis, similiter summo mane
exeunt ad oolligendas herbas odoriferas et optimas et medioinales ex sua natura et
ex plenitndine Tirtutum propter tempus. . . quidam ignes accendunt in compitis
▼iarum, in agris, ne inde sortilegae et malefieae ilia noete transitum faciant, ut
ego propriis oculis vidi. Alii herbas colleotas in die S. Johannis incendentes contra
ftdgura, tonitrua et tempestates credunt suis fumigationibus arcere daemones et
tempestates.

* As he is supposed to leap three times at Easter (p. 291).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



624 ELEMENTS.

Bohemians used to lead their cows over it to protect them from
witchcraft. The Russian name was kupdlo, which some explain
by a god of harvest, Kupalo : youths and maidens, garlanded with
flowers and girt with holy herbs, assembled on the 24th June,
lighted a fire, leapt and led their flocks over it, singing hymns the
while in praise of the god. They thought thereby to shield
their cattle from the ldshis or woodsprites. At times a white cock
is said to have been burnt in the fire amid dance and song. Even
now the female saint, whose feast the Greek ritual keeps on this
day [Agrippina], has the by-name kupdlnitsa; a burning pile of
wood is called the same, and so, according to Karamzin, is the
flower that is strewn on St. John's Day [ranunculus, crowfoot] - 1
This fire seems to have extended to the Lithuanians too : I find
that with them kwpoles is the name of a St. John's herb. Tettau
and Temme p. 277 report, that in Prussia and Lithuania, on
Midsummer Eve fires blaze on all the heights, as far as the eye
can reach. The next morning they drive their cattle to pasture
over the remains of these fires, as a specific against murrain,
magic and milk-drought, yet also against hailstroke and lightning.
The lads who lighted the fires go from house to house collecting
milk. On the same Midsummer Eve they fasten large burs and
mugwort (that is to say, kupdles) over the gate or gap through
which the cattle always pass.

Now at a bird's-eye view we perceive that these fires cover
nearly all Europe, and have done from time immemorial. About
them it might seem a great deal more doubtful than about water-
lustration (pp. 585. 590), whether they are of heathen or of Chris-
tian origin. The church had appropriated them so very early to
herself, and as Beleth and Durantis shew, had made them point
to John ; the clergy took some part in their celebration, though
it never passed entirely into their hands, but was mainly con-
ducted by the secular authorities and the people itself (see Suppl.).

Paciaudi 8 labours to prove that the fires of St. John have
nothing to do with the far older heathenish fires, but have sprung
out of the spirit of Christian worship.

1 Karamzin 1. 73. 81. 284. Gfttze's Bass, volksl. p. 230-2. Dobrovsky denies
a god Kupalo, and derives the feast from kupa (hayoock) ; Hanusch p. 201 from
kupel, kaupel, kupadlo (bath, pond), because aoo. to Slav notions the son rises oat
of his bath, or because pouring of water may have been practised at the festival.

2 De oultu S. Johannis baptistae, Bomae 1765, dissert. 8, oap. 1. 2.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



(PALILIA). 625

In Dent. 18, 10 and 2 Chron. 28, 3 is mentioned the heathen
custom of making sons and daughters pass through afire. In
reference to this, Theodoret bp. of Cyras (d. 458), makes a note
on 2 Kings 16, 8 : elSov yap ev rial iroXecw anal; rov €tov$ iv
rat? irXaTelai? airrop,iva% mvpfe ical ravra? rwas xnrepaWofiivov?
Kal irqS&VTa? ov povov iralhas aKka ical avSpas, ra 84 rye fiptyrj
irapk r&v firpreptov irapcuf>€p6fi€va Sta rrj^ <f>\oy6$. i&otcet, Se
tovto aTTOTpoTTiao-fibs elvai kqX K&Oapaw. (In some towns I saw
pyres lighted once a year in the streets, and not only children
bat men leaping over them, and the infants passed through the
flame by their mothers. This was deemed a protective expiation) .*
He says ' once a year/ but does not specify the day, which would
have shewn us whether the custom was imported into Syria
from Rome. On April 21, the day of her founding, Rome kept
the palilia, an ancient feast of herdsmen, in honour of Pales, a
motherly divinity reminding us of Ceres and Vesta. 8 This date
does not coincide with the solstice, but it does with the time of
the Easter fire ; the ritual itself, the leaping over the flame, the
driving of cattle through the glowing embers, is quite the same
as at the Midsummer fire and needfire. A few lines from Ovid's
description in the 4th book of the Fasti shall suffice :

727. certe ego transilui positas ter in ordine flammas.
781. mozque per ardentes stipulate crepitants acervos

trajicias celeri strenua membra pede.
795. pars quoque, quum saxis pastores saxa feribant,

scintillam subito prosiluisse ferunt ;
prima quidem periit ; stipulis excepta secunda est,

hoc argumentum flamma palilis habet.
805. per flammas saluisse pecus, saluisse colonos ;

quod fit natali nunc quoque, Roma, tuo (see Suppl.).

The shepherds had struck the fire out of stone, and caught it on
straw ; the leaping through it was to atone and cleanse, and to
secure their flock against all harm. That children were placed in
the fire by their mothers, we are not told here ; we know how
the infant Demophoon or Triptolemus was put in the fire by

1 Opp., ad. Sirmond, Paris, 1642. 1, 852.

* The masc. Pales, which also occurs, may remind us of the Slay god of
shepherds, Rubs. Volos, Boh. Welet.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



626 ELEMENTS.

Ceres, as Achilles was by Thetis, to insure his immortality. 1 This
fire-worship seems equally at home in Canaan, Syria, Greece and
Rome, so that we are not justified in pronouncing it a borrowed
and imported thing in any one of them. It is therefore hard to
determine from what source the Christians afterwards drew, when
they came to use it in their Easter and Midsummer festivals, or on
other occasions. Canon 65 of the Council of a.d. 680 already
contains a prohibition of these superstitious fires at new moon :
Ta? iv rah vovfirjvlai? vwb tlv&v wpo r&v ol zee low ipyatrrrjpuov 'fj
ol/cwv avairTo/jiivas irvp/caias, &? teal vwepaXKeadai rtve?, Kara
to edo$ apxalov, iiri^ipovaiVy airo irapovro^ KarapyrjOrfvac
irpoo-TaTTOfiev (The fires kindled before workshops and houses at
new moon, which some aho leap over after the ancient custom,
we command henceforth to be abolished). The same thing was
then forbidden, which afterwards, on St. John's day at least, was
tolerated, and to some extent connected with church ordinances.

Now, even supposing that the Midsummer fire almost universal
throughout Europe had, like the Midsummer bath, proceeded more
immediately from the church, and that she had picked it up in
Italy directly from the Roman palilia ; it does not follow yet, that
our Easter fires in northern Germany are a mere modification of
those at Midsummer. We are at liberty to derive them straight
from fires of our native heathenism : in favour of this view is the
difference of day, perhaps also their ruder form ; to the last there
was more earnestness about them, and more general participation ;
Midsummer fires were more elegant and tasteful, but latterly con-
fined to children and common people alone, though princes and
nobles had attended them before. Mountain and hill are essential
to Easter fires, the Solstitial fire was frequently made in streets
and marketplaces. Of jumping through the fire, of flowers and
wreaths, I find scarcely a word in connexion with the former ;
friction of fire is only mentioned a few times at the Midsummer
fire, never at the Easter, and yet this friction is the surest mark
of heathenism, and — as with needfire in North Germany, so with
Easter fires there — may safely be assumed. Only of these last
we have no accounts whatever. The Celtic bel-fires, and if my
conjecture be right, our Phol-days, stand nearly midway betwixt

1 Conf. the superstition* * filinm in fornacem ponere pro sanitate febrium,*
and * ponere infantem juxta ignem^ Superst. B, 10. 14, and p. 200*.



Digitized by



Google



OTHEE FIRES. 627

Easter and Midsummer, bat Dearer to Easter when that falls late.
A feature common to all three, and perhaps to all public fires
of antiquity, is the wlisel, as friction is to all the ancient Easter
fires.

I must not omit to mention, that fires were also lighted at
the season opposite to summer, at Chiistmas, and in Lent. To
the Yule-fire answers the Gaelic samhtheine (p. 614) of the 1st
November. In France they have still in vogue the souche de
Noel (from dies natalis, Prov. natal) or the trefue (log that burns
three days, Saperst.E, 1. 28), conf.the trefoir in Brand's Pop.antiq.
1, 468. At Marseille they burnt the calendeau or caligneau, a
large oaken log, sprinkling it with wine and oil ; it devolved on
the master of the house to set light to it (Millin 3, 336). In
Dauphin6 they called it chalendal, it was lighted on Christmas
eve and sprinkled with wine, they considered it holy, and had
to let it burn out in peace (Champol.-Figeac, p. 124). Christmas-
tide was called chalendes, Prov. calendas (Raynouard 1, 292),
because New-year commenced on Dec. 25. In Germany I find
the same custom as far back as the 12th cent. A document of
1184 (Kindl/s Mlinst. beitr. ii. urk. 34) says of the parish priest
of Ahlen in Munsterland : ' et arborem in nativitate Domini ad
festivum ignem suum adducendam esse dicebat/ The hewing of
the Christinas block is mentioned in the Weisthiimer 2, 264. 302.
On the Engl, yule-clog see Sap. I, 1109, and the Scandinav.
julblok is well known ; the Lettons call Christmas eve blukku
wakkars, block evening, from the carrying about and burning of
the log (blukkis). 1 Seb. Prank (Weltbuch 51 a ) reports the fol-
lowing Shrovetide customs from Pranconia : ' In other places they
draw a fiery plough kindled by a fire cunningly made thereon, till
it fall in pieces (supra, p. 264). Item, they wrap a waggon-wheel
all round in straw, drag it up an high steep mountain, and hold
thereon a merrymaking all the day, so they may for the cold,
with many sorts of pastime, as singing, leaping, dancing, odd or
even, and other pranks. About the time of vespers they set the
wheel afire, and let it run into the vale at full speed, which to look
upon is like as the sun were running from the sky/ Such a

1 « So the Lith. kalledos «■ Christmas, from kalada, a log.'— Supfl.



628 ELEMENTS.

'hoop-trundling' on Shrove Tuesday is mentioned by Schm. 1,
544 ; the day is called funkentag (spunk.), in the Rheingau hall-
feuer, in Prance ' la f§te des brandoifts' 1 It is likely that similar
fires take place here and there in connexion with the vintage.
In the Voigtland on Mayday eve, which would exactly agree with
the bealteine, you may see fores on most of the hills, and children
with blazing brooms (Jul. Schmidt's Reichenf. 118). Lastly, the
Servians at Christmas time light a log of oak newly cut, badniak,
and pour wine upon it. The cake they bake at such a fire and
hand round (Vuk's Montenegro, 105) recalls the Gaelic practice
(p. 613). The Slavs called the winter solstice koleda, Pol.
koleda, Buss, koliadfi, answering to the Lat. calendae and the
chalendes above ; * they had games and dances, but the burning
of fires is not mentioned. In Lower Germany too kaland had
become an expression for feast and revelry (we hear of kaland-
giiden, kalandbriider), without limitation to Christmas time, or
any question of fires accompanying it (see Suppl.).

If in the Mid. Ages a confusion was made of the two Johns,
the Baptist and the Evangelist, I should incline to connect with
St. John's fire the custom of St. John's minne (p. 61), which by
rights only concerns the beloved disciple. It is true, no fire
is spoken of in connexion with it, but fires were an essential
part of the old Norse minne-drinking, and I should think the
Sueves with their barrel of ale (p. 56) burnt fires too. In the
Saga Hakonar g6$a, cap. 16, we are told : s eldar scyldo vera a
midjo gdlfi i hofino, oc j>ar katlar yfir, oc scylcti full of eld bera/
should bear the cups round the fire. Very striking to my mind
is the ' dricka eldborgs skal ' still practised in a part of Sweden
and Norway (Sup. K, 122-3). At Candlemas two tall candles
are set, each member of the household in turn sits down between
them, takes a drink out of a wooden beaker, then throws the
vessel backwards over his head. If it fall bottom upwards, the
thrower will die; if upright, he remains alive. 3 Early in the
morning the goodwife has been up making her fire and baking ;
she now assembles her servants in a half-circle before the oven

1 Sap. K, 16. Mem. des antiquaires 1, 236. 4, 871.

2 Other derivations have been attempted, Hanusoh 192-3. [See note, p. 627
on Lith. kaHedot.'}

8 A similar throwing backwards of an emptied glass on other occasions, Sup. 7
514. 707.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



OVEN. BONFIEE. 629

door, they all bend the knee, take one bite of cake, and drink
eldborgsskdl (the fire's health) ; what is left of cake or drink is
cast into the flame. An unmistakeable vestige of heathen fire-
worship, shifted to the christian feast of candle-consecration as
the one that furnished the nearest parallel to it.

Our of en, MHG. oven, OHG. ovan, ON. on represents the Goth.
auhns, O. Swed. omn, ofn, ogn, Swed. ugn, Dan. on ; they all
mean fornax, i.e. the receptacle in which fire is inclosed (conf.
focus, fuoco, feu), but originally it was the name of the fire itself,
Slav, ogan, ogen, ogn, Boh. ohen, Lith. ugnis, Lett, ugguns, Lat.
ignis, Sanskr. Agni the god of fire. Just as the Swedish servants
kneel down before the ugns-hol, our German marchen and sagen
have retained the feature of kneeling before the oven and praying
to it ; the unfortunate, the persecuted, resort to the oven, and
bewail their woe, they reveal to it some secret which they dare not
confide to the world. 1 What would otherwise appear childish is
explained : they are forms and formulas left from the primitive
fire-worship, and no longer understood. In the same way people
complain and confess to mother earth, to a stone, a plant, an oak,
or to the reed (Morolt 1438). This personification of the oven
hangs together with Mid. Age notions about orcus and hell as
places of fire. Conf. Erebi fornax (Walthar. 867), and what was
said above, p. 256, on Fornax.

The luminous element permitted a feast to be prolonged into
the night, and fires have always been a vehicle for testifying
joy. When the worship had passed over into mere joy-fores, ignis
jocunditatis, feuz de joie, Engl, bon-fires, these could, without
any reference to the service of a deity, be employed on other
occasions, especially the entry of a king or conqueror. Thus
they made a torch-waggon follow the king, which was afterwards
set on fire, like the plough and wheels at the feast of St. John



1 Haas and kinderm. 2, 20. 8, 221. Deutsche sagen no. 513. A children's
game has the rhyme : * Dear good oven, I pray to thee, As thou hast a wife, send a
husband to me 1 ' In the comedy ' Life and death of honest Madam Slut (Schlam-
pampe),' Leipz. 1696 and 1750, act 3, sc. 8: * Gome, let us go and kneel to the oven,
maybe the gods will hear our prayer. 1 In 1558 one who had been robbed, but had
sworn secrecy, told his story to the Dutch-tile oven at the inn. Rommell's Hess,
gesch. 4, note p. 420. Joh. Miiller's Hist. Switz. 2, 92 (a.d. 1333). ' Nota est in
eligiis Tibulli Januae personificatio, oui amantes dolores suos narrant, quam orant,
quam increpant ; erat enim daemoniaca quaedam vis januarum ex opinione veterum,'
Diasen'a Tib. 1, clxxix. Conf. Hartong's Bel. der Bom. 2, 218 seq.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



630 ELEMENTS.

(RA. 265). ' Faculis et faustis acclamationibus, ut prioribus
regibas asBueverant, obviam ei (non) procedebant/ Lamb, schafn.
ad an. 1077. Of what we now call illumination, the lighting up
of streets and avenues, there are probably older instances than
those I am able to quote : ( von kleinen kerzen manec schoup
geleit uf olboume loup/ of little tapers many a cluster ranged in
olive bower, Parz. 82, 25. Detmar (ed. Grautoff 1, 301) on the
Emp. Charles I Ws entry into Lubeck : ' des nachtes weren die
luchten bernde ut alien husen, unde was so licht in der nacht als
in dem dage/ The church also escorted with torchlight pro-
cessions : ' cui (abbati) intranti per noctis tenebras adhibent faces
et lampadas/ Chapeaville 2, 532 (12th cent.). ' Hirimannus dux
susceptus est ab archiepiscopo manuque deducitur ad ecclesiam
accensis luminaribus, cunctisque sonantibus campanis/ Dietm.
merseb. 2,18. € Taceo coronas tarn luminoso fulgore a luminaribus
pendentes/ Vita Joh. gorziens. (bef. 984) in Mabillon's Acta
Ben., sec. 5, p. 395 (see Suppl.).

3. Air.
The notions ' avr, wind, weather/ touch one another, and their
names often do the same. 1 Like water, like fire, they are all
regarded as a being that moves and lives : we saw how the words
animus, spiritus, geist (pp. 439. 461) come to be used of genii,
and the Slav, dukh is alike breath, breathing, and spirit.
Wuotan himself we found to be the all-pervading (p. 133) ; like
Vishnu, he is the fine »ther that fills the universe. But lesser
spirits belong to this element too: Oustr, Zephyr, B laser (p. 461),
Blaster, Wind-and-weather (p. 548), proper names of dwarfs,
elves, giants. In the Lithuanian legend the two giants Wandu
(water) and Weyas (wind) act together (p. 579). To the OHG.
wetar, OS. wedar, AS. weder (tempestas) corresponds the Slav.
veter, vietar (ventus, aer) : and to Goth, vinds, OHG. wint, the
Lat. verities. The various names given to wind in the Alvismal
(Saem. 50*) are easily explained by its properties of blowing,
blustering and so forth : cepir (weeper) ejulans, the wailing,
conf. OS. wop (whoop), OHG. wuof ejulatus ; gneggioffr (neigher)
strepens, quasi hinniens ; dynfari cum sonitu iens.

1 Our luft I include under the root linban, no. 580, whose primary meaning
is still obscure ; conf . klinban kluft, skiuban skuft.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



AIR. THE WINDS. 631

Thus personification already peeps out in mere appellatives;
in the mythic embodiments themselves it is displayed in the most
various ways.

Woodcuts and plates (in the Sachsenspiegel) usually represent
the winds, half symbolically, as blowing faces, or heads, probably
a fancy of very early date, and reminding us of the blowing John's-
head that whirls Herodias about in the void expanse of heaven
(p. 285). The winds of the four cardinal points are imagined as
four dwarfs : ' undir hvert horn (each corner) settu )>eir dverg',
Sn. 9 (p. 461) l ; but by the Greeks as giants and brethren :
Zephyrus, Hesperus, Boreas, Notus (Hes. Theog. 371), and
Boreas' s sons Zetes and Kala'is are also winged winds (Apollon.
Argon. 1, 219). Aeolus (aloXo? nimble, changeful, many-hued),
at first a hero and king, was promoted to be governor and guider
of winds [rafilr^ avi/jiwv, p. 93). In Russia popular tradition
makes the four winds sons of one mother* the 0. Russ. lay of Igdr
addresses the wind as € lord/ and the winds are called Stribogh's
grandsons, 3 his divine nature being indicated by the ' bogh* in
his name. So in fairy-tales, and by Eastern poets, the wind is
introduced talking and acting : ' the wind, the heavenly child I* 4

In the ON. genealogy, Forniotr, the divine progenitor of giants
(p. 240), is made father of Edri (stridens) 'who rules over the
winds; 9 K&ri begets Iokul (glacies), and Iokul Sneer (nix), the
king whose children are a son Tliorri and three daughters Fonn,
Drifa, Mioll, all personified names for particular phenomena of
snow and ice (Sn. 358. Fornald. sog. 2, 3. 17). K&ri however is
brother to H16r (p. 241) and Logi (p. 240), to water and fire, by
which is expressed the close affinity between air and the other
two elements. The old Scandinavian cry ' bids kdri ! ' is echoed
in that of the Swedish sailors € bias kajsa !' a goddess instead of
the god (Afzelius 1, 30). Both wind and fire ' blow ' and ' emit
spray/ nay, fire is called the red wind : ( von ir zweier swerte gie
der fiur-rote wint/ Nib. 2212, 4. In the same line of thought a
higher divinity, NiorSr, has the sovereignty given him alike over



1 And therefore Sttr&ni, weatrdni, sundrdni, nordroni are maac. nouns ; the
Got hi 3 forms would be du$tr6nei$, etc.

8 Buss, volismarchen, Leipz. 1831. p. 119.

* * Vetre vetrilo gospodine,' Hanka's ed. pp. 12. 86.

4 E.g. in Nalus, p. 180 (Bopp's 2 ed.). Einderm. nos. 15. 88.



VOL. II. O

Digitized by



Google



632 ELEMENTS.

water, wind and fire (p. 217) ; and Loptr (aereus) is another name
for Loki (p. 246). A phrase in C»dm. 181, 13 Beems worthy of
notice : ' lyft-helme bej>eaht/ galea aerea tectus (see SuppL).

When in onr langnage we still call one kind of tempest (OHG.
wiwint, Graff 1, 624), the windsbraut (wind's bride), and it was
called the same in our older speech, OHG. wintes brut, 0. v. 19,
27. windis prut, Gl. Hrab. 975 b . Jun. 230. Diut. 2, 182. Gl.
florent. 982 a -3 b -4 b ; MHG. windes brut (Gramm. 2, 606), Tit. 3733.
swinder (swifter) danne windes brut, Ms. 2, 131*. lief spilnde
als ein w.b. darch daz gras, Fragm. 19 A . alsam in rore din w. b.,
Beinfried 159 b . varn mit hurt als ein w. prut, Prauend. 92, 13 ; —
it is only the proper names that seem to be lost. 1 The corrupt
forms wintsprout, -praut (Suchenw. 41, 804), windbrauss (in later
writers, as Matthesius), windsprauch (Schm. 4, 110), have arisen
out of the endeavour to substitute some new meaning for the
no longer intelligible mythic notion. They say it is a woman
snatching up a napkin from the bleaching ground and falling
down with it, Moneys Anz. 8, 278. So in the Netherlands the
whirlwind is called barende frauw, Wolf nos. 518-620 (see SuppL),

This wind's«bride is a whirlwind, at which our mythology
brings the highest gods into play. Even Wuotan's ' furious host/
what is it but an explanation of the stormwind howling through
the air ? The OHG. ziu, turbines, we have traced to Zio, pp. 203.
285; and the storm-cloud was called maganwetar (p. 332 last 1.).
But the whirlwind appears to be associated with Phol also (pp.
229. 285), and with an opprobrious name for the devil (schweine-
zagel, sauzagel, sustert, sow's tail), to whom the raising of the
whirl was ascribed (Superst. I, 522) 2 as well as to witches (ibid.
554). It was quite natural therefore to look upon some female
personages also as prime movers of the whirlwind, the gyrating
dancing Herodias, and frau Hilde, frau Holde (p. 285). In Kilian
693 it is & fahrendes weib ; in Celtic legend it is stirred up by fays,

1 Orithyia carried off by Boreas (Ov. Met. 6, 710)" could with perfect justice
be named windesbrdt by Albrecht.

8 Two Pol. tales in Woycicki 1, 81 and 89 : When the whirlwind (vikher) sweeps
up the loose sand, it is the evil spirit dancing ; throw a sharp new knife into the
middle of it, and you wonnd him. A magician plunged Buoh a knife into his
threshold, and condemned his man, with whom he was angry, for seven years to ride
round the world on the swift stormwind. Then the whirlwind lifted the man, who
was making haycocks in a meadow, and bore him away into the air. This knife-
throwing is also known to Germ, superstition everywhere (I, 554).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



wind's bbide^ 633

and the Irwh name for it is sigh gaoite (O'Brien), sighgaoithe
(Croker III, xxi) ; in a whirlwind elvish sprites can steal (Stewart
p. 122). It is a popular belief in Sweden, that the skogsra
(wood-wife) makes her presence known by a violent whirlwind
which shakes the trees even to breaking. The Slav, polednice
(supra, p. 478n.) is a female daemon, who flies up in the dust of
the whirlwind (Jungmann sub v.). According to a legend of the
Mark (Kuhn no. 167) the whirlwind was a noble damsel who
loved the chase above everything, and made havock of the hus-
bandman's crops, for which she is doomed to ride along with
the storm to all eternity ; this again reminds us of Diana and
the huntress Holda (see Suppl.).

In addition to these widely spread fancies, there is a peculiar
one about the origin of wind, which appears to extend through
nearly all Europe. According to the Edda, Hrcesvelgr is the name
of a giant, who in the shape of an eagle l sits at the end of heaven :
from his wings cometh all wind upon men, Sffim. 35 b . Snorri
defines it more minutely : He sits at the north side of heaven,
and when he flaps his wings, the winds rise from under them (Sn.
22.) And in the formula of the trygdam&l (Gr&g&s 2, 176), it
is said : € sv& viSa sem valr ftygr v&rl&ngan dag, oc standi byrr
undir bdda vcengi,' far as falcon flies a summerlong day, when
stands fair wind under both his wings. Light clouds threatening
storm are called in Iceland Mo-sigi (Biorn spells klosegi), claw-
sinking ; ace. to Ounnar Pauli, because the eagle causes storm by
letting down one of his claws (Finn Magn. p. 452) .* It is also
an Indian belief that tempest comes from Qaruda's vtings,
Somadeva 2, 102: the motion of his flight stirs up the wind.

Then again people in the Shetland isles are said to conjure the
storm-wind in the shape of a great eagle.* Further we are told
that Charles the Great had a brazen eagle fixed on the top of
his palace at Achen (Aix), and there was some connexion
between it and the wind; Richerus 3, 71 (Pertz 5, 622) relates
the inroad of the Welsh (Gauls) in 978 : ' Aeneam aquilam, quae
in vertice palatii a Karolo magno acsi volans fixa erat, 4 in vul-

1 The giants often put on the arnar ham (erne's coat) : Thiazi in Sn. 80. 82,
Suttftngr in Sn. 86.

* Day also was imaged as a bird, who dng his claws into the clouds.

* Scott's Pirate, Edinb., 1822.

4 It ought not to be overlooked here, that at the west door of Ottin's hall there



Digitized by VjOOQIC



634 ELEMENTS.

turnum converterunt. Nam Germani earn in favonium (Up.
Germ, fohn) converterant, subtiliter significantes G-allos suo
equitatu quandoque posse devinci/ The meaning seems to be,
that the French turned the eagle's head to the south-east, the
Germans to the west, to signify that like the storm they could
make a raid (ride, that is what equitatus comes to) upon the
country toward which the bird's head was directed. Dietmar of
Merseburg's account 3, 6 (Pertz 5, 761) is as follows : ' Post haec
autem imperator ordinavit expeditionem suam adversus Lotharium
regem Karelingorum, qui in Aquisgrani palatium et sedem regiam
nostrum semper respicientem dominium valido exercitu praesump-
sit invadere, sibique versa aquila designare. Haec stat in
orientali parte domus, morisque fuit omnium hunc locum possi-
dentium ad sua earn vertere regna.' This statement appears less
accurate than that of Rioherus, for each would turn the eagle's
head not toward his own kingdom, but the foreign or depen-
dent one; oonf. Jahrb. d. Rheinlande v. vi. 73. But even in
the 12th cent, the wind's connexion with the eagle was still
known in Germany, for Veldek sings, MS. 1 , 2 l a : ' j&rlanc ist
reht*daz der -air winke dem vil siiezen winde/ all this year the
eagle must beckon to (i.e. bring) a mild wind. How many
fancies familiar to the Mid. Ages must be lost to us now, when
of all the poets that mention air and wind and storm no end of
times, only one happens to allude to this myth ! But not only
do aquila and aquilo, 1 vultur and vulturnus point to each other ;
avefios (wind) and aero? (eagle) are likewise from one root
ao>, arjfii.* According to Horapollo 2, 15 a sparrowhawk with
outspread wings represents the wind. Eagle, falcon, vulture,
sparrowhawk, are here convertible birds of prey. The Indian
garuda, king of birds, is at the same time the wind. The O.T.
also thinks of the winds as winged creatures, without specifying
the bird, 2 Sam. 22, 11: 'rode on the wings of the winds' ;
Ps. 18,11. 104,3: 'volavit super pennas ventorum/ which.



also hang a wolf, and over it an eagle (drupir om yfir, Ssm. 41 b ), and that the
victorious Saxons fixed an eagle over the city's gate, supra, p. 111.

1 Festus : ' aquilo ventus a vehementissimo volatu ad instar aquilae appel-
lator ' ; conf . Hesyohius, &Kip6s 6 pofyas.

2 Wackernagel on Ablaut (vowel-change) p. 30. Eustathius on the D. 87. 15
Bom.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



WIND. STORM. 635

Notker translates 'iiberfloug die vettacha dero windo'; and
Martina 7 C has, in allusion to the biblical phrase, ' der uf der
winde vedem saz/ The expression used by Herbort 17091, 'der
wint }iez ouch dare g&n/ shews that the poet imagined it either
Bying or riding (see Suppl.).

The Finns call the eagle kokleo (kotka) ; but a poem descriptive
of the northstorm begins : € Game the eagle on from Turja, down
from Lappmark sinks a bird/ and ends : ' Neath his wing a
hundred men, thousands on his tail's tip, ten in every quill there
be/ 1 And in a Mod. Greek folk-song the sparrowhawk (as in
Horapollo) calls upon the winds to hush : airb rh rpUop<f>a fiowh
Upd/ci eavpe XaXid • 7ra^reT,' d&pe$ 9 irdtyere diroyfre k aWrjv fnav
fipaSid* The winds are under the bird's command, and obey
him. In another song the mother sets three to watch her son
while he sleeps, in the mountains the sun, in the plain the eagle
(aero<?), on the sea the brisk lord Boreas : the sun sets, the eagle
goes to sleep, and Boreas goes home to his mother ; s from the
whole context here we must understand by the eagle the sweet
soft wind, and by Boreas the cool northwind.

Hrcesvelgr (OHG. Hr6osuolah?) means swallower of corpses,
flesh-eater, Sansk. kraviy&da, and is used of birds of prey that
feed on carrion, but may also be applied to winds and storms
which purify the air : they destroy the effluvia from bodies that
lie unburied.

Is that the foundation of the fancy, that when a man luings
himself, a tempest springs up, and the roar of the wind pro-
claims the suicide ? 4 Is it the greedy carrion-fowl that comes
on in haste to seize the dead, his lawful prey, who swings un-
buried on the tree ? Or does the air resent the self-murderer's
polluting presence in it? A New-year's storm is thought to
announce pestilence (Sup. I, 330. 910), spreading an odour of
death in anticipation.

Tempest (like fire) the common people picture to themselves as
a voracious hungry being (of course a giant, according to the root



1 Finnish rones, Ups. 1819, pp. 58-60. *

3 Fauriel 2, 236. Wh. Mtiller 2, 100.
> Fauriel 2, 432. Wh. Mailer 2, 120.

* Sup. I, 343. 1013. Kirchhofer's Sohweiz. spr. 327. CI. Brentano's Libussa
p. 432. Sartori's Beise in Karnten 2, 164. Leoprechting 102.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



636 ELEMENTS.

idea of iotunn, p. 519), and they try to pacify him by pouring out
flour in the air. 1 I take this to be an ancient superstition, and
light is thrown upon it now by a Norwegian tale in Asbjomsen
no. 7, of the northwind carrying off a poor fellow's meal three
times, but compensating him afterwards by costly presents. This
northwind behaves exactly as a rough good-natured giant. (See
Suppl.).

The raising of the whirlwind was, as we have seen (p. 682),
ascribed to divine, semi-divine and diabolic beings. In Norway
they say of whirlwinds and foul weather, ' the giant stirs his pots,'
Faye p. 7.

In two weather-spells (Append., Exorcism v.) Menneut and
Fa8olt are called upon as evil spirits and authors of storms.
Fasolt is the well-known giant of our hero-legend, brother of
Ecke, who was himself god of tides and waves (p. 239). The
two brothers have kindred occupations, being rulers of the dread
sea and of the weather. What we gather from the second spell
about Fasolt seems to me of importance, and another conclu-
sive proof of the identity of Ecke with Oegir : as H16r and
K&ri are brothers and giants, so are also Ecke and Fasolt; as
Hl&r commands the sea and K&ri the winds, so does Ecke rule
the waters and Fasolt the storm. To the Norse poets the wind
is ' Forniots sonr ' and ' Oegis br&Sir/* Now, as H16r was called
by another nation Oegir, i.e. Uogi, Ecke, so Kfcri may have been
called Fasolt. Fasolt must be an old word, if only because it is
hard to explain ; does it come under the OHG. fasa, fas&n (Graff
3, 705) ? In ON., ' fas ' is superbia, arrogantia ; the name seems
to express the overbearing nature of a giant. Mermeut, which
occurs nowhere else, perhaps means the sea-mutterer ? Schm. 2,
552. 653 has maudern, mntern, murmurare. — These demi-gods
and giants stand related to Donar the supreme director of clouds
and weather, as Molns or Boreas to Zeus.

And from Zeus it was that the favourable wished-for wind
proceeded : Jto9 oipos, Od. 5, 176. Wuotan (the all-pervading,

1 Sup. I, 282. Praetorius's Weltbeschr. 1, 429 : At Bamberg, when a violent
wind war raging, an old woman snatched up her mealsaok, and emptied it out of
window into the air, with the words : * Dear wind, don't be so wild ; take that home
to your child ! ' She meant to appease the hunger of the wind, as of a greedy
lion or fierce wolf.

a * Forniots set ar ' = sea and wind, Sam. 90 b .



Digitized by VjOOQIC



WIND. STORM. 637

p. 630) makes the wish-wind, dska-byrr, p. 144. What notion
lies at the bottom of Wolfram's making Juno give the ' segels
loft/ sail-wind (Parz. 753, 7) ? Again in Parz. 750, 7 and 766,
4 : ' Juno fuocte (fitted) daz weter/ and ' segelweter. 9 The f ruit-
ful breeze that whispers in the corn was due to Fro and his boar,
pp. 213-4. An ON. name of OSinn was Vifirir, the weatherer:
' at )>eir sogftu han vefcrum rfrSa/ he governs weathers (Fornm.
sog. 10, 171). Such a god was Pogoda to the Slavs, and the Pol.
pogoda, Boh. pohoda, still signifies good growing or ripening
weather [Buss. g6d = time, year; pog6da = weather, good or bad].
Typhon in Egyptian legend meant the south wind, Hes. Theog.
301. 862.

The Lettons believed in a god of winds and storms Okkupeernis,
and thought that from his forehead they came down the sky to
the earth. 1

In an ON. saga (Fornald. sog. 3, 122) appears giant Grimnir,
whose father and brother are named Grfmdlfr and Grimarr, a sort
of Polyphemus, who can excite storm or good wind ; here again
it is OSinn we must think of (p. 144). Two semi-divine beings,
honoured with temples of their own and bloody sacrifices, were
£he giant's daughters Thorgerdr and Irpa (p. 98). In the Skald-
skaparm&l 154 ThorgerSr is called Holgabru&r or king Holgi's
daughter, elsewhere horgabru&r and horgatroll (Fornald. sog. 2,
131), sponsa divum, immanissima gigas, which reminds us of our
wind's-bride. Both the sisters sent foul weather, storm and hail,
when implored to do so, Fornm. sog. 11, 134-7. And ON.
legend mentions other dames besides, who make foul weather and
fog, as HeiSi and Hamglom, Fornald. sog. 2, 72, Ingibiorg, ibid.
3,442 (seeSuppl.). 8

What was at first imputed to gods, demigods and giants, the
sending of wind, storm and hail (vis daemonum concitans pro-
cellas, Beda's Hist. eccl. 1, 17), was in later times attributed to
human sorcerers.

First we find the Lex Visigoth, vi. 2, 3 provides against the
' malefici et immissores tempestatum, qui quibusdam incanta-
tionibus grandinem in vineas messesque mittere perhibentur.'
Then Charles the Great in his Oapit. of 789 cap. 64 (Perfcz 3, 61) :

1 Okka, or auka, storm ; peere forehead. Stender'B Gramm. 266.
9 Conf . p. 383, 463 hulizhialmr.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



638 ELEMENTS.

' ut nee cauculatores et incantatores, nee tempestarii vel obliga-
tores non fiant, et ubicunque sunt, emendentur vel damnentur/
Soon after that king's death, about the beginning of Lewis the
Pious's reign, bp. Agobard (d. 840) wrote ' Contra insulsam vulgi
opinionem de grandine et tonitruis.' From this treatise, following
Baluz's edit, of the works of Agobard, I take a few passages.

1, 145 : In his regionibus pene omnes homines, nobiles et
ignobiles, urbani et rustici, senes et juvenes, putant grandines et
tonitrua hominum libitu posse fieri. Dicunt enim, mox ut audie-
rint tonitrua et viderint fulgura : ' aura levatitia est/ Inter-
rogati vero, quid sit aura levatitia? alii cum verecundia, parum
remordente conscientia, alii autem confidenter, ut imperitorum
moris esse solet, confirmant incantationibus hominum qui dicun-
tur tempestarii, esse levatam, et ideo dici levatitiam auram.

1, 146 : Plerosque autem vidimus et audivimus tanta dementia
obrutos, tanta stultitia alienatos, ut credant et dicant, quandam
esse regionem quae dicatur Magonia, ex qua naves veniant in
nubibus, in quibus fruges quae grandinibus decidunt et tempesta-
tibus pereunt, vehantur in eandem regionefn, ipsis videlicet nautis
aereis dantibus pretia tempestariis, et accipientibus f rumenta vel
ceteras fruges. Ex his item tarn profunda stultitia excoecatis, ut.
hoc posse fieri credant, vidimus plures in quodam conventu homi-
num exhibere vinctos quatuor homines, tres viros et unam femi-
nam, quasi qui de ipsis navibus ceciderinti quos scilicet, per
aliquot dies in vinculis detentos, tandem collecto conventu homi-
num exhibuerunt,ut dixi, in nostra praesentia, tanquam lapidandos.
Sed tamen vincente veritate post multam ratiocinationem, ipsi qui
eos exhibuerant secundum propheticum illud confusi sunt, sicut
confunditur fur quando deprehenditur.

1, 153 : Nam et hoc quidam dicunt, nosse se tales tempestarios,
qui dispersam grandinem et late per regionem decidentem faciant
unum in locum fluminis aut silvae infructuosae, aut super unam,
ut ajunt, cupam, sub qua ipse lateat, defluere. Frequenter certe
audivimus a multis dici quod talia nossent in certis locis facta, sed
necdum audivimus, ut aliquis se haec vidisse testaretur.

1, 158 : Qui, mox ut audiunt tonitrua vel cum leviflatu venti,
dicunt ' levatitia aura est/ et maledicunt dicentes : ' maledicta
lingua ilia et arefiat et jam praecisa esse debebat, quae hos facit 1 '

1, 159 : Nostris quoque temporibus videmus aliquando, collectis



Digiti



? ed by Google



WIND. STORM. 639

messibus et vindemiis, propter sicoitatem agricolas seminare non
posse. Quare non obtinetis apud tempestarios vestros, ut mittant
auras levatitias, quibus terra inrigetur, et postea seminare possitis?

1, 161 : Isti autem, contra qnos sermo est, ostendunt nobis
homunculos, a sanctitate, justitia et sapientia alienos, a fide et
veritate nudos, odibiles etiam proximis, a quibus dicunt vehemen-
tissimos imbres, sonantia aquae tonitrua et levatitias auras posse
fieri.

1, 162 : In tantum malum istud jam adolevit, ut in plerisque
locis sint homines miserrimi, qui dicant, se non equidem nosse
immittere tempestates, sed nosse tamen defendere a tempestate
habitatores loci. His habent statutum, quantum de frugibus suis
donent, et appellant hoc canonicum. Many are backward in tithes
and alms, canonicum autem, quern dicunt, suis defensoribus (a
quibus se defendi credunt a tempestate) nullo praedicante, nullo
admonente vei exhortante, sponte persolvunt, diabolo inliciente.
Denique in talibus ex parte magnam spem habent vitae suae,
quasi per illos vivant (see Suppl.).

It was natural for driving hail-clouds to be likened to a ship
sailing across the sky ; we know our gods were provided with
cars and ships, and we saw at p. 332 that the very Edda bestows
on a cloud the name of vindjlot. But when the tempest-men
by their spells call the air-ship to them or draw it on, they are
servants and assistants rather than originators of the storm.
The real lord of the weather takes the corn lodged by the hail
into the ship with him, and remunerates the conjurors, who
might be called his priests. The Christian people said : € these
conjurors sell the grain to the aeronaut, and he carries it away/
But what mythic country can Magonia mean ? It is not known
whether Agobard was born in Germany or Gaul, though his name
is enough to shew his Frankish or Burgundian extraction ; just
as little can we tell whether he composed the treatise at Lyons,
or previously at some other place. The name Magonia itself
seems to take us to some region where Latin was spoken, if we
may rely on its referring to magus and a magic land.

In later times I find no mention of this cloud-ship, except in
H. Sachs, who in his schwank of the Lappenhauser ii. 4, 89 c re-
lates how they made a ship of feathers and straw, and carried it
up the hill, with the view of launching out in it when the mitt



Digitized by



Google



640 ELEMENTS.

should fall. Fischer in Garg. 96* introduces quite unconnectedly
the nebelschiffs segel of Philoxenus (the guestfriend or Zeus ?) in
a passage that has nothing in Rabelais answering to it.

In the latter part of the Mid. Ages there went a story of the
wind-selling inhabitants of Vinland, which I give from a work
composed towards 1360 by Glanvil or Bartholomaens Anglicus,
'Deproprietatibus rerum' 15, 172 : 'Gens (Vinlandiae) estbarbara,
agrestis et saeva, magicis artibus occupata. Unde et naviganti-
bus per eorum litora, vei apud eos propter venti defectum moram
contrahentibus, ventum venalem offerunt atque vendunt. Globum
enim de filo faciunt, et diversos nodos in eo conneetentes, usque ad
ires nodos vel plures de globo eztrahi praecipiunt, secundum quod
voluerint ventum habere fortiorem. 1 Quibus propter eorum in-
credulitatem illudentes, daemones aerem concitant et ventum
majorem vel minorem excitant, secundum quod plures nodos de
filo extrahunt vel pauciores, et quandoque in tantum commovent
ventum, quod miseri talibus fidem adhibentes justo judicio sub-
raerguntur/ — This selling of wind in Wilandia (as he calls it) is
likewise mentioned in Seb. Frank's Weltbuoh 60 a , without any
description of the method. By Vinland is to be understood a
part of the Greenland coast which had been early visited by
Norwegians and Icelanders, and in ON. tales is by turns called
Yinland and Yindland ; * the latter form might have suggested
the whole story of raising the wind, on which the ON. writings
as well as Adam of Bremen are silent. Others however tell
the same story of the Finns (01. Magnus 3, 15) : it seems to me
a tradition spread all over the North 8 (see SuppL).

The Norse legends name wind produced by magic gdrninga-ve&r.
Ogautan (like Aeolus) had a veSr-helqr (-bellows, or leathern
bag) ; when he shook it, storm and wind broke out (Fornald.
sog. 2, 412); the same with Mondull (3, 338). The Swedish

1 This globus resembles the Lat. turbo, a top or teetotum used in magic : ' oitum
retro solve, solve turbinem,' Hor. Epod. 17, 7.

8 Forum, sog. 2, 246. Isl. sog. 1, 9. 100. 151. Cont Torfaeus's Hist. Vinlandiae
antiquae, Hafn. 1705.

> The Esthonians believed that wind oould be generated and altered. In the
direction whenoe you wish it to blow, hang up a snake or set an axe upright, and
whistle to make it come. A clergyman happened to see some peasants making a
great fuss round three stones, eating, drinking and dancing to the sound of rustic
instruments. Questioned as to the object of the feast, they replied that by means
of those stones they could produce wet weather or dry; dry, if they set them
upright, wet if they laid them along (Ueber die Ehsten, p. 48) ; supra pp. 593-7.



Digitized' by



Google



STORM. 641

king Eirlkr, son of Ragnar Lodbrok, bore the surname of
ve&rhattr (ventosi pilei) : whichever way he turned his hat, from
there the wished for wind would blow (Saxo Oram. 175. 01.
Magnns 3, 13. Gejer's Hafder 582). One of our nursery-tales
even, no. 71, tells of a man who can direct the weather by
setting his hat straight or askew. There is an expression in
the Edda, vindhidlmr (Seem. 168 b ), which reminds me of the
OHG. name Windhehn, Trad. fuld. 2, 167 (see Suppl.).

That is a beautiful fancy in the Edda, of seven-and-twenty
valkyrs riding through the air, and when their horses shake
themselves, the dew dropping out of their manes on the deep
valleys, and hail on the lofty trees : a sign of a fruitful year, Saem.
145. So morning-dew falls on the earth each day from the foam-
ing bit of the steed Hrimfaxi (dew-mane), Sn. 11. The ON.
meldropi, AS. meledeaw, OHG. militou (Gl. Jun. 224), MHG.
miltou (Ms. 2, 124*), all take us back to mel (lapatum equi) ;
conf. note on Elene p. 164, where mel is derived from midl,
mittul, and supra p. 421. Antiquity referred all the phenomena
of nature to higher powers. The people in Bavaria call a dark
rain-cloud € anel mit der laugen/ granny with her ley (Schm. 1,
63) ; in Bohemia light clouds are babky, grannies. When moun-
tain mist is rising, the Esthonians say ' the Old one is putting his
fire out ' ; our people ascribe it to animals at least : ' the hare is
boiling [his supper], the fox is bathing, brewing/ Reinh. ccxcvi.
When shapes keep rising in the mists on the seashore, the
Italians call it fata morgana, p. 412 (see Suppl.).

The Scythians explained drifting snow as flying feathers (Herod.
4, 31), and our people see in the flakes the feathers out of the
goddess's bed, or goose (p. 268). Those snow-women Fonn,
Drifa, Mioll (p. 631) appear also to touch one side of Holda. The
Lettish riddles, ' putns skreen, spahrni pill/ and ' putns skreen,
spalwas putt' 1 mean a rain-cloud and a snow-cloud. In Switzer-
land vulgar opinion looks upon avalanches as ravening beasts, on
whom (as on fire) you can put a check (see Suppl.).

4. Eaeth.

Of the goddess, and her various names, we have spoken already :

Nerthus p. 251, Erda p. 250, Fairguni p. 172. 256, Erce p. 253,

1 Bird flies, wings drip. Bird flies, feathers drop. Stender's Gramm. 260.



Digitized by



Google



642 ELEMENTS.

Hludana p. 256, and others ; in which the ideas of the ancients
about Terra, Gaia, Ops, Rhea, Cybele, Ceres repeat themselves.
On p. 803 the Indian Prithivi was compared with Freyja, and the
closest kinship exists between Freyr and NiorSr (the male Ner-
thns). But also the bare element itself, the molte (mould, pulvis)
p. 251, was accounted holy : it is the j£0aw/ iroXvfioTeipa, out of
its teeming lap rise fruits and trees, into it the dead are laid, and
decay or fire restores them to dust and ashes. 1 To die was f to
sink to the earth/ € til iarSar (til moldar) hniga/ ' to kiss the
earth/ still more prettily in ON. € i moffurcett falla ' (Nialss. cap.
45), in maternum genus cadere, to fall back into the womb of
terra mater} They also said i iarSar megin kiosa ' (vim telluris
eligere, i.e. invocare), S»m. 27 b j and as the Greeks made the
falling giant acquire new strength the moment he touched the
ground, the Edda has 'aukinn iarSar megni' (auctus vi telluris),
118 b , 119\ s One who had been long away from home kissed the
earth on treading it once more ; in O.Fr. poems € baiser la terre '
is a sign of humility, Berte pp. 35. 43. 58. Renart 14835. As
the pure stream rejects the malefactor, so neither will the earth
endure him: 'unssolt diu erde nicht tragen/ Troj. 491 [conf. 'art
cursed from the earth/ Gen. 4. 10-12]. Secrets were entrusted
to the earth, as well as to fire and oven, p. 629 (see Suppl.).

It is more especially earth grown over with grass, the green-
sward, that has a sacred power ; such grass the Sanskrit calls
khu8a, and in particular durva, to which correspond the AS. turf,
ON. torf, OHG. zurba : ' holy earth and haulms of durva/ Sak-
untala (Hirzelpp. 51. 127). I have also accounted for the famous
chrene crud of the Salic law by our c reines kraut/ clean herb ;
and explained f chreneschruda (dat.) jactare' by the Soman

1 Irstantent (they rise again) fon themo fulen legare, uz fon theru aigu, fon
theru falatctigu, fon themo irdisgen herde, O. v. 20, 25-8.

8 Ancient tombs have been discovered, in which the bodies neither lie nor sit,
but crouch with the head, arms and legs pressed together, in receptacles nearly
square. M. Fred. Troyon of French Switz., who has carefully explored and ob-
served many old graves, expressed to me his opinion, that by this singular treat-
ment of dead bodies it was prob. intended to replace man in the same posture that
he maintained in the womb before birth. Thus fhe return into mother earth would
be at the same time an intimation of the coming new birth and resurrection of the
embryo.

* The Servians, by way of protesting, sav * tako mit zemlie I ' so (help) me
earth. A Gaelic saw (Armstrong sub v. coibhi, priest, supra p. 92 note) declares :
4 ged is fagus claoh do 'n lar, is faigse na sin cobhair choibhi,' near as a stone is to
the ground, the coibhi's help is nearer still, which seems to imply the earth's prompt
assistance as well as the priest's.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



EARTH. 643

'puram herbam toilers/ as the Hel. 73, 7 has hreneurni, an OHG.
gloss reincurne8 =frumenti, MHG. r daz reine grasf Iw. 6446, and
grass and 'der melm/ dust, are coupled together, Wh. 24, 28.
The purport of the law is, that earth or dust must be taken up
from the four corners of the field, and thrown with the hand over
tlie nearest kinsman. It was a solemn legal ceremony of heathen
times, which the christian Capitulars abolished. Against my
interpretation, however, Leo has now set up a Celtic one (cruin-
neach collectus, criadh terra), 1 and I cannot deny the weight
of his arguments, though the German etymology evidently
has a stronger claim to a term incorporated in the text itself
than in the case of glosses [because the Latin text must be
based on a Frankish original] . The mythic use made of the
earth remains the same, whichever way we take the words.

The ON. language of law offers another and no less significant
name: the piece of turf [under which an oath was taken] is
called iarffmen, iarSwr men ; now ' men > is literally monile, OHG.
mani, meni, AS. mene, as we saw in the case of FreyjVs neck-
lace ' Brislnga men/ But € iarSar men ' must once have been
Iardar men, Erda's necklace, the greensward being very poetically
taken for the goddess's jewelry. The solemn ' g&nga undir
Iardar men* (RA. 118-9) acquires its true meaning by this. In
other nations too, as Hungarians (RA. 120), and Slavs (Bohme's
Beitr. 5, 141), the administration of oaths took place by the per-
son who swore placing earth or turf on his head (see Suppl.).

The custom of conquered nations presenting earth and water
in token of submission reaches back to remote antiquity : when
the Persians declared war, they sent heralds to demand the two
elements of those whose country they meant to invade, 8 which
again reminds us of the Roman 'pura.' Our landsknechts as
late as the 16th century, on going into battle, threw a clod of
earth (like him that threw chrenechruda) in token of utter re-
nunciation of life. 8 Among the Greeks too, grasping the sod

1 Zeitschr. f. d. alterth. 2, 163 seq. Malb. gl. 2, 149. 150.

8 Brissonius De regno Pers. 8, 66—71. Herod. 4, 127. 5, 18. Curtiusiii. 10,
108. Aristotle Rhet. ii. 22, 37. Also Judith 2, 7 : iroifi&pw yrjv xal Odup (Cod.
alex. ed. Augusti).

9 Barthold's Frnndsberg p. 58-9. In the Mid. Ages, when a nun was conse-
crated, her kinsmen, as a sign that she renounced all earthly possessions, threw
earth over the maiden's arm; conf. Svenska visor 1, 176 :

det Toro b& m&nga grefvar bald,



Digitized by VjOOQIC



644 ELEMENTS.

signified taking possession of land, especially in the case of
emigrants. As Euphamos sits on the prow of the Argo, Triton
appears in human form and presents him with a clod of earth as a
gift of hospitality. Eaphamos takes the symbolic earth (fi&Xatca
Saifioviap), and gives it to his men to keep, but they drop it
in the sea, and it melts away. Had it been preserved and
deposited at Tainaros, the descendants of Euphamos would have
won the promised land (Cyrene) in the fourth generation. As
it was, they only got it in the 17th (see Suppl.). 1

In an AS. spell which is elsewhere given, four pieces of turf
are cut out, oil, honey, yeast and the milk of all cattle are dropt
on them, and thereto is added some of every kind of tree that
grows on the land, except hard trees, 2 and of every herb except
burs ; and then at length the charm is repeated over it. With
their seedcorn people mix earth from three sorts of fields (Superst.
I, 477) ; on the coffin, when lowered, three clods are dropt (699) ;
by cutting out the sod on which footprints [of a thief or enemy]
are left, you can work magic (524. 556; and gee Suppl.).

Of holy mountains and hills there were plenty ; yet there seems
to have been no elemental worship of them : they were honoured
for the sake of the deity enthroned upon them, witness the
Wodan's and Thunar's hills. When Agathias, without any such
connexion, speaks of Xbifroi, and <f>dpayy€<; (hills and gullies) as
objects of worship (p. 100) ; possibly his knowledge of the facts
was imperfect, and there was a fire or water worship connected
with the hill. It is among the Goths, to whom fairguni meant
mountain (p. 172), that one would first look for a pure mountain-
worship, if the kinship I have supposed between that word and
the god's name be a matter of fact. Dietmar of Merseburg
(Pertz 5, 855) gives an instance of mountain- worship among the
Slavs : € Posita antem est haec (ci vitas, viz. Nemtsi, Nimptch)
in pago silensi, vocabulo hoc a quodam monte, nimis excelso et
grandi, olim sibi indito : et hie ob qualitatem suam et quantitatem,
cum execranda gentilitas ibi veneraretur, ab incolis omnibus nimis

som hade deraf stor harm (great sorrow),

der de nu ha* tads den svarta mull (black mould)

allt d/ver skSn Valborg's arm.

1 Pindar's Pyth. 4, 21-44. 0. Mailer's Orohom. 852, and proleg. 142 seq. ;
his Dorier 1, 85. 2, 535.

3 ' Only of soft wood, not hard, 1 RA. 506.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



MOUNTAINS. STONES. 645

honorabatur.' The commentators say it is the Zobtenberg in
Silesia (see Suppl.).

Here and there single stones and rocks, or several in a group,
sometimes arranged in circles, were held in veneration (Append.
c vota ad lapides/ especially ' lapides in ruinosis et silvestribus
locis venex-an;' AS. stanweordung, ' bringan t6 stane,' Thorpe pp.
380. 396). This worship of stones is a distinguishing character-
istic of Celtic religion, 1 less of Teutonic, though amongst our-
selves also we meet with the superstition of slipping through
hollow stones as well as hollow trees, Chap. XXXVI. Cavities
not made artificially by human hand were held sacred. In Eng-
land they hang such holy-stones or holed-stones at the horses'
heads in a stable, or on the bed- tester and the house-door against
witchcraft. Some are believed to have been hollowed by the
sting of an adder (adderstones) . In Germany, holy stones were
either mahlsteine of tribunals or sacrificial stones : oaths were
taken € at ursvolum unnwr steini/ ' at enom hvita helga steinif
Sami. 165 a . 237 b . heilogfioll 189 b . Hel-gafell, Landn. 2, 12 ; conf.
espec. Eyrbygg. saga c. 4. Four holy stones are sunk to cleanse
a profaned sea (supra p. 87 note). A great number of stones
which the giant or devil has dropt, on which he has left the print
of his hand or foot, are pointed out by popular legend, without
any holy meaning being thereby imparted to them (see Suppl.) .

As giants and men get petrified (p. 551), and still retain, so
to speak, an after-sense of their former state, so to rocks and
stones compassion is attributed, and interest in men's condition.
Snorri 68 remarks, that stones begin to sweat when brought out
of the frost into warmth, and so he explains how rocks and stones
wept for Baldr. It is still common to say of bitter, anguish : 4 a
stone by the wayside would feel pity/ ' it would move a heart
of stone/ * Notice the MHG. phrase : ' to squeeze a stone with



1 Conf. Armstrong sub v. earn and clachbrath ; O'Brien sub v. earn ; H.
Sehreiber's Feen, p. 17 on the menhir and pierces fites, p. 21 on the pierces
hranlantes. Of spindle-stones I have spoken, p. 419.

* This mode of expression is doubtless very old; here are specimens from
MHG. : ez erbarmet einem tteine, Hart. erst, buchl. 1752. waer sin herze guinea,
ewer (whoso) si weinen saehe, ze weinen im gesohsehe, Herb. 68* ; ir klage mohte
erbarmen einen stein 89 b . erbarmen ein iteinhertez herze, Flore 1498. ir j&mer
daz moht einen velt erbarmen, Lohengr. p. 16. ez moht ein stein beweinet h&n
dise barmnnge, Bietr. 48*. Mark, the stones did not weep of themselves, but were
moved to sympathy by the weeping and wailing of the hapless men, which as it



Digitized by VjOOQIC



646 ELEMENTS.

straps, till its veins drop blood/ MsH. 2, 235 b , suggested no
doubt by the veins which run through some stones (see Sup pi.).

In closing this chapter, I will group together the higher gods
who more immediately govern the four elements. Water, springs,
rain and sea are under Wuotan (Nichus), Donar, TJogi, Holda.
Fire, lightning under Donar, Loki. Air, wind under Wuotan,
Frd. Earth under Nerthus and many others, mentioned on
p. 641-2.



were penetrated their ears. So in Holberg (EUefte juni 4, 2) : horte jeg en snkken
og hylen, som en steen maatte grade ved. And Ovid (Met. 9, 303) : moturaqne
dura* Verba qneror silices. Luke 19, 40 : ol \L0oi KetcpdZovrai [Habak. 2, 11 : the
stones shall cry out of the wall] .



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CHAPTER XXI.
TREES AND ANIMALS.

As all nature was thought of by the heathen mind as living;. 1,
as language and the understanding of human speech was allowed
to beasts, and sensation to plants (see Suppl.) ; and as every kind
of transition and exchange of forms was supposed to take place
amongst all creatures : it follows at once, that to some a higher
worth may have been assigned, and this heightened even up to
divine veneration. Gods and men transformed themselves into
trees, plants or beasts, spirits and elements assumed animal
forms ; why should the worship they had hitherto enjpyed be
withheld from the altered type of their manifestation ? Brought
under this point of view, there is nothing to startle us in the
veneration of trees or animals. It has- become a gross thing
only when to the consciousness of men the higher being has
vanished from behind the form he assumed, and the form alone
has then to stand for him.

We must however distinguish from divinely honoured plants
and animals those that were esteemed high and holy because
they stood in close relationship to gods or spirits. Of this kind
are beasts and vegetables used for sacrifice, trees under which

1 The way it is expressed in the Eddie myth of Baldr is more to the point than
anything else : To ward off every danger that might threaten that beloved god,
Fngg exacted oaths from water, fire, earth, stones, plants, beasts, birds and worms,
nay from plagues personified, that they would not harm him ; one single shrub she
let off from the oath, because he was too young, Sn. 64. Afterwards all creatures
weep the dead Baldr, men, animals, plants and stones, Sn. 68. The OS. poet of the
Holland calls dumb nature the unquethandi, and says 168, 82 : * that thar Wal-
dandes d6d (the Lord's death)? unquethandes sd filo antkennian scolda, that is
endagon ertha bivftda, hrisidun thia ndhun bergos, harda stenos clubun, fe lisos after
them felde.' It is true these phenomena are from the Bible (Matth. 27, 51-2), yet
possibly a heathen picture hovered in the author's mind (as we saw on pp. 148.
807), in this case the mourning for Baldr, so like that for the Saviour. Herbort
makes all things bewail Hector : if (says he, 68*) stones, metals, chalk and sand
had wit and sense, they would have sorrowed too. As deeply rooted in man's
nature is the impulse, when unfortunate, to bewail his woes to the rocks and trees
and woods ; this is beautifully expressed in the song Ms. 1, 3 b , and all the objects
there appealed to, offer their help.

VOL. II. •* P



Digitized by VjOOQIC



648 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

higher beings dwell, animals that wait upon them. The two
classes can hardly be separated, for incorrect or incomplete
accounts will not allow us to determine which is meant.

1. Treks.

The high estimation in which Woods and Trees were held by
the heathen Germans has already been shown in Chap. IV. To
certain deities, perhaps to all, there were groves dedicated, and
probably particular trees in the grove as well. Such a grove
was not to be trodden by profane feet, such a tree was not to be
6tript of its boughs or foliage, and on no account to be hewn
down. 1 Trees are also consecrated to individual demons, elves,
wood and home sprites, p. 509.

Minute descriptions, had any such come down to us, would tell
us many things worth knowing about the enclosure and main-
tenance of holy woods, about the feasts and sacrifices held in
them. In the Indiculus paganiarum we read ( de sacris silvarum,
quae nimidas vocant.' This German word seems to me uncor-
rapted, but none the easier to understand : it is a plur. masc.
from the sing, nimid* but to hit the exact sense of the word, we
should have to know all the meanings that the simple verb
neman was once susceptible of. If the German nimu be, as it
has every appearance of being, the same as vifuo, then nimid
also may answer to Gr. ve/^o?, Lat. nemus, a woodland pasture,
a grove, a sacrum silvae (p. 69). s Documents of 1086 and 1150

1 Sacrum nemus, nemus eastern in Tacitus. Ovid, Amor. iii. 1, 1 :

Stat vetus et multos incaedua sihoa per annos,

credibile est illi numen incase loco :
ions sacer in medio, spelunoaque pumice pendens,

et latere ex omni dulce queruntur aves.

Lncan, Phars. 8, 899 : Lucas erat longo nunquam violates ab aevo. So the Sem-
nonian wood, the nemus of Nerthus, the Slav luens Zutibure, the Prussian grove
Romowe. Among the Esthonians it is held infamous to pluck even a single leaf
in the sacred grove : far as its shade extends (ut umbra pertingit, RA. 67. 1061, they
will not take so much as a strawberry ; some people secretly bury their dead there
(Petri Ehstland 2, 120). They call suoh woods kio, and the I. of Dago* is in
Esth. Hiomah, because there is a consecrated wood near the farmhouse of Hiohqf
(Thorn. Hiarn.).

* Like hehd fheros), gimeinid foommunio), frumid, pi. frumidas (AS. frymtias,
primitiae), barid (clamor, inferred from Tacitus's baritus).

• Can nimid have been a heathen term for sacrifice ? Abnemen in the 18th cent,
meant mactare, to slaughter (used of cattle), Berthold p. 46, as we still say abthvn,
absckneiden, Ulph. vfsneipan; Sohmid's Schwab, wtb. 405 abnehmen to kill poultry.
This meaning can hardly He in the prefix, it must be a part of the word itself;



Digitized by VjOOQIC



TBEES. 649

name a place Nimodon, Nimeden (Moser's Osnabr. gesch., urk. 34.
56. 8, 57. 84) ; the resemblance may lead to something farther
(see SappL).

There can be no doubt that for some time after the conversion
the people continued to light candles and offer small sacrifices
under particular holy trees, as even to this day they hang wreaths
upon them, and lead the ring-dance under them (p. 58). In the
church-prohibitions it is variously called : f vota ad arbores facere
aut ibi candelam sen quodlibet munus deferre ; arborem colore ;
votum ad arborem persolvere ; arbores daenwnibus consecrates
colore, et in tanta veneratione habere, ut vulgus nee ramum nee
surculum audeat amputate.' It is the AS. treow-weor&ung (cultus
arborum), the ON. biota lundinn (grove), Landn. 3, 17. The
Acta Bened. sec. 2 p. 841 informs us : ' Adest quoque ibi (at
Lutosas, now Leuze) non ignoti miraculi fagus (beech), subter
quam luminaria saepe cum accensa absque hominum accessu
videmus, divini aliquid fore 8uspicamur. , So the church turned
the superstition to account for her own miracles : a convent was
founded on the site of the tree. About Esthonians of the present
day we are told in Kosenplanter's Beitr. 9, 12, that only a few
years ago, in the parish of Harjel, on St. George's, St. John's
and St. Michael's night, they used to sacrifice under certain trees,
i.e. to kill, a black fowl. 1 Of the Thunder-god's holy oak an
account has been given, pp. 72-3-4. 171. 184; and in Gramm.
2, 997 the OHG-. scaldeih (ilex) is compared with the AS. names
of plants scaldhyf el, scald]>yfel and the scaldo quoted above, p. 94.
All this is as yet uncertain, and needs further elucidation.

Among the Langobards we find a worship of the so-called
blood-tree or holy tree (p. 109). The Vita S. Barbati in the Acta
sanctor. under Pebr. 19, p. 189. The saint (b. cir. 602, d. cir.
683) lived at Benevento, under kings Grimoald and Bomuald ;



niman, neman would therefore be to out, kill, divide, and nimidas the victims slain
in the holy grove, under trees ? Conf . what is said in the text of the Langobardio
tree of sacrifice. Celtic etymologies seem rather oat of place for this plainly Saxon
Indiculus. Adelong already in Mithrid. 2, 65. 77 had brought into the field Nemetes
and nemet (templnm) ; Ir. naomh is sanctus, neamh (gen. nimhe) ooelum, niem-
headh land consecrated, belonging to the church.

1 The superstition of the Lausitz Wends holds that there are woods which
yearly demand a human victim (like the rivers, p. 494) ; some person must lose his
life in them : ' hohla dyrbi kojzde Ijeto jeneho czloweka mjeoz,' Lausitz mon. schr.
1797, p. 748.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



650 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

the Lombard nation was baptized, but still clang to superstitious
practices : ' Quia etiam non longe a Beneventi moenibus devotis-
sime 8acrilegam colebant arborem, in qua suspenso corio cuncti qui
aderant terga vertentes arbori celerins equitabant, calcaribus
crnentantes equos, nt unus alteram posset praeire, atque in eodem
cursu retroversis mawtms in corium jaculabantur. Sicque parti-
culam modicam ex eo comedendam snperstitiose accipiebant. Et
quia stulta illic persolvebant vota, ab actione ilia nomen loco illi,
sicnt hactenus dicitur, votum imposuerant. , In vain Barbatas
preaches against it : € illi ferina coecati dementia nil aliud nisi
sessorum meditantes usus, optimum esse fatebantur cuUum legis
majorum suorum, quos nominatim bellicosissimos asserebant.'
When Romuald was gone to Naples, 'repen'te beatissimos Barbatus
securim accipiens et ad votum pergens, suis manibus nefandam
arborem, in qua per tot temporis spatia Langobardi exitiale sacri-
legiam perficiebant, defossa humo a radicibus incidit, ac desuper
terrae congeriem fecit, at nee indicium ex ea quis postea valuerit
reperire.' l This part about felling the tree has an air of swagger
and improbability ; but the description of the heathen ceremony
may be true to the life. I have pointed out, p. 174, that the
Ossetes and Circassians hung up the hides of animals on poles
in honour of divine beings, that the Goths of Jornandes truncis
suspendebwnt exuviae to Mars (p. 77 note), that as a general thing
animals were hung on sacrificial trees (pp. 75-9) ; most likely
this tree also was sacred to some god through sacrifices, i.e. votive
offerings of individuals, 8 hence the whole place was named ' ad
votum/ What was the meaning of hurling javelins through the
suspended skin, is by no means clear ; in the North it was the
custom to shoot through a hanging raw oxhide (Fornm. sog. 3, 18.
4, 61), as a proof of strength and skill. Doing it backwards

1 Another Vita Barbati (ibid. p. 112) relates as follows : * Nam quid despioa-
bilius credendum est, quam ex mortuis animations non oarnem sod corium aceipere
ad usum comestionis, nt pravo errori subjecti Langobardi feeerunt ? qui suarom
festa solennitatum equis praeenrrentibus nnus altero praeeedente, sient mos erat
gentilium, arbori ludificae procul non satis Benevento vota sua solvebant. Suspensa
itaqoe putredo oorii in hano arborem divam, eqnorum sessores versis post tergom
brachiis ignominiam oorii oertabant lanoeolis vibrare. Cumque lanoeolie esse
vibrata peUis mortua oerneretur, veluti pro remedio animae ex hac illosione oorii
partis mediae faotam recisionem gnstabant. Eooe quali zidionlo vanae mentis
homines errori snbjaoebant pestifero ! *

9 Supra p. 860 note ; votum is not only vow, bat the oblatio rei votivae :
• votare puerum ' in Pertz 2, 93 is equiv. to offerre.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



TREES. 601

increased the difficulty, and savours of antiquity. 1 Why the
particle of skin that was knocked out should be eaten, it is hard
to say ; was it to indicate that they were allowed to participate
in the sacrifice ? (p. 46 ; see Suppl.).

And not only were those trees held sacred, under which men
sacrificed, and on which they hung the head or hide of the
slaughtered beast, but saplings that grew up on the top of sacri-
ficed animals. A willow slip set over a dead foal or calf is not
to be damaged (Sup. I, 838) ; are not these exactly Adam of
Bremen's ' cvrbores ex morte vel tabo immolatorum divmae' ? (p.
76).*

Of hallowed trees (which are commonly addressed as frau,'
dame, in the later Mid. Ages) the oak stands at the head (pp.
72-77) : an oak or beech is the arbor frugifera in casting lots
(Tac. Germ. 10). Next to the oak, the ash was holy, as we may
see by the myth of the creation of man ; the ashtree Yggdrasill
falls to be treated in Chap. XXV. The wolf, whose meeting of
you promises victory, stands under ashen boughs. € The common
people believe that 'tis very dangerous to break a bough from
the ashy to this very day/ Rob. Plot's Staffordshire p. 207. One
variety, the mountain-ash or rountree, rowan-tree, is held to have
magical power (Brockett p. 177), 8 (conf. Chap. XXVII., Bonn).
With dame Hazel too our folk-songs carry on conversations, and
hazels served of old to hedge in a court of justice, as they still do
cornfields, RA. 810. According to the Ostgota-lag (bygdab. 30),
any one may in a common wood hew with impunity, all but oaks
and hazels , these have peace, i.e. immunity. In Superst. 1, 972 we
are told that oak and hazel dislike one another, and cannot agree,
any more than haw and sloe (white and black thorn ; see Suppl.).
Then the elder (sambucus), OHG. holantar, enjoyed a marked
degree of veneration ; holan of itself denotes a tree or shrub (AS.
cneowholen=ruscus). In Lower Saxony the sambucus nigra is

1 So the best head had to be touched backwards, RA. 396 ; so men sacrificed
with the head turned away (p. 493), and threw backwards over their heads (p. 628).

* A scholium en Ad. of Bremen's Hist. eccl. (Pertz, scr. 7, 379) is worth
quoting : * Prope illud templum (upsaliense) est arbor maxima, late ramos extendens,
©estate et hieme semper virens : cujus ilia generis sit, nemo writ. Ibi etiam est fons,
ubi saorifioia Paganorum solent exeroeri, et homo virus immergi, qui dum im-
mergitur (al. invenitur), ratum erit votum populi.' To sink in water was a good
sign, as in the ordeal (BA. 924; conf. Chap. XXXIV., Witch's bath).

* Esculus Jon sacra, Pliny 16, 4 (5).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



652 TREES AND ANIMALS.

called ellorn, ell-horn. 1 ArnkiePs testimony 1, 179 is beyond
suspicion : ' Thus did our forefathers also hold the ellhorn holy, and
if they must needs clip the same, they were wont first to say this
prayer : " Dame Ellhorn, give me somewhat of thy wood, then will
I also give thee of mine, if so be it grow in the forest." And this
they were wont to do sometimes with bended knees, bare head and
folded hands, as I have ofttimes in my young days both heard
and seen.' Compare with this the very similar accounts of elder
rods (Sup. I, 866), of planting the elder before stables (169), of
pouring water under the elder (864), and of the elder's mother
(Sup. K, Dan. 162) .* The juniper, wacholder, plays an impor-
tant part in the marohen of machandetboom ; in the poem of the
Mirror's adventure, fol. 88, occurs the mysterious statement :

Fraw Weckolter, ich sich Dame Juniper, I see

daz du ir sweater bist, that thou her 8 sister art,

du kund ouch falsche list thou knewest false cunning too

d& du daz kind verstalt. when thou stolest the child.

A man in Sudermania was on the point of cutting down a fine
shady juniper, when a voice cried out, l hew not the juniper ! '
He disregarded the warning, and was about to begin again, when
it cried once more ' I tell thee, hew not down the tree ! ' and he
ran away in a fright. 4 A similar notion lies at the bottom of
kindermarchen no. 128, only it has a ludicrous turn given it; a
voice out of the tree cries to the hewer, ' he that hews haspelholz
(windlass-wood), shall die.' Under such a tree, the Klinta tall
(deal-tree, pine) in Westmanland, dwelt a hafs-fru, in fact the
pine tree's i4 (p. 496) ; to this tree you might see snow-white
cattle driven up from the lake across the meadows, and no one
dared to touch its boughs. Trees of this kind are sacred to indi-
vidual elves, woodsprites, homesprites ; they are called in Swed.

1 AS. ellen. The Canones editi sub Eadgaro rege, cap. 16 (Thorpe, p. 896),
speak of the sorcery practised ' on ellenum and eao on ottrum misltoum treowum '
(in sambncis et in aliis varus arboribus).

9 The god Pushkait lives under the elder, and the Lettons used to set bread and
beer for him beside the tree, Thorn. Hiarn, p. 48. [In Somersetshire they will not
burn elder wood, for fear of ill luck. — Tbans.]

• My faithless lover's.

4 I find this quoted from Locoenius's Antiq. Sueog. 1,8; it is not in the ed. of
1647, it may be in a later. Afzelius 2, 147 has the story with this addition, that at
the second stroke blood flowed from the root, the hewer then went home, and soon
fell sick.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



TREES. 653*

bo-trad, in Dan, boe-tra (p. 509). Under tbe Kme-tree in the
Hero-book dwarfs love to haunt, and heroes fall into enchanted
sleep : the sweet breath of its blossoms causes stupefaction, D.
Heldenb. 1871, 3, 14-5. 135 (see Suppl.). But elves in particular
have not only single trees but whole orchards and groves assigned
them, which they take pleasure in cultivating, witness Laurin's
Rofiegarden enclosed by a silken thread. In Sweden they call
these gardens elftrad-g&rdar.

The Greek dryads l and hamadryads have their life linked to a
tree, and as this withers and dies, they themselves fall away and
cease to be ; any injury to bough or twig is felt as a wound, and
a wholesale hewing down puts an end to them at once. 9 A cry
of anguish escapes them when the cruel axe comes near. Ovid in
Met. 8, 742 seq., tells a beautiful story of Erisichthon's impious
attack on the grove of Ceres :

Hie etiam Cereale nemus violasse securi
dicitur, et lucos ferro temerasse vetustos.
Stabat in his ingens annoso robore quercus,
saepe sub hac dryades festas duxere choreas . . .
Gontremuit, gemitumque dedit Deo'ia quercus,
et pariter frondes, pariter pallescere glandes
coepere, ac longi pallorem ducere rami.

When the alder (erle) is hewn, it bleeds, weeps, and begins to
speak (Meinert's Kuhlandch. 122). An Austrian marchen (Ziska
38-42) tells of the stately fir, in which there sits a fay waited on
by dwarfs, rewarding the innocent and plaguing the guilty ; and
a Servian song of the maiden in the pine (fichte) whose bark the
boy splits with a gold and silver horn. Magic spells banish the
ague mtofrcm Fichte (see Suppl.).

This belief in spirit-haunted trees was no less indigenous among
Celts. Sulpicius Severus (beg. of 5th cent.) reports in his life of
St. Martin, ed. Amst. 1665, p. 457 : ' Dam in vico quodam tem-
plum antiquis8imum diruisset, et arborem pinum, quae fano erat
proxima, esset aggressus excidere, turn vero antistes illius luci
ceteraque gentilium turba coepit obsistere ; et cum iidem illi, dum
templum evertitur, imperante domino quievissent, succidi arborem



1 AS. gloss, wudu-elfenne, wood-elfins, fern. pi.

' ' Non sine hamadiyadis fato oadit arborea trabs.' Auflonius.



Digitized by



Google



654 TREES AND ANIMALS.

non patiebantur. Hie eos sedulo commonere, nihil esse religionis
in stipite ; Deum potius, cui serviret ipse, sequerentur ; arborem
illam exscindi oportere, quia esset daemoni dedicata' (see SuppL).
A great deal might be written on the sacredness of particular
plants and flowers. They are either dedicated to certain gods
and named after them (as Donners bart, p. 183. Baldrs br&,
p. 222. Forneotes folme, p. 240. Lokkes havre, p. 242. Freyju
h&r, Friggjar gras, p. 302-3) ; or they come of the transformation
of some afflicted or dying man. Nearly all such plants have power
to heal or hurt, it is true they have to be plucked and gathered
first: the Chap, on magic will furnish examples. Like sacred
tutelary beasts, they are blazoned on the coats-of-arms of
countries, towns, and heroes. Thus to the Northwest Germans,
especially Frisians and Zeelanders, the seeblatt (nymphaea, nenu-
phar) was from the earliest times an object of veneration. The
Hollanders call it plompe, the Frisians pompe : strictly speaking,
the broad leaves floating on the sea are pompebtedden, and the
fragrant white flowers, golden yellow inside, swanneblommen
(flores cygnei) ; which recals the names given at p. 489, ni»-
blume, nackblad, muhme and mummel (i.e. swan-maiden). The
Frisians put seven ' sea-blades ' (zeven plompenbladen) in their
escutcheon, and under that emblem looked for victory ; l our
GudrunKed (1373) knows all about it, and furnishes Herwtc of
Sdwen or Selanden with a sky-blue flag : ' sebleter swebent (float)
dar inne/ This sea-flower is the sacred lotus of old Egypt, and
is also honoured in India ; the Tibetans and Nepalese bow down
to it, it is set up in temples, Brahma and Vishnu float on its leaf;
and it is no other than a M. Nethl. poem that still remembers
Thambkin floating on the leaf (p. 451).



1 J. H. Halbertsma's Het Buddhisms en zijn stiohter, Deventer 1848, pp.8. 10;
and he adds, that the people are to this day very careful in picking and carrying the
plompen: if you faU with the flower in your hand, you get the falling sickness.
Plomben, our plumpfen, ON. pompa, means plumping or plunging down. Ace. to
W. Barnes, ' butterpumps = ovary of the yellow waterlily ;* conf. Lith. pumpa, Slav,
pupa, wen, pimple? Mart. Hamconii Frisia, Franekarae 1620, p. 7, says Friso intro-
duced the cognisance of the seven sea-blades : ' insigne Frisonis, ut Cappidus refert,
septem fuerunt rubra nympheae herbae folia, in tribus argenteis constitutae trabibus
per sattum eaeruUum oblique ductis. ' Cappidus is said to have been a priest at Sta-
vorn at the beg. of the 10th century, but nothing more is known of him. Conf. Van
d. Bergh's Volksoverlev. p. 88. 41. 110. Others connect the division of Friesland
into 7 sea-lands with the 7 leaves of the scutcheon ; it is not known for certain when
that division first began ; see De vrije Vries 4, 187.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



ANIMALS. 655

2. Animals.

We shall have still more to say about sacred animals, which
enter into more intimate relations with man than dumb nature
can ; but their cultus will admit of being referred to two or three
principal causes. Either they stood connected with particular
gods, and to some extent in their service, as the boar belongs
to Fr6, the wolf and raven to Wuotanj or there lies at the basis
the metamorphosis of a higher being into some animal shape,
on the strength of which the whole species comes to be invested
with a halo of honour. That is how we may in some instances
have to take a bear, bull, cow or snake, presupposing an in-
carnation, though our mythology may have long ceased to reach
so far back as to give a full account of it. Then, bordering
close upon such a lowering of the god into the animal, comes
the penal degradation of man into a beast, the old doctrine
of transmigration, in which we discover a third reason for the
consecration of animals, though it does not warrant an actual
worship of them. Those myths, e.g. of the cuckoo, woodpecker,
nightingale, and so on, furnish a fund of beautiful tales, which
enter largely into the hero-worship (see Suppl.).

Quadrupeds. — Foremost of animals I name the horse, the
noblest, wisest, trustiest of domestic animals, with whom the hero
holds friendly talk (p. 392), who sympathizes in his griefs and
rejoices in his victories. As some heroes are named after the
horse (Hengest, Hors), the horse too has proper names given him ;
Norse mythology assigns to nearly every god his separate horse,
endowed with miraculous powers. OSin's steed is named Sleipnir
(p. 154), and is, like some giants and heroes, an octopod. 1 The
other horses of the Ases are enumerated by Ssem. 44* and Sn. 18,
without specifying to which they belonged. Several names are
formed with 'faxi' (jubatus, comatus, OHG. vahso), as SMnfaxi
(S»m. 82. Sn.ll), Qullfaxi (Sn. 107-10), Hrimfaxi (Ssem. 32.
91. Sn. 11), Freyfcuti (Vatnsd. 140-1). Of these, Gullfaxi the
gold-maned belonged to giant Hrfingnir, Sktnfaxi the shiny-

1 Old riddle on Ottinn and Sleipnir in the Herrararsaga : ' Who are the two that
go to Thing (eotmeil) together, and have three eyes, ten legs and one tail between
them? ' A mode of expression quite of a piece with our old habits of speech ; thus
in the Weisthumer it is said the officers of the court shall come to the assize with 6 J
mouths, meaning three men on horseback and a dog.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



656 TREES AND ANIMALS.

maned was the steed of Day, and Hrimfaxi the rimy-maned
(p. 641) of Night. Bat even Faxi by itself is a name for horses,
e.g. Fornald. sog. 2, 168. 508. Arvakr (early- waker), AlsviSr
(all- wise) are horses of the sun-chariot, Saem. 45. Sn. 12 ; on
Arvakr's ear, on Alsvinn's 1 hoof, there were runes written ; also
runes '& Sleipnis tonnom (teeth)/ SaBin. 196*, as well as on the
bear's paw and the wolfs claws. 8 Svadilfari was the horse that
helped the giant in building, Sn. 46. And our hero-legend has
handed down the names of many famous horses (p. 392) . Bajart
is described as intelligent, like AlsvrSr ; he is said to be still alive
in Ardennes forest, where you may hear him neigh every year on
Midsummer day (Quatre fils Aimon 180 c ). The track of Schim-
lning's shoe stands printed on the rock, Vilk. saga cap. 37 (see
Suppl.).

The Freyfaxi in Vatnsdselasaga was owned by a man named
Brandr, who is said to have worshipped it (at hann hefSi fttrunaS
k Faxa), and was therefore called Faxabrandr. The unpublished
saga of Hrafnkell is known to me only from Mulleins Bibl. 1, 103,
but he too had a horse Freyfaxi (mispr. Freirfara), which he
had half given to Freyr, vowing at the same time to slay the
man who should mount it without his leave. I can give the
passage from Joh. Erici de philippia apud priscos boreales, Lips.
1755, p. 122 : 'Hrafnkell &tti }>ann grip i eigo sinni, er h&nom
J?6tti betri enn annar, )?at var hestr bleikalottr at lit, er hann
kalkiSi Freyfaxa, hann gaf Frey vin tinom (supra, pp. 93. 211)
J>enna hest halfann. & )>essom hesti hafSi hann svft mikla elsko
(love), at hann strengdi )>ess heit (vow), at hann skyldi )>eim
manni at bana verBa, er )>eim hesti rrSi &n hans vilja/ Brand's
' a\truna$ ' refers, no doubt, to the same circumstance of his horse
being hallowed and devoted to the god. A striking testimony
to this is found in Olafs Tryggvasonar saga : 8 Tidings came to
the king, that the Tr»ndir (men of Drontheim) had turned back
to the worship of Freyr, whose statue still stood among them.
When the king commanded them to break the image, they re-
plied: 'ei munum ver bridta lihneski Frey 8, jjviat ver hofum leingi

1 Svitfr, gen. svinns, like ma$r, manns.

2 Reminding of the Germ. Beast-apologue (Beinh. oelxiii.). In Fornald. aog.
1, 169 Bain prefers, wrongly I think, the reading * hdtti,' head.

> Ed. Skalh. 1698. 1690. 2, 190 cap. 49 ; this cap. ifl left out in Fornm. sdg. 2.
189, but inserted at 10, 812.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HOBSES. 657

honum )?ionat ok hefr oss vel dftgat/ Olafr summoned them
to an assembly, resolving to destroy the idol himself, and sailed
to the coast where the temple (hof) stood. When he landed, he
found the horses of the god grazing there (]>& sau hans menn st6$-
hross nokr vr5 vegin, er )?eir sogSu at hann Freyr setti). The
king mounted the stallion, and his courtiers the mares, and so
they rode to the temple ; Olafr dismounted, walked in and threw
down the idols (goSin), 1 but took Frey's image away with him.
When the Traendir found their gods dishonoured, and Frey'B
image carried off, they were ware that the king had done it, and
they came to the place of meeting. The king had the image set
np in the Thing, and asked the people : ' know ye this man ? '
1 It is Freyr our god ' they answered. ' How has he shewn his
power to you?' 'He has often spoken to us, foretold the
future, granted plenty and peace (veitti oss ar oc friS) / € The
devil spake to you ' said the king ; then taking an axe, he cried
to the image : * Now help thyself, and defend thee if thou canst/
Freyr continuing silent, Olafr hewed off both his hands, and then
preached to the people how this idolatry had arisen. The whole
narrative bears the impress of a later age, yet it had sprung out
of Norse tradition, and assures us that horses were consecrated to
Freyr, and maintained in the hallowed precincts of his temples.
Had not the temples of other gods such horses too ? The animals
that Wilibrord found grazing in Fosete's sanctuary (p. 230) can
hardly have been horses, or he would not have had them slaugh-
tered for food ; but the practice of rearing cattle consecrated to
the gods is established by it none the less. And apart from this,
it seems that single beasts were maintained by private worship-
pers of the god.

Such breed of pure and dedicated horses was destined for holy
uses, especially sacrifice, divination, and the periodical tours of
deities in their cars. Their manes were carefully cultivated,
groomed and decorated, as the name Faxi indicates; probably
gold, silver and ribbons were twined or plaited into the locks
(Qullfazi, SMnfaai) ; mon gl6ar (juba splendet), Seem. 92*, tysir
mon af mari (lncet juba ex equo) 32 b , as indeed the Lat. jubar
suggests juba, because a mane does radiate, and light sends out

1 So that there were other statues standing beside Frey's.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



658 TREES AND ANIMALS.

beams in the manner of hair. 1 Oulltoppr, Silfrintoppr are names
of horses whose tails were tied round with gold or silver, Sn. 44.
The names Oyllir and Oler (golden, glittering, ibid.) may be
given them for the same reason, or because their hoofs were
shod with gold, or from the gilding of the bridle and saddle.
Of colours, white was esteemed the noblest ; a king would make
his entry, or bestow a fief, seated on a milk-white steed. The
Weisthiimer often mention the white horse (e.g. 3, 342. 857) ; if
an inheritance lie vacant, the governor is to mount a white foal,
and taking one man before him and the other behind, to set one
of them down on the property (3, 831; conf. 2, 541). A foal
was esteemed even purer and nobler than a horse (see Suppl.). 2

Tacitus (Germ. 9, 10), after saying ' lucos ac nemora conse-
crant/ adds : ' Proprium gentis, equorum quoque praesagia ac
monitus experiri. Publico aluniwr, iisdem nemoribus ac lucis,
candidi et nullo mortali opere contacti, quos pressos sacro curru
sacerdos ac rex vel princeps civitatis comitantur, hinnitusque ac
fremitus observant. Nee ulli auspicio major fides, non solum
apud plebem, sed apud proceres, apud sacerdotes : se enim
ministros deorum, illos conscios putant ; ' these sacred beasts are
in the secrets of the gods, and can reveal their counsels. And in
christian times the Indiculus pagan, cap. xiii. speaks * de auguriis
equorvm,' without describing them further. A horse*s neigh is
an omen of good (Sup. I, 239) . 8 To warriors victory was fore-
tokened by their chargers' neighing (OHG. hueion, MHG. weien,
M. Neth. neien, ON. hneggja, Swed. gnagga), and defeat by
their withholding the cheerful spirit-stirring strain: see an in-
stance in the Flem. rhyming chron., ed. Kausler 7152. We



1 Single hairs oat of the mane or tail of a sacred horse were treasured up.
Franz Wessel relates, p. 14, that when the Johannites preached in a town or village,
they had a fine stallion ridden round, to which the people offered 'afgehowen
woppen (bunch of oat ears) ' ; any one who could get a hair out of the horse's tail,
thought himself lucky, and sewed it into the middle of his milk-strainer, and the
milk was proof against witchcraft.

2 A foal's tooth, it seems, was hung about the person, and worn as a safeguard.
A MHO. poet says : ' gevater unde filli-zant an grdzen naeten sint ze swach,' god-
fathers and foal's teeth are too weak in great emergencies, MS. 2, 160 b . To let
children ride on a black foal makes them out their teeth easily, Superst. I, 428.
From Eracl. 1320. 1485 fM-zene appear to be the milk-teeth shed by a foal (see
Suppl.).

3 What the breath of a swine has polluted, is set right again by that of the
hone (Sup. I, 820. K, 92) ; the horse is a clean animal. It helps a woman in labour,
for a horse to feed out of her apron (Sup. I, 887).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HORSES. 659

know how the Persians chose a king by the neighing of his
horse, Herod. 3, 84. In the Norwegian tale Grimsborken (Asb.
and Moe, no. 38) a foal is suckled by twelve mares, and gets to
talk sensibly (see Sappl.).

And as Mtmi's head retained its wisdom after it was cat off
(879), heathendom seems to have practised all sorts of magic by
catting off horse's heads and sticking them up. In a nursery-tale
(no. 89) the trusty Falada's head is nailed up over the gate, and
carries on converse with the king's daughter. This catting off
and setting up of horse's heads has been mentioned at p. 47-8 as
an ancient German custom. Pliny 19, 10 (58) notices, as a remedy
for caterpillars : ' si pah imponantur in hortis ossa capitis ex
equino genere.' In Scandinavia they stuck a horse's head on a
pole, and turned the gaping jaws, propped open with a stick, in
the direction whence the man they had a spite against, and
wished to harm, was sure to come. 1 This was called a neidstange
(spite-stake). Saxo Gram. p. 75 : Immolati diis equi abscissum
caput conto excipiens, subjectis stipitibus distentos faucium rictus
aperuit, sperans se primos Erici conatus atrocis spectaculi for-
midine frustraturum. Arbitrabatur enim ineptas barbarorum
mentes oblatae cervicis terriculamento cessuras; et jam Ericas
obvium illis iter agebat. Qui prospecto eminus capite, obscoenita-
tis apparatum intelligens, silere socios cautiusque se gerere jubet,
nee quemquam temere prracipitare sermonem, ne incauto effamine
ullum maleficiis instruerent locum, adjiciens, si sermone opus
incideret, verba se pro omnibus habiturum. Jamque medius illos
amnis aecreverat, cum magi, ut Ericum pontis aditu deturbarent,
contum quo equi caput refixercmt fluvio citimum locant. Hie
nihilominus pontem intrepide aggressus, 'in latorem' inquit
' gestaminis sui fortuna recidat, nos melior consequatur eventus.
Male maleficis cedat, infaustae molis gerulum onus obruat, nobis
potiora tribuant omina sospitatem I ' Neo secus quam optabatur
evenit: continuo namque excussa cervice ruens ferentem stipes
oppressit. — Egilssaga p. 389 : Egill tok I hond ser heslis staung
(hazel rod), ok geek & bergsnaus nockura, )?& er vissi til lands
inn. JA t6k hann hross-foofuS oh setti up a staungina. siftan veitti



* Wolve? heads were in like manner held open with hazel rods and hung up
Isengr. 645-7-8. Beinardus 3, 293. 312. Reinhart, introd. p. lziz.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



660 TREES AND ANIMALS.

hann form&la ok maelti sva : ' her set ek opp ntiTstaung, ok sn£
ek )?essu ni$i & hond Eiriki konAngi ok Gunnhilda dr&ttntngu.'
hann sneri hross-hof&inu inn d land. — At other times they carved
a man's head out of wood, and fastened it to a stake which was
inserted in the breast of a slaughtered horse. 1 Yatnsd. saga, p.
142 : Iokull skar karls hofut & sfilu endann, ok risti & rfinar med
ollum )?eim formula sem fyrr var sagdr, slftan drap Iokull mer
eina (killed a mare), ok opnuSu hana hia briostinu, fcer&u a
suluna, ok lfitu horfa J?eim ft Borg (see SuppL). It is well worth
noticing, that to this very day the peasants' houses in a part
of Lower Saxony (Liineburg, Holstein, Mecklenburg) have horses'
heads carved on the gables : they look upon it merely as an orna-
ment to the woodwork of the roof, but the custom may reach
far back, and have to do with the heathen belief in outward-
pointing heads keeping mischief away from houses. 2 The Jahrb.
of the Meckl. verein 2, 118 says, these horses 9 heads are nailed
transversely on each gable-end (kiihlende) of the roof, a remin-
iscence of the sacred horses of the ancients. Heinr. Schreiber
(Taschenb. f. 1840, p. 240 seq.) has likewise noticed these horses
rushing at each other on gables of the older houses in Romanic
Rhsetia (not Germ. Switz., but Tyrol; see Zingerle's Sitten
p. 55) ; he is decidedly over hasty in pronouncing them a Celtic
symbol, for if we were to say that the custom in L. Saxony was
a legacy from the earlier Celtic inhabitants, criticism would lose
all firm footing. To me this custom, as well as horse-worship
altogether, seems to belong equally to Celts, Teutons and Slavs ;
what particular branches of these races were most addicted to
it, will by degrees unfold itself to future research (see Suppl.).
Pratorius (Weltbeschr. 2, 162-3) relates, that the Non-German
people (Wends) used to keep off or extirpate cattle-plagues by
fixing round their stables the heads of mad horses and cows on

1 Oonf. Sap. I, 838, planting the willow in the dead foal's month.

* Pretty much as they turned the eagle's head on the house, and thought
thereby to shift the wind (p. 683-4). The heathen practice of fastening up animals'
heads explains many very old names of places in Germ, and France, as Berhaupten,
Tierhaupten, Roshaupten, Schm. 2, 223. Ad locum qui nuncupatur caput caballi-
num, Pertz 2, 278. Ad locum qui voeatur caput equi (Vita S. Magni, in Ganisius'a
Lect. ant. 1, 667), with the addition in Goldast (Scr. rer. Alem. i. 2, 198) : ' et idcirco
vocatus est ille locus caput equi, quia omnes venatores reliquerant ibi suos cabaUos,
et pedestres ibant ad venandum.' Obviously a false later interpretation ; in fact
this life of St. Magnus (MagnoaM, Mangold) has a good many interpolations, oonf.
Mabillon's Acta Bened. sec. 2, p. 505.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



HORSES. 661

hedge-stakes; also that if at night their horses were ridden
to exhaustion by the night-hag or leeton, they put a horse's head
among the fodder in the crib, and this would curb the spirit's
power over the beast. Very likely the superstitious burying of
a dead head in the stable (I, 815) means that of a horse, 1 conf.
Chap. XXXVIII., Nightmare. In Holland they hang a Iwrse's
head over pigstyes (Westendorp p. 518), in Mecklenburg it is
placed under a sick man's pillow (Jahrb. 2, 128). We saw
the horse y s head thrown into the Midsummer fire with a view to
magical effects (p. 618) . 2

Prretorius's account is enough to shew that Slavs agreed with
Germans in the matter of horse- worship. But older and weightier
witnesses are not wanting. Dietmar of Mersefcurg (6, 17. p. 812)
reports of the Luitizers, i.e. Wilzes: 'Terram cum tremore
infodiunt, quo sortibus emissis [imm. ?] rerum certitudinem du-
biarum perquirant. Quibus finitis, cespite viridi eas operientes,
equum, qui maximus inter alios habetur et ut sacer ah his vener-
ator, swper fixas in terram duorum cuspides hastilium inter se
transmissarum supplici obsequio ducnnt, et praemissis sortibus
quibus id explicavere prius, per hunc quasi divinum denuo
augurantur; et si in duabus his rebus par omen apparet, factis
completur j sin autem, a tristibus populis hoc prorsus omittitur.'
— The Vita beati Ottonis episcopi bambergensis, composed by an
unknown contemporary (Oanisius iii. 2, 70), relates more fully of
the Pomeranians, whom Otto converted a.d. 1124: 'Habebant
caballvm mirae magnitudinis, et pinguem, nigri coloris, et acrem
valde. Iste toto anni tempore vacabat, tantaeque f uit saMctitatis
ut nullum dignaretur sessorem; habuitque nnum de quatuor
sacerdotibus templorum custodem diligentissimum. Quando ergo
itinere terrestri contra hostes aut praedatum ire cogitabant,
eventum rei hoc modo solebant praediscere. Hastae novem dis-
ponebantur humo, spatio unius cubiti ab invicem separatae.
Strato ergo caballo atque frenato, sacerdos, ad quern pertinebat
custodia illius, tentum freno per jacentes hastas iransversum
ducebat ter, atque reducebat. Quod si pedibus inoffensis hastisque



1 Conf. Fornald. sog. 2, 168. 300, what is said of Faxi's hross-haus.

* Why should the monks in the abbey have a caput caballinum 1 Reinhar Jus
3, 2032. 2153. Does the expression span oat of a dead hone't head ' in Buroard,
Waldis 4, 2, mean enchanted ?



Digitized by VjOOQIC



662 TREES AND ANIMALS.

indisturbatis equus transibat, signum habuere prosperitatis, et
securi pergebant; sin autem, quiescebant.' — Here the holy steed
is led across nine spears lying a cubit apart from one another, in
Dietmar's older narrative aver the points of two crossed spears ;
of coarse the Laitizers may have had a different method from the
Pomeranians. Saxo Gram. p. 321 gives yet a third account of
the matter respecting the Slavs of Biigen : € Praeterea peculiarem
albi coloris equum titulo possidebat (numen), cujuq jubae aut caudae
pilos eonvellere nefarium ducebatur. Hunc soli sacerdoti pascendi
insidendique jus erat, ne divini animalis usus quo frequentior hoc
vilior haberetur. In hoc equo, opinione Rugiae, Svantovitus (id
simulacro vocabulum erat) adversus sacrorum suorum hostes bella
gerere credebatur. Oujus rei praecipuum argumentum exstabat,
quod is nocturno tempore stabulo insistens adeo plerumque mane
sudore ac luto respersus videbatur, 1 tanquam ab exercitatione
veniendo magnorum itinerum spacia percurrisset. Auspida
quoque per eundem equum hujusmodi sumebantur. Cum bellum
adversum aliquam provinciam suscipi placuisset, ante fanum tri-
plex hastarum ordo ministrorum opera disponi solebat, in quorum
quolibet binae e traverso junctae conversis in terram cuspidibus
figebantur, aequali spaciorum magnitudine ordines disparante.
Ad quos equus ductandae expeditionis tempore, solenni precatione
praemissa, a sacerdote e vestibulo cum loramentis productus, si
propositos ordines ante dextro quam laevo pede transcenderet,
faustum gerendi belli omen accipiebatur. Sin laemim vel semel
dextro praetulisset, petendae provinciae propositum mutabatur.' —
This description is still more exact : the sacred horse, here attri-
buted to the deity himself who bestrides him by night, is led
three times over two spears planted crosswise, that is, over six
spears, and must, for the omen to be favourable, pass each row
with his right foot foremost; if at even one row he has lifted
the left before the right, misfortune is threatened. The colour
ascribed to the steed is white as in Tacitus, not black as in the
biographer of Otto.

The Chronica Augustensis ad. an. 1068 (in Freher 1, 349)
says, that Bp. Burcard of Halberstadt (the Buko still known in



1 As the horse ridden by the night-spirit is oovered with dust and sweat the
next morning (see p. 287 and SappL).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HORSES. 663

our children's game) took away their sacred horse from the
Latizers, and rode home to Saxony on it himself: 'Burcardas
Halberstatensis episcopus Luiticiorum provinciam ingressus in-
cendit, vastavit, avectoque equo quern pro deo in Bheda l colebant,
snper earn sedens in Saxoniam rediit.'

May we then adopt the hypothesis, that Dietmar and the
Augsburg chronicler mean the sacred horse of Radigast at
Rhetra, and Saxo and the author of the Vita Ottonis that of
Sviatovit at Arkona ? Each of these gods 2 had horses hallowed
to him, and others may have had the same. And so in Germany
too, horses may have been dedicated to several deities, and
divination performed with them under similar forms ; especially
to the gods Frouwo (p. 656) and Wuotan (p. 154-5-6).

Some accounts of the reverence paid to sacred horses in Dit-
marsen have a doubtful look. The Rieswold or Riesumwold on
the confines of N. and S. Ditmarsen is said to have been a holy
wood, in which human sacrifices were offered, and white horses
consecrated to gods were maintained. 8 This is simply an unauthor-
ized appropriation of the statement in Tacitus to a particular
locality. There is more of local colour in what Bolten 1, 262 re-
peats after the suspicious Garsten, that at Windbergen there
stood a grove set apart to Hesus (!), which is still called Hese*
or Heseholt. 4 In the grove two white horses, a young and an
old, were fed for the god, no one was allowed to mount them, and
good or bad auguries were gathered from their neighing and
leaping. Some talk of ten or even twenty horses. A priest of
the god stuck staves in the ground, led the bridled steed along,
and by certain processes made it leap slowly over the staves.
Joh. Aldolfi, i.e. Neocorus, who is cited in support, says nothing
at all about it. The immunity from mounting is another point of
agreement with those Slav horses.



1 Not 'in rheda' (Wedekind's Notes 1, 173). Bhetra, a chief place of Slav
heathenism, placed by Adam of Bremen in the land of the Retharii, where stands
the temple of Bedigost ; Dietmar gives the Lutiz town in the * gran Riedera ' itself
the name of Riedegost.

1 Sviatavit or Svantevit has been confounded with St. Vitus, sanotus Vitus
foonf. Acta sanotor. 15 Jun. p. 1018); but we cannot possibly make the god
Bvantevit originate in Vitus. .

* Falk's Collection of treatises, 5, 103. Tondern, 1828.

4 This He$e-wood may however remind us of the • silya Heiti, He$e ' on the
Buhr in Westph. (LacombL no. 6. 17. 64. 260) and the ' silya caeria' of Tacitus.

VOL. II. Q

Digitized by VjOOQIC



664 TREES AND ANIMALS.

But in the case of the heathen Livonians the Slav custom
admits of proof. The Chronicon livonicum vetus relates ad
an. 1192 (in Gruber p. 7): 'Colligitur populus, voluntas deorum
de immolatione (fratris Theoderici cisterciensis) sorte inquiritur.
Ponitur lancea, calcat equus; pedem vitae deputatum (the right
foot) nutu dei praeponit. Orat frater ore, manu benedicit.
Ariolus deum Christianornm equi dorso insidere et pedem equi
ad praeponendum movere asserit, et ob hoc equi dorsum tergen-
dum, quo dens elabatur. Quo facto, dum equus vitas pedem
praeponit ut prius, frater Theodoricus vitae reservatur/ Here a
heathen and a christian miracle met.

This worship was also an Old Prussian one : ' Prussorum aliqui
equos nigros, quidam albi coloris, propter deos suos non aude-
bant aliqualiter equitare/ Dusburg 3, 5 (see Suppl.). 1

The sacrificing of horses, and the eating of horseflesh inseparable
from it, have been noticed (pp. 47-49). Strabo reports, that the
Veneti offered a white horse to Diomed (v. 1, 9. Siebenk. 2, 111.
Casaub. 215. Kramer 1, 339). The Indians get up grand horse-
sacrifices with imposing ceremonies. What is told of the Kal-
muks appears worthy of notice. Among them you see numbers
of scaffolds erected, bearing horses 9 hides and heads, the remains
of former sacrifices. By the direction of the horse's head to east
or west, you can tell if the sacrifice was offered to a good or
evil spirit. 3 On the one hand it suggests that sacrificial fixing
of horses' heads in a particular direction in Germany, which
under Christianity was treated as wicked sorcery; and on the
other hand the € pira equinis sellis constructa ' in Jornandes, and
the oijfia of the Scythian kings in Herodotus (see HA. 676, and
Suppl.). 8

Of honours paid to oxen I have not so much to tell, though
they are not at all a matter of doubt, if only because bullocks
were sacrificed, and bulls drew the car of the Frankish kings, RA.
262. War-chariots continued to have oxen till late in the Mid.
Ages : ' capto ducis (Lovaniensis) vexillo, dicto gallice standart,

1 Sup. M, 85 shews that Esthonians ascribe prophetic powers to the horse.

' Ledebour's Beige nach dem Altai, Berl. 1830. 2, 54-5.

> A Sansk. name for the horse is SrlbhrAtri, brother of Sri (Lakshmi), because,
like her (and Aphrodite) it rose out of the sea-waves, Pott 2, 407. Still more
natural is the identification of horse and ship.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



oxen. 665

opere plumario a regina Angliae ei misso, quod fastu superbiae
quadriga bourn ferebat/ Chapeaville 2, 69 (an. 1129). A chariot
drawn by four white oxen in Lorraine occurs in Scheffer's Haltaus,
p. 251. In Plutarch's Marius cap. 23 is the well-known story of
the Cimbrians swearing over a brazen bull, by which the Mecklen-
burgers account for the bull's head in their arms (Masco? 1, 13).
At Hvitab»r the people worshipped an ox (Fornald. sog. 1, 253),
at Upsal a cow (1, 254. 260-6. 270-2 ; see Suppl.).

Whilst among horses the stallion is more honoured than the
mare, among neat the cow seems to take the lead. Kine were
yoked to the car of Nerthus [and two milch- kine to the ark of
Jehovah] . The Edda speaks of a cow named Auffumbla, which
plays a great part in the origin of men and gods (p. 559), and was
no doubt regarded as a sacred beast. By the side of that faith
in horses (p. 656) we find an 'fttruna'Sr a ku.' King Eysteinn of
Sweden put faith in a cow called Sibilja : ( hun var sva miok
blotin (so much worshipped), at menn mattu eigi standast lat
hennar * ; they used to lead her into battle, Fornald. sog. 1, 254.
260. King Ogvaldr carried a sacred, cow with him everywhere,
by sea and by land, and constantly drank of her milk (Fornm.
sog. 2, 138. 10, 302). 1

The horns of cows, like the manes of horses, were adorned
with gold: ' gullhyrndar bfr,' Seem. 73 a . 141*; and the herdsman
of the Alps still decks the horns of his cattle with ribbons and
flowers. Oxen for sacrifice are sure not to have lacked this
decoration.

The Sanskrit gavs (bos and vacca), root g6, ace. gam, Pers.
ghau, gho, corresponds to Lett, gohw, OHG. chuo, AS. cu } ON.
Jcyr. What is more important, 'gd* likewise means terra and
plaga (Bopp's Gram. § 123. Gloss, p. 108 b ), so that it touches
the Gr. 7S, 7?}. Taking with this the presence of Au&umbla in
the Norse history of creation, we can perhaps connect rinta (the
earth) and Rindr (p. 251) with our rind armentum ; it is true
this 'rind' originally began with hr (Graff 4, 1171), and is the

1 What can the black cow mean in the following phrases ? * the 6. c. crashes
him ' (HupeTs Livliind. idiot. 131) ; * the b. c. has trodden him ' (Etner's Apoth.
514). The Hor. Belg. 6, 97. 101 (oonf . 228) speaks ' van onser goeden blaren coe, van
miere blaren coe ' ; and Ir. elfenm. cxx. of the blue cow. It is dangerous to kill
the Mack cow, Sup. I, 887. A Slovenio name for the rainbow is maura-blaok cow.
[Eng. * the 6. c. has trodden on his foot/ of sorrow, esp. bereavement.]



Digitized by VjOOQIC



666 TEEES AND ANIMALS.

AS. hrySer, hrofcer, but who can tell whether € rinde * cortex was
not once aspirated too f Evpayjrrj, the name of one quarter of
the earth, must surely also mean earth (eipeia the broad), and on
p. 838 I made a guess that Europa, whom Zeus courted in the
shape of a bull, must herself have been thought of as a cow, like
Io ; it was not the earth took name from her, but she from the
earth. On the worship of cows and oxen by the Indians, Egypt-
ians and Romans, I refer to A.. W. Schlegel's learned treatise. 1
The Israelites also made a burnt-offering of 'a red heifer (Goth.
kalb6) upon which never came yoke/ Numb. 19, 2 (see Suppl.).

The boar and the he-goat were holy sacrificial beasts (p. 50-1-2),
the boar 2 dedicated to Freyr (p. 213), he and she goats to Th6rr
(p. 185), as goats are even yet considered devil's creatures. 8 To
that divine boat's account I think we are also entitled to set
down the old song out of which Notker has preserved a passage
(he whose foreign learning so seldom suffers him to put down
anything he knew of his own country) :

Imo sint fuoze fuodermaze,
imo sint burste ebenhd forste,
unde zene sine zuelif -elnige ;

his bristles are even-high with the forest, and his tusks twelve ells
long. A reason for the veneration of the boar has been found
in the fact that he roots up the ground, and men learnt from him
to plough. The Slavs also seem to have worshipped boars:
'Testatur idem antiquitas, errore delusa vario, si quando his
saeva longae rebellionis asperitas immineat, ut e mari praedicto
(near Biedergost) aper magnus et candido dente e spumis luces-
cente exeat, seque in volutabro delectatum terribili quassatione
multis ostendat/ Ditm. merseb. p. 812 (see Suppl.).

None but domestic animals were fit for sacrifice, and not all of
them, in particular not the dog, though he stands on much the
same footing with his master as the horse ; he is faithful and in-
telligent, yet there is something mean and unclean about him,

1 Ind. bibl. 2, 288—295.

1 He enjoys a doable appellation : OHG. epur, AS. eofor ; and OHG. per, AS.
b&r(Goth. bais?).

» While God (Wnotan) made the wolf (p. 147), the devil (Donar ?) produced the
goat. In some places they will not eat goats* feet (Tobler p. 214).

Digitized by VjOOQIC



BOAR. DOG. BEAR. 667

which makes his name a handle to the tongue of the scorner. It
seems worthy of notice, that dogs can see spirits (Sup. I, 1111),
and recognise an approaching god while he is yet hidden from
the human eye. When Grrtmnir entered the house of GeirrtfSr,
there was 'eingi hundr sv& 61mr, at & hann mundi hlaupa/ the
king bade seize the dark-cloaked giant, 'er eigi vildo hundar
ftr&Sa/ Seam. 89. 40. So when Hel prowls about, the dogs per-
ceive her. The Greeks had exactly the same notion : at Athena's
approach, no one espies her, not even Telemachos, only Odysseus
and the dogs, Od. 16, 160 :

ovB y apa Trfkefiaxo? ISev avriov, ovS' ivori&ev,
ov yap 7r« iravreaai Oeol <f>alvovrac ivapyels,
a\\' *08v<rev$ re /cvve? T€ tSov, zeal ff ov% vXdovro, l
/cvvty)6fia> €T€p(ocr€ Sea araOfiolo (pofiTjOev,

(they did not bark, but fled whining through the tent). — The
howling of dogs is ominous (Sup. I, 493), and gives notice of fire.
Oftinn is provided with dogs, 'ViSris grey/ Seem. 151* ; so are
the norns (p. 410), 'norna grey/ 273*. But whence arose the
story in the early Mid. Ages, of St. Peter and his dog ? In the
AS. Saturn and Solomon (Eemble p. 186), one asks: 'saga me,
hwilc man firost wcere wiff hund sprecende?' and the other
answers : 'ic j>e secge, sanctus Petrus/ The Nialss. cap. 158 p.
275 contains a spell to save from the power of the watersprite :
' runnit hef r hundr Jrinn, Petr 'postoli, till Roms tysvar (twice), ok
mundi (would) renna it J>rr8ja sinn, ef )>A leyfdir' (see Suppl.).

Among wild beasts of the wood were some that men regarded
with awe, and treated with respect : above all, the bear, wolf and
fox. I have shewn that it was an ancient and widespread custom
in Europe to bestow names of honour on these three (Beinh. p.
lv. ccvii. 446) , 2 and that with our ancestors the bear passed for
the king of beasts (p. xlviii. seq. ccxcv.). A doc. of 1290 (Lang's
Beg. 4, 467) presents the surname 'Chuonrat der heiligbar'; with
this connect the name Halecbern (Trad. corb. Wig. § 268), the
ON. Hallbiom, and the still older names, male and female, ON.

1 In a Dan. folksong 1, 207-9 they bark at a spectre. Barking and not bark-
ing are the same thing here.

3 A striking confirmation appears in V. Hugo's Notre Dame de Paris 2, 272 : he
states, from a book or from oral tradition, that the Gipsies call the fox piedbUu,
eoureur dei 6ow, the wolf piedgris, pieddort, and the bear vieux or grandp&re.



Digitized by



Google



668 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

A8bidrn, AS. Osbeorn, OHGL Anspero, and ON. Asbirna, OHG.
An8pirin (in Walth. Ospirn), Ospirinberg, MB. 28. 2, 123 ; ap-
parently the legend of the animal's sacredness was still in fall
swing among the people. Biorn was a side-name of Th6rr, and
Welsh legend presents king Arthur as a bear and a god, which is
not to be accounted for by the mere resemblance of his name to
aptcros : the bear in the sky plays a most dignified part. In the
Edda a by-name of the bear is Vetrli&i, hie mem snstinens (Sn.
179. 222), because he sleeps through winter, and winter was
called biarnar-n6tt ; the name was passed on to men, as € Vetrlidi
skald' in Pornm. sog. 2, 202, and a Vetrlifti 3, 107 whose name
reproduces his father's name Asbiorn} The myth of the white
bear and the wee wight was alluded to, p. 479. It is not to
be overlooked, that certain beast-fables get converted into human
myths, and vice vers& : e.g., the parts of bear and fox are handed
over to a giant or the devil. Thus, the Esthonian tale of the
man who goes partners with the bear in raising turnips and oats
(Reinhart cclxxxviii.) is elsewhere told of a man and the devil.
Such overlapping of the beast-fable with other traditions is an
additional guarantee of the epic nature of the former. — Two
wolves, Oeri and Freki, were sacred to OSinn : whatever food was
set before him, he gave to them to eat, Sn. 4 ; they were, so
to speak, the hounds of the god (ViSris grey). I should like to
know where Hans Sachs picked up that striking notion of the
Lord God having chosen wolves to be His hunting dogs.* A
son of Loki, Fenrisulfr, makes his appearance in wolfs shape
among the gods ; no metamorphosis occurs more frequently in
our antiquities than that of men into were-wolves. — Both wolf
and bear are a favourite cognisance in coats of arms, and a great
many names of men are compounded with them : neither fact is
true of the fox. Hence the dearth of mythical conceptions linked
with the fox ; a few traces have been pointed out in Reinh. ccxcvi., 3

1 The name WeturUt is also found in the Necrolog. angiense (Mone 98 b ).

3 Ed. 1558. i, 499* : * die wolf er im erwelen gund fgan choose), and net sie bei
jViy n fur jagdhnnd.*

* Klaproth finds in Japanese books, that the people in Japan worship the inari
(fox) as a tutelar god : little temples are dedicated to him in many houses, espec.
of the commoner folk. They ask his advice in difficulties, and set rice or beans for
him at night. If any of it is gone in the morning, they believe the fox has con-
sumed it, and draw good omens from it ; the contrary is an unlucky sign (Nouv.
annales des voyages, Dec. 1833, p. 298). They take him to be a kami i.e. the soul
of a good man deceased (ibid.)

Digitized by VjOOQIC



WOLF. FOX. CAT. BIBDS. 669

and the kindermarchen no. 38 has furnished him with nine tails,
as Sleipnir had eight legs, and some heroes and gods four
arms.

FreyjVs car was drawn by two cats (tveim kottum), p. 305.
Now, as fres in ON. means both he-cat and bear, it has lately
been contended, not without reason, that kottum may have been
substituted for fressum, and a brace of bears have been really
meant for the goddess, as Cybele's car was drawn by lions,
p. 254. For Puss-in-boots see pp. 503-9, and the Norweg. tale in
Folkeeventyr no. 29. Cats and weasels pass for knowing beasts
with magical powers, whom one has good reason to indulge, Sup.
I, 292 (see Suppl.).

Birds. — With birds the men of old lived on still more intimate
terms, and their greater nimbleness seemed to bespeak more of
the spiritual than was in quadrupeds. I will here quote some
instances of wild fowl being fed by man. Dietmar of Merseb.
relates of Mahtildis, Otto I.'s mother (Pertz 5, 740) : ' non solum
pauperibus, verum etiam ambus victum subministrabat ; ' and we
find the same in the Vita Mahtild. (Pertz. 6, 294) : f nee etiam
oblita est volucrum aestivo tempore in arboribus resonantium,
praecipiens ministris sub arbores proicere micas panis/ In Nor-
way they used to put out bunches of corn for the sparrows on
Yule-eve : ( Jule-aften at sette trende kornbaand paa stoer under
aaben himmel ved laden og foe-huset till spwrrens fode, at de
naste aar ikke skal giore skade (do no harm next year) paa
ageren/ Hiorthoi Gulbrands dalen, Kb. 1785. 1, 130 ; it was a
sacrifice offered to the birds, to keep them from ravaging the
crops. It reminds one of the legacy to birds on Walther von
der Vogelweide's tombstone, whose very name denotes € pascua
avium/

Gods and goddesses often change themselves into birds , but
giants possess the same power too. The Esthonian god Tarapila
flies from one place to another, p. 77; the Greek imagination
pictured winged gods, the Hebrew winged angels, the Old German
a maiden with swan's wings. The Norse gods and giants put on
an eagle's coat, cvrnar-ham, p. 633n., the goddesses a falcon's coat,
vals~ham, p. 302. Wind is described as a giant and eagle, p.
633, and sacred eagles scream on the mountains : ' orn g&l aria,



Digitized by VjOOQIC



670 TREES AND ANIMALS.

arar gullo/ S®m. 142» 149*. Wolfram thinks of the earth as a
bird, when he says, Wh. 308, 27 :

s6 diu erde ir gevidere rfirt

unde si der meie 16rt

ir mfize alsus volrecken (see Suppl.).

Domestic fowl available for sacrifice, notably the cock and the
goose, have bat few mythic aspects that I know of. Fire is de-
cribed as a red cock (p. 601) : H. Sachs has the phrase c to make
the red cock ride on one's rooftree/ and the Danes ' den rode
hane galer over taget/ the red cock crows on the thack (the
fire crackles). Eed cocks in preference had to be brought in
payment of ground rent (formerly perhaps in sacrifice), RA. 376.
The Voluspa 54 sets before as 'Fialarr, fagur-rauftr hani ' singing
in the forest ; a golden-crested cock awakes the heroes, a dark
one crows in the nether world. In the Danish song 1, 212 there
is meaning in the crowing of a red and a black cock one after the
other; and another song 1, 208 adds a white cock as well. An*
other cock in the Edda, Viftofnir, perches on MimamerSr, Seem.
109* ; with him Finn Magnusen (Lex. myth. 824. 1090) would
connect the cock they stick on the Maypole. The Wends erected
cross-trees, bat, secretly still heathen at heart, they contrived to
fix at the very top of the pole a weathercock, 1 In one fairy-tale,
no. 108, Hansmeinigel's cock sits on a tree in the wood. I do not
know when the gilded cock on the church-steeple was introduced ;
it can hardly have been a mere weather-vane at first. Guibertus
in Vita sua, lib. 1 cap. 22, mentions a gallus super turri, so that
the custom prevailed in France at the beginning of the 12th
century; in S. Germany we know it existed two centarids earlier.
Eckehard tells of the great irruption of Hungarians : ' duo ex illis
accendunt campanarium, cujus cacuminis gallum aureum putantes,
deumqiie loci sic vocatum, non esse nisi carioris metalli materia
fusum, lancea dum unas, ut earn revellat, se validus protendit, in
atrium de alto cecidit et periit ' (Pertz 2, 105). The Hungarians
took this gilded cock (gallus) for the divinity of the place, and
perhaps were confirmed in their error by the bird's name being
the same as that of St. Gallus ; they even left the minster stand -

1 Annalen der Churbr. HannSv. lande, 8 jahrg. p. 284. Some think the cook
referred to Peter's denial.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



COCK. RAVEN. 671

ing for fear of him: 'monasterio, eo quod Gallus, dens ejus,
ignipotens sit, tandem omisso' (ibid. 106). 1 Tit. 407: ' Hz golde
ein or gercetet, gefiuret nnde gefnnkelt ufjeglich kriuze geloetet/
True, the cock is an emblem of vigilance, and the watchman, to
command a wide view, must be highly placed ; 3 bat it is quite
possible that the christian teachers, to humour a heathen custom
of tying cocks to the tops of holy trees, made room for them on
church-towers also, and merely put a more general meaning on
the symbol afterwards (see Suppl.).

At the head of wildfowl the eagle stands as king, and is the
messenger of Jove. In our beast-fables the raven seems to take
upon him the parts both of wolf and of fox, uniting the greed
of the one with the other's cunning. Two ravens, Huginn and
Muninn, are, like the two wolves, constant companions of OSinn
(p. 147) ; their names express power of thought and remembrance :
they bring him tidings of all that happens. 8 Compare the sage
sparrow (sporr) of the Norse king Dag (Tngl. saga 21), who
gathers news for him out of all countries, and whose death he
avenges by an invasion. Those scouts of OSinn seem to be
alluded to in several stories, e.g., Olaf Tryggv. cap. 28, where
screaming ravens testify that OSinn accepts the offering pre-
sented; and in Nialss. 119 two ravens attend a traveller all day.
In like manner St. Gregory is escorted by three flying ravens,
Paul. Diac. 1, 26. In the beautiful myth of king Oswald, the
raven who gets his plumage bound with gold (conf. the falcon,
Ms. 1, 38 b ) acts an essential part : he has nothing of the fiendish
nature afterwards imputed to this bird. It shews the same
tendency, that where the Bible says of the raven sent out of the
ark by Noah, simply that he ifcXffwp ovk avearpe^e (Gen. 8, 7),



1 All rery legendary; for the Hungarian attack on the monastery oi Herzfeld
(Hirutfeld) on the Lippe is related much in the same way in the Vita S. Idae, viz.
that having sealed the nolarius, but not succeeded in wrenching off the bells, they
suddenly fled, aliquid ibi esse divalis nominis Buspicati sunt (Pertz 2, 573). Here
the cock does not come into play, the bells do it all.

9 Monster's Sinnbilder der alten Christen, p. 55. As Gregory the Great explains
gallus by • praedioator • (Opp., Paris 1705. i, 959. 961), and again neculator by the
same ' praedioator,' he may in the following passage have had the cock in view,
without naming him: 'speculator semper in altitudine stat, ut quidquid venturum
sit longe prospiciat,' ibid, i, 1288.

* In a Slovenic fairy-tale somebody had a raven (vrdna) who was all-knowing
(vedezh), and used to tell him everything when he came home. Murko's Sloven,
deutsohes wtb. Gratz 1833. p. 696.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



672 TREES AND ANIMALS.

oar Teutonic poetizers must make him alight on carrion, Ceedm.
87, 11. Diut. 3, 60. King Arthur, whom we lately met as a
bear, is said to have been converted into a raven : ' que anda
hasta ahora convertido en cuervo, y le esperan en su reyno por
momentos,' Don Quixote 1, 49. In folksongs it is commonly a
bird that goes on errands, brings intelligence of what has passed,
and is sent out with messages : the Bohemians say ' to learn it
of the bird 9 (dowedeti se po ptacku, see SuppL).

In our legends, birds converse together on the destinies of
men, and foretell the future. Ravens reveal to the blind the
means of recovering their sight, KM. no. 107. Domestic fowls
discuss the impending ruin of the castle, Dent. sag. 1, 202. In
the Helgaqvifta, Saem. 140-1, a wise bird (fugl froShugaflr) is
introduced talking and prophesying to men, but insists on a
temple and sacrifices before he will tell them more. In one
German story, men get to understand the language of birds by
eating of a white snake, KM. no. 17. SigurSr understands it too,
the moment the heart's blood of the dragon Fafnir has got from
his finger-tips to his tongue : and then swallows (igSor) give him
sound advice, Saem. 190-1. To kill swallows brings misfortune :
ace. to Sup. I, 378 it occasions four weeks' rain ; and their nests
on the houses no one dares knock down. From Saxo's account
(p. 327) of the oaken statue of Rugivit, we may conclude that the
Slavs had let swallows build on it in peace (see Suppl.).

The mythical character of the swan is certified by the legend
of swan-wives (p. 426) and by the bird's own death-song (see
Suppl.). The stork too was held inviolable, he is like swallows
a herald of spring ; his poetic name certainly reaches back to
heathen times, but hitherto has baffled all explanation. OHG.
glosses give odebero, Graff 3, 155, udebero, Sumerl. 12, 16,
otivarOy odebore, Fundgr. 1, 386, odeboro, Gl. Tross; MHG.
adebar only in Diut. 3, 453; MLG. edebere, Bran's Beitr. 47,
adebar, Eeinke, 1777. 2207; M. Neth. odevare, hodevare, Eein.
2316. Clignett 191; New Neth. oyevdr; New LG. eber, ab&r,
atjebar ; AS. and Norse have nothing similar. The ' bero, boro '
is bearer, but the first word, so long as the quantity of its vowel
remains doubtful, is hard to determine; the choice would lie
between luck-bringer (fr. 6t opes) and child-bringer, which last
fits in with the faith, still very prevalent, that the stork brings

Digitized by VjOOQIC



SWALLOW. STOBK. WOODPECKER. 673

babies. If, beside the OS. partic. 6dan, AS. e&den, ON. auBinn
(genitus), we could produce a subst. 6d, e4d (proles), all would be
straight. The prose word, OHQ. storah, AS. store, ON. storkr,
may be just as old. In Frisian superstition there occur meta-
morphoses of storks into men, and of men into storks. A lay
of Wolfram 5, 21 declares that storks never hurt the crops (see
SuppL).

The woodpecker was held sacred by ancient peoples of Italy,
and ranked as the bird of Mars, "Apeo? 6pvv; : perched on a
wooden pillar (iirl /ciovo? ^vkivov) he prophesied to the Sabines
in the grove by Matiena (or Matiera, Dion. hal. 1, 14. Reiske
p. 40) ; he had once guided them on their way, &pp.rpnai. oi
IIik€vtIvoi SpvoKoXdirrov Tt)v 6Bov ^yeaa/jiivov, Strabo v, p. 240.
And he purveyed for Romulus and Remus when the wolfs milk
did not suffice them, Ov. Fasti 8, 37. 54 ; conf . Niebuhr 1, 245.
Ace. to Virg. Aen. 7, 189 and Ov. Met. 14, 321 Picus was the
son of Saturn and father of Faunus, 1 and was changed into the
bird. The apparent relationship of this Picus to our poem of
Beowulf (bee-hunter, i.e. woodpecker), was pointed out p. 369.
In Norway the red-hooded blackpecker is called Gertrude's fowl,
and a story in Asbiornsen and Moe (no. 2) explains its origin :
When our Lord walked upon earth with Peter, they came to a
woman that sat baking, her name was Gertrude, and she wore a
red cap on her head. Faint and hungry from his long journey,
our Lord asked her for a little cake. She took a little dough
and set it on, but it rose so high that it filled the pan. She
thought it too large for an alms, took less dough and began
to bake it, but this grew just as big, and again she refused to
give it. The third time she took still less dough, and when the
cake still swelled to the same size, l Ye must go without ' said
Gertrude, 'all that I bake becomes too big for you/ Then
was the Lord angry, and said: 'Since thou hast grudged to
give me aught, thy doom is that thou be a little bird, seek thy
scanty sustenance twixt wood and bark, and only drink as oft as
it shall rain/ No sooner were these words spoken, than the
woman was changed into Gertrude's fowl, and flew up the kitchen

1 When the Swiss call the black-pecker merzafOlli (March-foal, Staid. 2, 199.
Tobler 316*), the simplest ezplan. is from pious martius ; yet fulli may be for yogeli,
and'so March-fowl or Martin's fowl ; see more in Chap. XXXV., Path-crossing.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



674 TREES AND ANIMALS.

chimney. And to this day we see her in her red cap, and the
rest of her body black, for the soot of the chimney blackened
her ; continually she hacks into the bark of trees for food, and
pipes before rain, because, being always thirsty, she then hopes
to drink. 1 The green-pecker has the alias giessvogel, Austr.
giswogel (Stelzhamer's Lieder pp. 19. 177), goissvogel (Hofer 1,
306), Low G. gutvogel, gietvogel, gutfugel (Bhrentr. 1. 845), Engl.
rainbird, ramfowl, because his cry of ' geuss, giess, giet ' (pour !)
is said to augur a downpour of rain. About him there goes a
notable story : When the Lord God at the creation of the world
ordered the beasts to dig a great well (or pond), this bird
abstained from all work, for fear of soiling his handsome plumage
(or yellow legs). Then God ordained that to all eternity he
should drink out of no well (pond) ; therefore we always see him
sip laboriously out of hollow stones or cart-ruts where rainwater
has collected. But when no rain has fallen and there is drought,
he is sore athirst, and we hear unceasingly his pain-stricken
' giet ! ' And the good Lord takes pity, and pours down rain
(Reusch in Preuss. provinz. bl. 26, 536; from Samland). Pahl-
mann in the Dorpater verhandl. 1, 42 gives an Esthonian myth :
God was having the Em-bach (-beck, -brook, p. 599n.) dug, and
set all the beasts to work ; but the Whitsun-fowl idly flew from
bough to bough, piping his song. Then the Lord asked him :
'hast thou nought to do but to spruce thyself f ' The bird
replied, ' the work is dirty, I can't afford to spoil my golden-
yellow coat and silvery hose.' 'Thou foolish fop/ the Lord
exclaimed, 'from henceforth thou shalt wear black hose, and
never slake thy thirst at the brook, but pick the raindrops off the
leaves, and only then strike up thy song when other creatures

creep away from the coming storm/ Now that Norwegian

Oertrude's fowl, whose thirsty piping brings on rain, is evidently
identical, and very likely another story explains the rainbird as
the metamorphosis of a vain idle person. Sometimes it is not
the woodpecker at all that is meant by giessvogel, giesser, wasser^
vogel, pfingstvogel, regmpfeifer, but a snipe (Hofer 1, 306. 341),
whose cry likewise forebodes a storm (p. 184), or the curlew
(numenius arquata), Fr. pluvier (pluviarius), Boh. koliha, PoL

1 Kytohkcw's Journ. thro' the Boas. Emp., trsl. by Hase, Riga 1774. p. 124.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



WOODPECKER. MAGPIE. SPARROWHAWK. CTJCKOO. 675

kulig, kullik, LG. regenwolp, waterwolp (Brem. wtb. 5, 286). In
our own beast-fables the woodpecker is left without any part
to play, only in an altogether isolated episode he is introduced
conversing with the wolf (Reinh. 419). The Votiaks pay divine
honours to the tree-tapping woodpecker, to induce him to spare
their woods. 1 The cry of this woodpecker (zhunia) the Servians
call klikchi, kliknuti, kliktati, as they do that of the vila [p. 436,
but there wrongly ascribed to the tapping noise]. Wood-
peckers by their tapping shew the way to the river (Lay of Ig(5r
79) ; the old legend of the woodpecker and springwurzel will be

examined in Chap. XXXII (see Suppl.) . A near neighbour of

the pecker (picus) is the pie, magpie (pica). In ON. her name is
skaffi (masc., says Biorn), Swed. skata, Dan. shade, which may
be referred to the abstract notion of damnum, OHG. scado ; at
the beginning of the Volsunga saga there occurs a man's name
Skadi, which Finn Magn. (Lex. 699) declares to be the goddess
Skadi. In Flemish beast-legend the magpie was ' ver Ave/ frau
Ave. In Poitou there still lingers a trace of pie-worship ; viz.
a bunch of heath and laurel is tied to the top of a high tree in
honour of the magpie, because her chatter warns the people of the
wolfs approach : ' porter la crfipe (pancake) k la pie/ M6m. des
antiq. 8, 451.

In Old Bohemian songs the sparrowhawk (krahui, krahug) is a
sacred bird, and is harboured in a grove of the gods (Koniginh.
MS. 72. 80. 160). On the boughs of an oak that springs out of
a murdered man's grave, holy sparrowhawks perch, and publish
the foul deed (see Suppl.).

There is no bird to which the gift of prophecy is more univer-
sally conceded than the cuckoo? whose clear and measured voice
rings in the young foliage of the grove. The Old German law
designates spring by the set phrase ' wann der gauch guket ' (BA.
86), as in Hesiod's rules of husbandry the cuckoo's song marks
the growing rains of spring. Two old poems describe the quarrel
of Spring and Winter about the cuckoo, and the shepherds'
lamentation for him: Spring praises the bird, 'tarda hiems'

1 Carniol. iima, Pol. Boh. ztawa, Boh. also wlha, wolga.

' Goth, g&uks t OHG. gouh (Hoffm. 5, 6), AS. geac, ON. gaukr ; MHG. goneh,
MS. 2, 182*, also reduplicated (like cuculus) gucgouch, MS. 1, 132*, guggouch, MS.
1, 166* ; oar gukuk, kakak, Up.G. guggauch, gutzgonoh.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



676 TREES AND ANIMALS.

chides him, shepherds declare tliat he is drowned or kidnapped.
There is a remarkable line :

Tempus adest veris ; cnculus, modo rumpe soporem. 1

His notes usher in the sweetest season of the year, bat his telling
men their fortunes is not alluded to. The Cod. Exon. 146, 27
also makes him publish or ' bid * the year : ' gedcas gear budon/
cuculi annum nuntiavere. But the superstition is not yet extinct,
that the first time you hear the cuckoo in the spring, you can
learn of him how many years you have yet to live (Sap. I, 197.
K, Swed. 119. Dan. 128. 146). In Switzerland the children
call out : ' gugger, wie lang leb i no ? ' and in Lower Saxony :

kukuk vam haven,

wo lange sail ik leven ?

then you must listen, and count how many times the bird repeats
his own name after your question, and that is the number of
years left you to live (Schiitze's Hoist, idiot. 2, 363). In some
districts a the rhyme runs :

kukuk beckenknecht,

sag mir recht,

wie viel jar ich leben soil ? 8

The story is, that the bird was a baker's (or miller's) man, and
that is why he wears a dingy meal-sprinkled coat. In a dear
season he robbed the poor of their flour, and when God was
blessing the dough in the oven, he would take it out, and pull
lumps out of it, crying every time r guk-guk,' look-look ; there-
fore the Lord punished him by changing him into a bird of prey,



1 Both eologues in Dornavii Amphith. 456-7, where they are attrib. to Beda ;
ditto in Leyser p. 207, who says they were first printed in the Frankf . ed. (1610) of
Ovid's Amatoria, p. 190. Meanwhile Oudin (De script, eocles. 2, 827-8, ed. Lips.
1722) gives the Oonfliotus veris et hiemis under the name of * Milo, sancti Amandi
elnonensis monachus ' (first half of 9th century) ; and the second poem Be morte
cuculi stands in Mabillon's Anal. 1, 369 as 'Alcuini versus de onoulo.' Anyhow they
fall into the 8th or 9th century ; in shortening the penultima of • ouculus • they
agree with Beinardus 8, 528. Hoffm, Horae belg. 6, 236 has also revived the
Conflictus.

3 Aegid. Albertini narrenhatz, Augsb. 1617. p. 95 : * Even as befel that old wife,
which asked a guguck how many year she had yet to live, and the guguck beginning
five times to sing, she supposed that she had five year more to live, etc.' From
* Schimpf und ernst ' o. 891.

8 So in Mod. Greek : kovko fu>v t kovk&ki /j.ov, ki dpyvpoKovtcdici /mv, xdcovs x/>>ovs
0i *d tfata ;



Digitized by VjOOQIC



cuckoo. 677

which incessantly repeats that cry (conf. Praetorius's Weltbeschr.
1, 656. 2, 491). No doubt the story, which seems very ancient,
and resembles that of the woodpecker (p. 673), was once told
very differently; conf. Chap. XXII., Pleiades. That 'dear
season ' may have to do with the belief that when the cuckoo's
call continues to be heard after Midsummer, it betokens dearth
(Sup. I, 228).

In Sweden he tells maidens how many years they will remain
unmarried :

gok, gok, sitt pS, quist (on bough),

sag mig vist (tell me true),

hur m&nga ar (how many years)

jag o-gift g&r (I shall un-given go) ?

If he calls more than ten times, they declare he has got ' pa galen
quist ' (on the silly bough, i.e. bewitched), and give no heed to
his prophecies. And then a good deal depends on the quarter
whence you hear your cnckoo first. You must pay strict atten-
tion in spring; if you hear him from the north (the unlucky
quarter), you will see sorrow that year, from east or west his
call betokens luck, and from the south he is the proclaimer of
butter : ' ostergok ar trostegok, vestergok ar bastagok, norrgok or
sorggok, sorgok ar smorgok. 1

In Goethe's Oracle of Spring the prophetic bird informs a
loving pair of their approaching marriage and the number of
their children.

It is rather surprising that our song- writers of the 13th cen-
tury never bring in the cuckoo as a soothsayer; no doubt the
fact or fancy was familiar to all, for even in the Renner 11340 we
read:

daz weiz der gouch, der im fur w&r

h&t gegutzet hundert jar.

Gaesarius heisterbac. 5, 17: 'Narravit nobis anno praeterito
(? 1221) Theobaldus abbas eberbacensis, quod quidam con versus,
cum nescio quo tenderet, et avem, quae cuculvw dicitur a voce
nomen habens, crebrius cantantem audiret, vices interruptions
numeravit, et viginti duas inveniens, easque* quasi pro omine

1 Arodt's Reise durch Schw. 4, 6 — 7. The snipe is in 8 wed. hwsgj'dk, ON.
hrossagaukr (horse-cuckoo), and she too has the gift of divination, p. 184.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



678 TREES AND ANIMALS.

accipiens, pro annis totideni vices easdem sibi computavit : € eia '
inquit, 'certe viginti duobus annis adhuc vivam, at quid tanto
tempore mortificem me in ordine ? redibo ad seculum, et secolo
deditas viginti annis f ruar deliciis ejus ; duobus annis qui super-
sunt poBnitebo.' — In the Couronnemens Renart, the fox hears the
bird's voice, and propounds to him the query :

A cest mot Renart le cucu

ententy si jeta un faus ris,

' jou te conjur ' fait il, € de oris,
215 cucus, que me dies le voir (truth),

quans ansjai a vivre ? savoir

le veil/ Cucu, en preu cucu, 1

et deus cucu, et trois cucu,

quatre cucu, et cine cucu,
220 et sis cucu, et set cucu,

et uit cucu, et nuef cucu,

et dis cucu, onze cucu,

duze cucu, treize cucu.

Atant se taist, que plus ne fu
225 li oisiaus illuec, ains s'envolle.

Renart carries the joyful news to his wife, that the bird has
promised him yet 'treize ans d'a6 ' (see Suppl.).

Is it the cuckoo that is meant by ' timebird ' in Ms. 1, 88* : ' diu
vroide vlogzet (joy flies) gellch dem zitvogel in dem neste'?
What makes me think so is a passage in Pliny, which anyhow is
pertinent here, exhorting the husbandman at the aequinoctium
vernumto fetch up all arrears of work : l dum sciat inde natam
exprobrationem foedam putantium vites per imitationem cantus
otitis temporarii, quern cuculum vocant. Dedecus enim habetur
opprobriumque meritum, falcem ab ilia volucre deprehendi, ut ob
id petulantiae sales etiam cum primo vere ludantur.'

Delight at the first song of the cuckoo is thus expressed in a
Swiss couplet (Tobler 245 b ) :

wenn der gugger chond gegugga ond 's merzofoli lacht,
denn wott i gad goh lo, 'swit i koh mocht;

i A line seems wanting here, to tell us that Cuckoo, like a sensible ouokoo (en
preu oucu, fogl frO^huga^r), • began to sing, One enoo.'



Digitized by



Google



cuckoo. 679

they imagine that he never sings before the 3rd of April, and
never after Midsummer :

am dretta Abarella

moss der gugger griiena haber schnella ;

bat he cannot sing till he has eaten a bird's egg. If yon have
money in your pouch when you hear him sing the first time, you
will be well off all that year, if not, you will be short the whole
year (Sup. I, 374) ; and if you were fasting, you will be hungry
all the year. When the cuckoo has eaten his fill of cherries three
times, he leaves off singing. As the cuckoo's song falls silent at
Midsummer, vulgar opinion holds that from that time he turns
into a hawk. Reusch, N. pr. prov. bl. 5, 338-9.

The Poles call the bird zezula, the Bohemians 'ezhule (both
fern.). The 0. Pol. chronicle of Prokosz, 1 p. 113 of the Lat. ed.,
has a remarkable account of the worship of a Slavic god Zyvie :
'divinitati Zywie fanum exstructum erat in monte ab ejusdem
nomine Zywiec dicto, ubi primis diebus mensis Maji innumerus
populus pie conveniens precabatur ab ea, quae vitae * auctor habe-
batur, longam et prosperam valetudinem. Praecipue tamen ei
litabatur ab iis qui primum cantum cuculi audivissent, ominantes
superstitiose tot annos se victuros quoties vocem repetiisset. Opin-
abantux enim supremum hunc universi moderatorem transfigurari
in cuculum nt ipsis annuntiaret vitae tempora: undo crimini
ducebatur, capitalique poena a magistratibus afficiebatur, qui
cuculum occidisset/ Here the oracular bird is a god in meta-
morphosis, just as that Saxon rhyme called him 'kukuk vam
haven.'

To the Servian haiduks it betokens evil when the kukamtsa
comes too soon, and cries out of the black (leafless) forest ; and
good luck when it sings from the green wood, Vuk sub v.

In the Eddie Grotta-song the quern-maids are only allowed to
rest and sleep while the cuckoo is silent (enn gaukrinn J>ag3i).

The cuckoo can prophesy both good and ill ; in dealing with
him (as with other birds of enchantment, owls, magpies) you

1 Kronika polska przez Prodosza, Warsz. 1825, and in Latin ' Chronioon
SlaTOsarmaticum Prooosii,' Varsav. 1827 ; professedly of the 10th cent. It is not
so old as that, yet Dobrowsky (Wien. jahrb. 32, 77 — 80) goes too far in pronouncing
it a pure fabrication ; it is at any rate founded on old traditions.

' zywy> alive ; iywic, to sustain life, nourish.



II. B

Digitized by



Google



680 TBEES AND ANIMALS.

have to weigh your words and questions, so as not to get en-
snared (Arndt's Sweden 3,.] 8). To kill him without cause is
dangerous, his followers might avenge it. He has power to teaze
men, to delude them, what Swedish superstition calls d&ra, and
Danish gante. A MHG. poem (Fragm. 38 b ) has : 'peterlin und
louch h&t begucket mit der goueh.' Often his appearing is of evil
omen. Paulus Diac. 6, 55 says of Hildeprand king of the Lom-
bards : ' cui dum contum, sicut moris est, traderent, in ejus conti
summitate cuculus avis volitando veniens insedit. Tunc aliquibus
prudentibus hoc portento visum est significari, ejus principatum
inutilem fore ' (see Suppl.) .

As that all-nourishing life-divinity of the Slavs took the shape
of the cuckoo, so does the Grecian Zeus transform himself into
the bird, when he first approaches Hera. A seated figure of the
goddess shews a cuckoo on her staff, and a bas-relief representing
the wedding procession of Zeus and Hera has a cuckoo perched on
Zeus's sceptre (as on that of the Lombard king) -, l so that this
bird has got mixed up with the most sacred of all weddings,
and we understand why he promises marriage and the fruit of
wedlock. Then, the mountain on which Zeus and Hera came
together, previously called &p6va% (from 0p6vos, seat of the
Thunderer? supra p. 183) or Bopva!*, received after that the
name of 8po$ /cotctcvyiov (Pausanias ii. 36, 2). Well, and we have
gowk's-hills in Germany : a Oauchsberg near Kreuznach (Widder's
Pfalz 4, 36), others near Durlach and Weinsberg (Mone's Anz. 6,
850), a Chiggisberg in Switzerland (Joh. Miiller, 1, 347. 2, 82.
Tschachtlan p. 2), Qockerliberg (KM. no. 95); the name might
be accounted for very naturally by the song of the bird being
heard from the hill, but that other traditions also are mixed up
with it. In Preidank 82, 8 (and almost the same in Bonerius 65,
55):

wisiu wort unt tumbiu were
diu habent die von Qoucliesberc.

Here the men of Gauchsberg are shown up as talking wisely and
acting foolishly ; Gauchsberg is equivalent to Narrenberg (fooFs

1 Welcker on Schwenk 269. 270 ; usually an eagle sits there. The figures of
eagle and cuckoo are not always easy to distinguish ; hut to this day the Bavarians
by way of jest call the Prussian eagle ' gukezer,' Schm. 2, 27.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



cuckoo. 681

mount). 1 As far back as the 10th cent, gouh has the side-mean-
ing of fool (N. ps. 48, 11. 93, 8. urheizkouh, war-fool, N. Bth.
175); the same everywhere in the 18th (Walth. 22, 31. Trist.
8631. 18215), though commonly with a qualifying adj. or gen.
pi. : ich tumber gouch, MS. 1, 65*. tumber denn ein gouch, Troj.
8126. tumber gouch, Barl. 319, 25. gouch unwise 228, 32. sin-
neloser gouch, 319, 38. der treit gouches houbet (wears a gowk's
head), MsH. 3, 468*. rehter witze ein gouch, MS. 2, 124 b . der
maere ein goichelin (dim.), and gouchgouolt (augm.), Ben. 209.
The ON. gaukr is likewise arrogans mono. Hans Sachs occa-
sionally uses Oauchberg 2 in the same sense, ii. 4, 110 d (Kempten
ii. 4, 220*), extr. from Goz 1, 52. Yet originally in Gauchsberg
the bird himself may very well have been meant in a mystic sense
which has fallen dark to us now (see Suppl.). 8

In other ways too the cuckoo stands in ill repute, he passes
for an adulterer, who lays his eggs in other people's nests ; hence
the Romans used cuculus in the sense of moechus (Plauti Asinaria,
twice in last scene), and our gouch, gouchelin formerly meant
bastard (Nib. 810, 1. Aw. 1, 46), as the Swiss gugsch still
means an unbidden rival suitor. He even comes out as a fiendish
being, or the fiend himself, in phrases everywhere known from of
old : ' cuckoo knows, cuckoo take him, cuckoo sent him here '
and the like, in all of which the devil's name might be substi-
tuted without change of meaning. This seems to me to point
to old heathen traditions, to which the diabolic tinge was added
only by degrees; and among these I reckon the Low Saxon
formula r the cuckoo and his clerk (or sexton) ' ! by which clerk is
meant the hoopoo (Brem. wtb. 2, 858), a bird that is likewise
thought to have received his form by metamorphosis. I cannot
trace the story of the cuckoo and hoopoo any further ; does the

1 Hence we find, as substitutes for it, Affenberc (Docen's Misc. 2, 187) ; Affen-
berc and Narrental, MsH. 8, 200 b ; Affental, ibid. 213*. Winsbeke 46, 7. Benner
16469 ; Apenberg and Narrenberg in the Plattd. • Narragonia • 77 b . 137 b ; EseUberc,
Dint. 2, 77. Animals whose stupidity was proverbial of old, are the ox, ass, ape,
goat, goose, gowk and jay : vi5 dsvinna apa, Stem. 25 b . atrunnr apa 56». Notk. ps.
67, 11 has ruoh (stultus), i.e. hruoh, AS. hrbc (graculus, Gramm. 3, 361).

' Much oftener Sehalksberg (rogue's hill) in the phrase • in den schalksperg
hawen (hew) ' L 6, 624». iii. 8, 28*. 64 b . iv. 8, 20*. 3K 40* ; the reason of which I
do not know. * Sehalksberg wine grows in Franconia.' * Henricus dictus de Scalket-
bergh,' Spilker 2, 148 (an. 1268).

* Those who crave other explanations, will find plenty in Mone's Anz. 6, 360
seq. 'Gouchsberg is Caucasus, as Elberioh is the spirit of Elburj, diabolus the
Persic div,' and so forth.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



682 TREES AND ANIMALS.

one sing to the other? [his note 'ooboo' is like an echo of
. 'cuckoo']. Dobel i. 1, 68 calls the hoopoo the cuckoo's lackey,
because he comes with him in spring and goes with him in
autumn (see Suppl.) . The peewit has the same things said of
him.

The froth on willows, caused by the cicada spumaria, we call
faikuks-speichel, Swiss gvggerspeu, Engl, cuckoo-spit, -spittle, Dan.
gibgespyt, but in some places witch's spittle, Norweg. trold-
kiaringspye r 1 another proof of the bird's connexion with preter-
natural things, and reminding us of the bird-spittle (fugls hr&ki)
which in Sn. 84 goes to make up the band Gleipnir. Several
names of plants assure us of his mythic nature. Sorrel : OHG.
gouchesampfera, Swiss guggersauer, AS. gedcessure, Dan. gioge-
mad, giogesyre, it being supposed that he loved to eat it ; our
kukuksbrot, gauchlaueh, Fr. pain de coucou, panis cuculi. Cuckoo-
flower : kukiiksblume, gauchblume, flos cuculi. Pimpernel : gauch-
heil, etc., guekgauchdorn, Fischart's Geschichtskl. 269*.

The Slavs all make this bird feminine, and see nothing bad,
nothing fiendish in it : zezhulice sits on the oak, and bewails the
passing away of .spring, Koniginh. MS. 174. The Servian kuka-
vitsa was once a maiden, who wept her brother's death till she
was changed into the bird ; ' sinia (gray) kukavitsa/ Vuk 3, 66 ;
three women turned into kukavitsas, Vuk 1, no. 821. In songs
of Lit. Russia still a moping melancholy bird ; and in Russian
folktales we have again a young girl changed into a cuckoo by an
enchantress (Gotze's Serb, lieder, p. 212).

Of small birds, the swallow has been mentioned, p. 672.
' Fran nachtigall ' is often named by our minnesingers ; but the
myth, that her children are born dead and she sings them alive,
seems not of German origin. The lark and galander (crested
lark) must have been actors in the animal legend oftener than we
are now aware of; there are still beautiful stories of the zaunkonig
(hedgeking, wren), AS. wrenna. But I have yet to speak of two
little birds, which appear to have been peculiarly sacred in olden
times : redbreast and titmouse.

Robin redbreast is on no account to have his nest disturbed, or
the house will be struck with lightning : it is the redstart's nest

1 Summer-freckles in Bavar. gugker-scheglten, cuckoo-spots, Schm. 2, 27 ; oonf.
Hofer 1, 337.

Digitized by VjOOQIC *



REDBBEAST. TITMOUSE. 683

that draws down the flash. The latter the Swiss call husrotheli
(house-red] ing) ; if you tease him or take him out, your cows
will give red milk (Tobler 281). Were these birds sacred to
Donar the red-bearded ? And has that to do with the colour of
their throat and tail ? They say the redbreast drops leaves and
flowers on the face of a murdered man [or 'babe'] whom he
finds in the wood; did he do this in the service of a god, who
therefore would not suffer him to be molested f

The tiny titmouse, 1 whom he called gossip, was able to outwit
even Reynard himself. The weisthumer tell us in what estima-
tion this little forest bird was held, by setting the severest penal-
ties on his capture : ' item, si quis sibilando vel alio modo volu-
crem ilium ceperit, qui vulgo meise nuncupatur, banni reus erit/
Jura archiep. trever., in Lacombl. arch. 326, 'si quis auceps
hanc silvam intraverit, pro nullo genere volucrum componet, nisi
capiat meisam que dicitur banmeisa, et pro ilia componat 60 sol.
tanquam pro cervo/ ibid. 867. ' wer da fehet ein bermeisen, der
sal geben ein koppechte hennen und zwelf hunkeln, und sechzig
schilling pfenning und einen helbeling/ Dreieicher wildbann
(Weisth. 1, 499). 'wer eine kolmeise fienge mit limen ader mit
slagegarn, der sal unserme berrn geben eine falbe henne mit sie-
ben hiinkeln/ Rheingauer w. 1, 535. l wer ein sterzmeise fahet,
der ist umb leib u. guet, und in unsers herrn ungnad/ Creuz-
nacher w. 2, 153. — The reason of these laws is hidden from us;
plainly the bird was held sacred and inviolable. And it is per-
fectly in tune with this, that at the present moment the Lettons,
who call the bird sihle, 2 regard it as prophetic and auspicious,
and even call a soothsayer sihlneeks? Also the Spanish name for
the titmouse, rid (lord), or rid paxaro (lord sparrow), is worth
considering. Titmouse, wren and woodpecker (bee-wolf) are
confounded in popular belief; what is meant is .the tiniest
prettiest bird (see Suppl.).



1 Meise, OHG. meiaft, AS. mase, Nethl. mdze, Fr. mesange, O.Fr. mesenge.

9 Lith. iyle, £yl61e ; Pol. sikora, Boh. sykora, Buss, zfnika, sinitsa, Slov.
eenitsa, Serv. sienitsa. The Lettic name may be derivable from sinnaht, the Lith.
from iynoti (scire) T so that the full form would be sinnele, iynle, the sage knowing
bird ? The jay also is in Lettic sihls. To the Swed. Lapps taitne signifies not
only wood-pecker, but superstitious divination ; tayetet is to understand. In view
of that, our specht (woodpecker) seems to belong to a lost root spihan, spah, spahun,
whence also spehdn (explorare), and spahi (sapiens, prudens).

• Mag. der lett. lit. gesellsoh., Mitau 1888. 6, 151.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



684 TEEES AND ANIMALS.

Ebptiles. — Snakes, by the beauty of their shape and the terror
of their bite, seem above all animals to command awe and rever-
ence. A great many stories tell of an exchange of form between
men and snakes : an almost infallible sign of their having been
worshipped. Beings that had passed out of human into animal
shapes, and were able to return into the former at need, these
heathenism was inclined to regard as sacred ; it worshipped kind
beneficent snakes, whilst in christian opinion the notion of snakes
being malignant and diabolic predominates.

The same Vita Barbati, which we had to thank for information
on the tree-cultus of the Lombards (p. 649), tells us likewise of
a worship of snakes : ' His vero diebus, quamvis sacra baptis-
matis unda Langobardi abluerentur, tamen priscum gentilitatis
ritum tenentes, sive bestiali mente degebant, bestiae simulaehro,
quae vulgo vipera nominatur, flectebant colla, quae debite suo de-
bebant flectere Creatori. . . . Praeterea Bomuald ej usque
sodales, prisco coecati errore, palam se solum Deum colere fate-
bantur, et in abditis viperae simulachrum ad suam perniciem
adorabant* During the king's absence, Barbatus beseeches his
consort Theodorada to procure for him that image of the snake.
' Illaque respondit : Si hoc perpetravero, pater, veraciter scio me
morituram/ He perseveres and at last persuades her ; as soon
as the image is in his hands, he melts it down, and delivers the
metal to goldsmiths to make out of it a plate and a chalice. 1
Out of these golden vessels the christian sacrament is adminis-
tered to the king on his return, and then Barbatus confesses that
the holy utensils were made by melting down the idol. ' Bepente
unus ex circumstantibus ait : Si mea uxor talia perpetrasset, nullo
interposito momento abscinderem caput ejus/ A passage in the
other Vita also is pertinent here: 'Quinetiam viperam auri
metallo formatam summi pro magnitudine del supplici devotione
venerari videbantur. TJnde usque hodie, sicut pro voto arboris
Votum, ita et locus ille Census, devotiones 2 ubi viperae redde-
bantur dignoscitur appellari.' About ' votum ' I expressed my
mind, p. 650n. ; ' census ' signifies the Goth, gild, gilstr, OHG.
keU, kehtar (p. 38-9 and RA. 358) . The two words votum and

1 As the gold of the swan-rings was made into pots, and what remained oyer
was the goldsmith's profit.

8 Printed text : locus ille census devotionis, ubi viperae reddebantur.



Digitized by



Google



SNAKE. 685

census are no slight testimony to the genuineness and oldness of

the biography. Here then we have a striking instance of an

idol made of gold, and moreover of the christian teacher's en-
deavour to preserve the sacred material, only converting it into a
christian form. What higher being the snake represented to the
Lombards, we can scarcely say for certain ; not the all-encircling
world- snake, the mrSgarSs-ormr, iormungandr of Norse myth-
ology* for there is not a hint that even in the North, let alone
elsewhere, he was visibly represented and worshipped. Ofnir
and Svdfnir are ON. names of snakes, and side-names of OSinn
(conf. p. 144) ; is it Wuotan that we are to understand by the
' summus deus ' of the Lombards ? l But the special character-
istics of their snake-worship are entirely lost to us. If the term
vipera was deliberately chosen, as I have no doubt it was, it can
only mean one of the smaller kinds of snake (coluber berus),
OHG. natara, AS. ncedre, ON. nadra (also masc. na$r, like Goth,
nadrs), though the simulacrum, of whose gold a plate and chalice
could be made, bespeaks a considerable size.

Lombard legend has more to tell us of snakes, and those
expressly small ones. The Heldenbuch describes the combat of
a small fire-spitting beast on the Gartensee (L. di Garda) with
Wolfdietrich and a lion, to both of whom it gives enough to do :

Nun hdrent durch ein wonder, wie das tierlein isi genant :
es heisst zu welsch ein t under, £U tentsch ein saribant,
in Sittenland naoh eren ist es ein vipper genant ;

and it is added, that there are but two such vipers alive at once,
for the young ones soon after birth eat up their parents. This
agrees closely with the statements in the Physiologus (Diut. 3,
29, 30. Hoffm. fundgr. 28). I cannot explain zunder from any
Italian dialect ; saribant is the MHG. serpant, Trist. 8994. Sit-
tenland I take to be the canton Valais, from its capital Sitten
(Sion) ; there the Romance vipera might easily remain in use
(Grisons vipra, vivra). In the Jura a never- dying winged snake
with a diamond eye is called vouivre, M6m. des antiq. 6, 217. In
Switzerland this snake in called stollenwurm (Wyss's Reise ins
Berner Oberland, p. 422), and in Salzburg birgstutze, Schm. 1,
196 (see Suppl.).

1 ' Snmmi pro magn. Dei' may possibly mean 'instead of (worshipping) the
majesty of the Most High/— Tbans.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



686 TREES AND ANIMALS.

Plenty of old tales are still told of home-snakes and unices. 1
On meadows and pastures, and even in houses, snakes come to
children when alone, sip milk with them ont of their bowl, wear
golden crowns, which in drinking they take off from their heads
and set on the ground, and often forget and leave them ; they
watch infants in the cradle, and to bigger children they shew
treasures : to hill them is unlucky. Every village has its own
suakes to tell of. So goes the story in Swabia. Some Hessian
stories are collected under Kinderm. no. 105, and one from
Austria in Ziska's Volksmarchen (Vienna 1822, p. 51) ; nearly all
bring in the milk-drinking s and the golden crown. If the parents
surprise the snake with the child, and kill it, the child begins to
fall away, and dies before long (Temme's Pomm. sagen no. 257).
Once, when a woman lay asleep, a snake crept into her open
mouth, and when she gave birth to a child, the snake lay tightly
coiled round its neck, and could only be got away by a milk*
bath ; but it never left the baby's side, it lay in bed with it, and
ate out of its bowl, without doing it any harm (Hone's Ana. 8,
530). Then other accounts speak of a multitude of snakes filling
house and yard, whose king was distinguished by a glittering
crown on his head. When he left the yard, all the rest would
accompany him * in the stable where he lived, they swarmed so
plentifully, that the maids feeding the cattle would take them
out of the crib by armfuls. They were friendly to the cattle
and the people ; but a new farmer shot their king, and they all
departed, and with them vanished wealth and prosperity from
the estate (ibid. 6, 174). 8 Here also comes in the queen of snakes
(Deut. sagen no. 220), and a remarkable story in the Gesta Bo*
manorum (Keller p. 152). To a dairymaid at Immeneich there
came a great snake into the cowshed every morning and evening
at milkiug-time, and wore a great crown on its head. The girl



1 MHG. tmfc, gen. unkes, MS. 2, 209 b . 206*: ' from copper one iivideth gold
with an mike's ashes'; hence an alohymist was called unhcn-bretmer (Felix
Malleolus de nobilitate et rustieitate, cap. 80). By unke is properly meant the
rana portentosa (bull- frog ?), but often snake or reptile in general. Like the
weasel, it is called caressingly * viilwitUiu, wUUwulI, 1 aunty. Sohm. 2, 576.

8 Down to the reourring formula : • ding, iss auoh brooken 1* (thing, eat crumbs
too) ; * fries auch mocken, nicht lauter schlappes I ' (not only slops) Mone's Anz.
8, 680 ; * friss auoh brocken, nicht lauter bruhe ! ' ibid. 6, 175.

* A similar story of the king of snakes from Lubbenau in the Spreewald of
Lausitz (Busching's Woch. nachr. 8, 842) in Beusoh no. 74.



Digitized by



Google



SNAKE. 687

everytime gave it warm cow's milk to sup. She suddenly left the
place in a tiff, and when the new maid went for the first time to
milk, there lay the golden crown on the milking-stool, with the
inscription : ' a token of gratitude/ She brought the crown to
her master, who gave it to the girl it was intended for ; but from
that time the snake was never seen again (Mone^ Anz. 8, 537) .
The adder's crown (atternkronlein) makes any one that wears it
invisible (Schm. 2, 388) and immensely rich as well. In some
districts they say every house has two snakes, a male and a
female, but they never shew themselves till the master or mistress
of the house dies, and then they undergo the same fate. This
feature, and some others, such as the offering of milk, bring the
home-snakes near to the notion of good helpful home-sprites (see
Suppl.).

The snake then comes before us as a beneficent inviolable
creature, perfectly adapted for heathen worship. A serpent
twined round the staff of Asklepios, and serpents lay beside
healing fountains (p. 588n.). The ancient Prussians maintained a
large snake for their Potrimpos, and the priests guarded it with
care ; it lay under ears of corn, and was nourished with milk. 1
The Lettons call snakes milk-mothers (peena mahtes) ; they were
under the protection of one of the higher goddesses named
Brehkina (crier), who cried out to all that entered to leave her
' peena mahtes ' unmolested in the house (Mag. der lett. gesellsch.
6, 144). There is milk set for them in pots. The Lithuanians
also revered snakes, harboured them in their houses, and offered
them sacrifices. 9 Egyptian snake-worship was witnessed by
Herodotus 2, 74. 'Nullus locus sine genio, qui per cmguem
plerumque ostenditur, 1 Serv. ad Aen. 5, 95.

Snakes were devised as a charm in swords and on helmets
(Ssem. 142 b ) :

liggr me*8 eggjo ovmr dreyf&Sr,
enn & valbosto verpr naffr hala.

The ormr or yrmllngr was supposed to run from the sword*s hilt



1 Voigt's Geschiohte Prenssens 1, 684.

* Seb. Frank's Weltbuch 65\ Mone's Heidenth. 1, 98. Adam. brem. de situ
Daniae, cap. 24, of the Lithuanians : * dracone$ adorant cam volucribus, quibus
etiam vivos litant homines, quos a mereataribuB emunt, diligenter oxnnino pxobatos
ne maoolam in oorpore habeant.'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



688 TREES AND ANIMALS.

(helz, hialt) to the point and back again (Kormakss. p. 82-4.
Vilk. s. p. 101). Vitege had the epithet 'mit dem slangen 9 be-
cause of his helmet's crest (Heldensage p. 148). They imparted
strength to a helmet, and force to the blade of a sword. It
seems much the same thing, when waggoners plait adders-
tongues into their whips, Sup. I, 174 (see Suppl.).

The snake crawls or wriggles along the ground; when
provided with wings, it is called dracke, a non-German word
coming from the Lat, draco, Gr. Spdtcow, and introduced very
early, OHG. traccho, AS. dram> ON. dreki. The Elder (or
Sremund's) Edda has dreki only once, in the latish Solarl. 127 b ;
elsewhere it is ormr, AS. wyrm, OHG. wurm, Goth, vaurms, which
in a wider sense includes the snake also. The one encountered
by Beowulf comes before us emphatically as a winged snake
(serpens alatus) ; i nihtes fleoge*S ' 4541, by night he flies, and
hence is called uhisceafta 4536 (nocturnus hostis, aggressor), and
lyfbsceaSa (aereus hostis), Cod. exon. 329, 24. Also the dragon
that keeps Krimhild prisoner on the Drachenstein comes riding
through the air, or flying. But the one that young Siegfried had
previously killed, when sent oat by the smith, lay beside a linde
(lime-tree), and did not fly : this is the Fdjhir of the Edda, a man
who had assumed the form of a snake; of him the Edda uses
skri'Sa (repere, to stride), Seem. 186. Sn, 138; and he is the
wyrm or draca slain by Sigemund and Fitela in Beow. 1765.
1779. In the Nib. 101, 2 and 842, 2 he is called lintrache, lint-
drache, in the Siegfriedslied 8, 2 lintwurm : an expression found
also in Mar. 148, 28. En, 2947. Troj. 25199, and to be ex-
plained, not from linde (tilia) as misunderstood by later legend,
but from the OHG. lint With this lint (Goth. lin)>s, AS. liS,
ON. linn?) many women's names are formed (Gramm. 2, 505),
e.g., Sigilint, ON. Sigrlinn (supra p. 428) , and it may have con-
tained the notion of brightness or beauty, 1 suitable alike to snake
and woman; the derivative weak form Unni (masc.) in ON.
signifies again coluber, serpens. And Limburg= Lintburg, the
name of several towns, is more correctly derived from snake than
from lime-tree.

About dragons it is a favourite fancy of antiquity, that they

1 Does not the Engl, lithe, pliable, give the moat suitable meaning, Germ.
gelind soft, Undern to mitigate ? — Trans.



Digitized by



Google



DRAGON. 689

lie upon gold, and are illumined by it ; gold itself was poetically
named worm-bed, ON. ormbefcr or ormbefts-eldr (wormbed's fire).
And with this was linked a farther notion, that they guard
treasures, and carry them through the air by night. That wyrm
slain by Sigemund is called ' hordes hyrde/ Beow. 1767 ; the one
that Beowulf fought with receives the epithet * se hord beweo-
tode ' 4420. FAfnir, formerly a giant, lay ( in (the shape of) a
worm/ wearing the Oegis-hialm, over inherited gold (S»m.
188 b . 189 b ) ; the expression is ' 1 tyngvi ' (from If ng, heath), and
the spot is named Gnita-herSi $ hence in other cases also the word
lyngvi, lyngormr (heath-worm) stands for dragon. The Vols,
saga c. 17 distinguishes lyngormr a small snake from dreki a large
one; so that our OHG. heimo, OS. hema, AS. Kama, spoken of
on p. 387, may be identical with lyngvi; Vilk. saga c. 17, p. 31
expressly calls heima 'allra orma skemdr' (omnium vermium
minimus), but as he is venomous, he cannot be the harmless
cicada (OHG. muhheimo). Popular belief still dreams of glitter-
ing treasures lying on lonesome heaths and guarded by dragons ;
and hceffen gold in Beow. may mean either aurum tesquorum or
ethnicorum, for dragons, like giants, were thought of as old and
full of years, e.g., eald uhtsceafta, Beow. 4536 ; wintrum fr&S (wise
with years) 4548 ; J?reo hund (300) wintra heold on hrusan (earth)
4550 ; at the same time they are covetous, envious, venomous,
spitting flame: ni&draca, Beow. 4540; attorscea&a 5673, f^re
befongen 4541, ongan glfidum spiwan 4619, deorcum nihtum
ricsian 4417, It is said of F&fnir, Sam. 186: 'screiS af gulli,
blfes eitri, hristi sik ok barSi hofSi ok sporSi/ stept off the gold,
blew poison, shook himself, and struck with head and tail ; it was
noticed on p. 562 that the two notions of eit (fire) and eiter
(poison) run into one. Connect with this the descriptions of MHG.
poets : the ' trache ' has his haunt in a valley, out of his throat
he darts flame, smoke and wind, Trist. 8944-74 ; he has plumage,
wings, he spits fire and venom, Troj. 9764. 9817 (see Suppl.).

Now it was the heroes' province to extirpate not only the
giants, but (what was in a measure the same thing) the dragons *
in the world : Tborr himself tackles the enormous miftgarSs-orm,
Sigemund, Siegfried, Beowulf stand forth as the bravest of

1 The analogy is kept nn in the circumstance of the conquered dragon (like the
giant's skeleton p. 666n.) being fastened oyer the town-gate, e.g. Pnlci 4, 76.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



690 TREES AND ANIMALS.

dragon-quellers, backed by a crowd of others, who spring out of
the exhaustless fount of living legend, wherever time and place
requires them. Frotho, a second Siegfried, overpowers a veno-
mous dragon that lay reposing on his treasure, Saxo Gram. p.
20. The beautiful Thora Borgarhiortr had a small tyngorm given
her, whom she placed in a casket, with gold under him : as he
grew, the gold grew also, till the box became too narrow, and the
worm laid himself in a ring all round it ; soon the chamber was
too small, and he lay round that, with his tail in his mouth, admit-
ting none into the room unless they brought him food, and he
required an ox at every meaL Then it was proclaimed, that
whoever slew him should get the maiden for his bride, and as
much gold as lay under the dragon, for her dowry. It was
Ragnar Lodbrok that subdued this dragon, Fornald. sog. 1,
237-8. The rapid growth of the worm has a startling similarity
to that of the fish, p. 578. But, beside the hoarded gold which
the heroes carry off as prize, the adventure brings them other
advantages : eating the dragon's heart gives one a knowledge of
beasts' language, and painting oneself with his blood hardens the
skin against all injury. Both features enter deeply into the
legend of Siegfried (see Suppl.) .*

Nearly all of this has its counterpart in the beliefs of other
nations. As the Romans borrowed gigas from the Greeks, so
they did draco, for neither serpens nor vermis was adequate
(like our slango and wurm) to express the idea. Now Spdxmv
comes from h&picew to look, illumine, flash out, $ao<; BiSopxe
expresses illuminating light, and this confirms me in my proposed
explanation of our lint and liuni. A fox after long burrowing
struck upon the cave of a dragon watching hidden treasure, 'ad
draconis speluncam ultimam, custodiebat qui thesauros abditos/
Phaedr. 4, 19. Then the story of the gold-guarding griffins must
be included, as they are winged monsters like the dragons.

In O. Slavic zmiy m., and zmiya f., signify snake, the one more
a dragon, the other an adder. The Boh. zmek is the fiery dragon
guarding money, zmiye the adder; Serv. zmay dragon, zmiya
adder. Mica, which the zmay shakes off him, is named otresine
zmayeve (dragon's off shake), Yuk p. 534. Once more, everything

1 Which reminds Albreoht in Titurel 8818—17 of a similar tale of Bodolz,
eonf. Parz. 518, 18 and Diut. 8, 59.



Digitized by



Google



DRAGON. BEETLE. 691

leads to glitter, gold and fire. The Lith. smakas seems borrowed
from Slavic ; whether connected with AS. snaca, is a question.
Jnngmann says, zmek is not only a dragon, but a spirit who
appears in the shape of a wet bird, 1 usually a chicken, and brings
people money; Sup. I, 143 says you must not hurt earth-chicks
or house-adders ; Schm. 1, 104 explains erdhunlein (earth -chicken)
as a bright round lustre, in the middle of which lies some-
thing dark ; conf. geuhuon, Helbl. 8, 858.

Renvall thus describes the Finn, mammelainen : ' femina ma-
ligna, matrix serpentis, divitiarum subterranearum custos.' Here
at last the hoard is assigned to a female snake ; in Teutonic and
also Slavic tales on the contrary it is characteristic of the fierce
fiendish dragon (m.) to guard treasure, and the adder or unke (f .)
plays more the part of a friendly homesprite : as the one is a man
transformed, so the other appears as a crowned maiden with a
serpent's tail (Deut. sag. no. 13), or as a fay. But she can no
more dispense with her golden crown than the dragon with his
guardianship of gold ; and the Boh. zmek is at once dragon and
adder. A story of the adder-king is in Bechstein's Franken p.
290 (seeSuppl.).

Amidst all these points of connexion, the being worshipped by
the Lombards must remain a matter of doubt ; we have only a
right to assume that they ascribed to it a benign and gracious
character.

Insects. — Some traces of beetle-worship I am able to disclose.

We have two old and pretty general terms: OHG. cheoor,
cheviro, MHG. kever, kevere, NHG. kafer, N. Neth. kever, AS.
ceafor, Engl, chafer. We have no business to bring in the Lat.
caper (which is AS. hcefer, ON. hafr) ; the root seems to be the
AS. ceaf, caf = alacer, for the chafer is a brisk lively creature,
and in Swabia they still say kaf ermassig for agilis, vivax (Gramm.
2, 571. 1013). The AS. has ceafortun, cafertun, for atrium, vesti-
bulum; € scarabaeorum oppidum* as it were, because chafers
chirp in it ? s The second term, OHG. wibil, webil, MHG. wibel,



1 Zmokly is drenched, zmoknuti to wet ; ' mokr^ gako zmok,' dripping like an
earth-sprite.

1 Here again the female being has the advantage over the male.

9 Helbling, speaking of an ill-shaped garment, starts the query (1, 177), where



Digitized by VjOOQIC



692 TREES AND ANIMALS.

NHG. webel, wiebel, AS. wifel, wefel, Engl, weevil, agrees with
Lith. wabalas, wabalis, Lett, w abbots, and I trace it to weben
(weave, wave) in the sense of our r leben and weben/ vigere,
moveri; we say, 'kriebeln und wiebeln' of the swarming of
beetles. 1

To the Egyptians the beetle (scarabaeus, KavBapos, tcdpafio?)
was a sacred being, an emblem of inmost life and mysterious self-
generation. They believed that he proceeded out of matter
which he rolled into globules and buried in manure (see Suppl.).

ON. literature deals in no prose terms, but at once comes out
with the poetic name iotunox, iatunoxi (giant-ox) ; as that giant
maiden took the ploughman with his oxen and plough for crawl-
ing beetles (p. 540, Finn, sontiainen, sondiainen, dung-beetle
from sonda, fimus), so conversely the real beetle might awaken
the notion of a iotunox. To liken the smaU animal to the large
was natural.

Our biggest beetle, the stately antlered stag-beetle, the Romans
called lucanus, Nigid. in Pliny 11, 28 (34), with which I suppose
is connected the well-known luca bos, lucanus or lucana bos, a
name which got shifted from the horned beast to a tusked one,
the elephant (Varro 7, 39. 40. O. Mull. p. 135). But we call
the beetle hirsch (stag, Pr. cerf volant), and even ox and goat,
all of them horned beasts, Pol. ielonek, 0. Slav, elenetz (both
stagling), Boh. rohac (corniger), Austr. hornier, Swed. horntroll.
Again, a Lat. name for scarabaeus terrester was taurus, Plin. 30,
5 (12), which keeps my lucanus bos or cervus, in countenance.
To the female the Bohemians give the further name of babha
(granny).

On p. 183 we came across a more significant name, donner-
guegi, donnerpuppe, in obvious allusion to Donar, whose holy tree
the beetle loves to dwell in ; and with this, apparently, agrees a
general term for beetles which extends through Scandinavia,
viz. Westergotl. torbagge, Swed. tortyfvel, Norweg. tordivcl, Jutl.
torr, torre. True, there is no Icelandic form, let alone ON., in
which Thorr can be detected ; yet this ' tor ' may have the same

might be the back and belly of one that was hidden away in such a cheverpeunt ?
He calls the ample cloak a chafer-pound or yard, in whose recesses you catch beetles.
This keverpiunt answers to the AS. ceqfortun,

1 Slavic names are, Boh. chraust, Pol. ohraszoz ; Boh. brauk, bruk, prob. from
bruohus, PpovKot. [Buss, zhuk ; the * gueg ' of S. Germany?]



Digitized by VjOOQIC



BEETLE. CHAFER. 693

force it has in torsdag (p. 126) and tordon (p. 166) ; ' bagge/
says Ihre p. 122, denotes juvenis, puer, hence servant of the god,
which was afterwards exchanged for dyfvel=diefVul, devil.
Afzelius (Sagohafder 1, 12. 13) assures us, that the torbagge was
sacred to Thor, that in Norrland his larva is called mulloxe (earth-
ox, our Swiss donnerpuppe? conf. iotunoxi), and that he who
finds a dung -beetle lying on his back (ofvaltes) unable to help
himself, and sets him on his legs again, is believed by the Norr-
landers to have atoned for seven sins thereby.

This sounds antique enough, and I do not hastily reject the
proposed interpretation of tordyfvel, false as it looks. For the
AS. tordwifel is plainly made up of ' tord/ stercus (Engl, turd)
and the 'wifel' above, and answers to the Dan. skarnbasse,
skarntorre (dungbeetle) ; consequently tordyfvel, torbasse crave
the same solution, even though a simple c tord ' and ' vivel ' be
now wanting in all the Scandinavian dialects. The Icelandic
has turned tordivel about into torfdifill, as if turf-devil, from
torf, gleba. There is also the N. Neth. tor, torre beetle, and
drektorre dungbeetle [or devil's coach-horse ; also Engl, dumble-
dorr cockchafer], to be taken into account (see Suppl.).

But who ever saw even a beetle lie struggling on his back,
without compassionately turning him over ? The German people,
which places the stagbeetle in close connexion with thunder and
fire, may very likely have paid him peculiar honours once.

Like other sacred harbingers of spring (swallows, storks), the
first cockchafer (Maikafer) 1 used to be escorted in from the woods
with much ceremony; we have it on good authority; that this

1 Maikdfer (like maiblume) Bounds too general, and not a people's word. And
there is no Lat. name preserved either. The Greek fx-qkokbvdr) designates our mai-
kafer or our goldkafer ; boys tied a string to it and played with it (Aristoph. Nub.
763), as our boys do. The It. tcarafaggio is formed from scarafone (scarabaeus) ;
the Fr. hanneton a dim. of the obsolete hanne horse, which may have been the term
for the stagbeetle (still petzgaxd, Bruin's horse, in the Wetterau), Fr. cerf volant,
Dan. eeghiort, Swed. ekhjort, i.e. oak-hart. The Mecklenb. eksttwer, oak-chafer, as
weU as the simple stiver, sever, sebber (Schiitze's Hoist, idiot. 4, 91) is applied to the
maikafer ; in other parts of L. Saxony they say mais&vel, mais&bel. This stiver,
z&ver (Brem. wtb. 4, 592. 5, 810) is surely no other than kafer with change of k
into *, »; Chytrsus's Nomenol. saxon. has * zever, and goldzever=go\$k&lei. y Or
does the HG. ziefer belong here, contrary to the etymol. proposed on p. 40 ? In
the Westerwald pouritz, kdwitz is maikafer, and in Bavensberg povdmmel dungbeetle
(Kuhn'a Westfal. sagen 2, 188), almost agreeing with Esthon. pona chafer, beetle.
Like the various names for the stagbeetle, maybeetle, dungbeetle, goldbeetle, the
traces of ancient beetle- worship seem also to meet, first in one, then in another of
them. A tcaraforu who brings succour occurs in Pentamer. 8, 5 (see Suppl.).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



694 TREES AND ANIMALS.

continued to be done by the spinning girls in parts of Schleswig
as late as the 1 7th century. 1

Folk- tales of Up. Germany inform us : Some girls, not grown
up, went one Sunday to a deserted tower on a hill, found the
stairs strewn with sand, and came to a beautiful room they had
never seen before, in which there stood a bed with curtains.
When they drew these aside, the bed was swarming with gold-
beetles, and jumping up and down of itself. Filled with amaze-
ment, the girls looked on for a while, till suddenly a terror seized
them, and they fled out of the room and down the stairs, with an
unearthly howl and racket at their heels (Mone's Anz. 7, 477).
On the castle-hill by Wolfartsweiler a little girl saw a copper pot
standing on three legs, quite new and swarming full of horsebeetles
(roskafer). She told her parents, who saw at once that the beetles
were a treasure, and hastened with her to the hill, but found
neither pot nor beetles any more (ibid. 8, 305). Here beetles
appear as holy animals guarding gold, and themselves golden.

In Sweden they call the small goldbeetle (skalkrak) Virgin
Mary's key-maid (jungfru Marie nyckelpiga), Dybeck's Buna
1844, p. 10; in spring the girls let her creep about on their
hands, and say, c hon marker mig brudhandskar/ she marks (fore-
shews) me bride's gloves ; if she flies away, they notice in which
direction, for thence will come the bridegroom. . Thus the beetle
seems a messenger of the goddess of love ; but the number of
the black spots on his wings has to be considered too : if more
than seven, corn will be scarce that year, if less, you may look
for an abundant harvest, Afzel. 3, 112-3.

The little coccinella septempunctata has mythical names in
nearly all our dialects : NHG. gotteskuhlein (God's little cow), 3
gotteskalb, herrgotteskalb, herrgotts-thiercheu (-beastie), herr-
gots-voglein (-birdie), Marienvoglein, MarienJcafer, Marienkalblein ;
Engl, lady cow, ladybird, ladyfly; Dan. Marihone (-hen); Boh.
hrawlea, krawiclea (little cow). In Up. Germany they call the
small goldbeetle (chrysomela vulg.) fraua-chiieli, ladyoow (Tobler

1 An old description of the maygrave feast by Ulr. Petersen (in Falck's New
staatsb. mag., vol. 1, Schlesw. 1832, p. 655) speaks of it thus : * A quaint procession
of the erewhile amazous of the spinning-wheel at Schleswig, for fetching in of a
cantharis or maykdfer with green boughs, whereat the town-hall of this place was
decked out with greenery.' The feast was still held in 1630—40.

* The Buss. * Bozhia kor6vka, has exactly the same meaning. — Trans.



Digitized by



Google



CHAFER. BEE. 695

204 b ) and ' der Hebe from henje/ our lady's hen (Alb. Schott's
Deutsche in Piemonb 297), in contrast to herra-chueU the
coccinella (Tobler 265*), though the name probably wavers be-
tween the two. By the same process which we observed in the
names of plants and stars, Mary seems to have stept into the
place of Preyja, and Marihone was formerly Freyjuhoe)ia, which
we still have word for word in Proue henje, and the like in Fraua-
chiieli. And of Romance tongues, it is only that of France (where
the community of views with Germany was strongest) that has a
bete a dieu, vache a dieu; Span, and Ital. have nothing like it.
At all events our children's song :

Marienkaferchen, flieg aus ! (fly away)

dein hauschen brennt, (burns)

dein miitterchen flennt, (weeps)

dein vaterchen sitzt auf der schwelle ; (sits on the threshold)

flieg in 3 n himmel aus der holle ! (into heaven out of hell)

must be old, for in England also they sing : ' Ladybird, ladybird,
fly away home, your house is on fire, and your children will burn
[all but little Bessie that sits in the sun].' With us too the chil-
dren put the Marienkafer or sonnenkafer on their finger, and ask
it, like the cuckoo: f sunnenhiehen (sun's chicken), ik frage di,
wo lange schal ik leven ? ' ' Een jaar, twee jaar/ etc., till the
chafer flies away, its home being in the sun or in heaven. In
Switzerland they hold the goldbeetle on their hand, and say :
' cheferli, cheferU, fliig us ! i getter milech ond brock* ond e
silberigs loffeli dezue.' Here the chafer, like the snake, is offered
'milk and crumbs and a silver spoon thereto.' In olden times he
must have been regarded as the god's messenger and confidant
(see Suppl.).

Lastly the bee, the one insect that is tamable and will live
among men, and whose wise ways are such a lesson to them, may
be expected to have old mythic associations. The bee is believed
to have survived from the golden age, from the lost paradise
(Chap. XXX.) ; nowhere is her worth and purity more prettily
expressed than in the Servian lay of the rich Gavan, where God
selects three holy angels to prove mankind, and bids them
descend from heaven to earth, ' as the bee upon the flower,' kako
pchela po tsvetu (Vuk 1, 128 ed. 2). The clear sweet honey,

vol. u. s

Digitized by VjOOQIC



TREES AND ANIMALS.

which bees suck out of every blossom, is a chief ingredient of the
drink divine (p. 819), it is the rjhela e'SaSiJ of the gods, Hymn, in
Merc. 560 ; and holy honey the first food that touches the lips
of a new-born child, BA. 457. Then, as the gift of poesy is
closely connected with OShroeris dreckr, it is bees that bring it
to sleeping Pindar : ftekKraai avr& /cadevBovri irpoaeTreTovro re
Kal hrKaaaov vrpb? rh X € ^V T °v icripov' apyft p,ev Tlivhap<p
iroieip ao-para iyevero Toiavrrj, Pausan. ix. 23, 2. And there-
fore they are called Musarum volucres (Varro de re rust. 3, 16).
A kindermarchen (no. 62) speaks of the queen-bee settling on
her favourite's mouth ; l if she flies to any one in his sleep, he
is accounted a child of fortune.

It seems natural, in connexion with these bustling winged
creatures, to think of the silent race of elves and dwarfs, which
like them obeys a queen. It was in the decaying flesh of the first
giant that dwarfs bred as maggots ; in exactly the same way bees
are said to have sprung from the putrefaction of a bullock's body :
'apes nascuntur ex bubulo corpore putrefacto/ Varro, 2, 5;
r amissas reparari ventribus bubulis recentibus cum fimo obrutis/
Plin. 11, 20 (23) ; conf. Virg. Georg. 4, 284-558. Ov. Met. 15,
364. To this circumstance some have ascribed the resemblance
between apis bee and Apis bull, though the first has a short a,
and the last a long. What seems more important for us is the
celebrated discovery of a golden bullock's-head amongst many
hundred golden bees in the tomb of the Frankish king Childeric
at Doornik (repres. in Eccard's Pr. or. 1, 39. 40).

Natural history informs us that clouds of bees fall upon the
sweet juice of the ash-tree; and from the life-tree Yggdrasil the
Edda makes a dew trickle, which is called a 'fall of honey/
and nourishes bees (Sn. 20) .*

The Yngl. saga cap. 14 says of Yngvifrey*s son, king Piolnir
(Siolm in the 0. Swed. chron.), that he fell into a barrel of mead
and was drowned; so in Saxo, king Hunding falls into sweet
mead, and the Greek myth lets Glaucus drown in a honey-jar, the
bright in the sweet. According to a legend of the Swiss Alps,

1 Sederunt in ore infantis torn etiam Platonis, suavitatem illam praedulcis
eloquii portendentes. Plin. 11, 17 (18).

3 Ceram ex floribus, melliginem e lacrimis arbonun quae glutinum parinnt,
aalicia, ulmi, arundinis suooo.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



BEE. 697

in the golden age when the brooks and lakes were filled with
milk, a shepherd was upset in his boat and drowned ; his body,
long sought for, turned up at last in the foaming cream, when
they were churning, and was buried in a cavity which bees had
constructed of honeycombs as large as town-gates (M&n. de
l'acad. celt. 5, 202). Bees weave a temple of wax and feathers
(Schwenk's Gr. myth. p. 129. Herm. Mulleins Griechenth. 455),
and in our IGnderm. no. 107, p. 130-1 a palace of wax and honey.
This reminds us of the beautiful picture in Lohengrin p. 191 of
Henry 2.'s tomb in Bamberg cathedral :

Sus lit er d& in stner stift

di'er het erbouwen, als din bin ir wift

uz maneger bliiete wiirket, daz man honc-seim nennet.

(he lies in the minster he built, as the bee her web from many a
blossom works, that we name honey-juice). In the various
languages the working bee is represented as female, OHG. pfa,
Lat. apis, Gr. /j,£\c<r<ra, Lith. bitte, in contrast with the masc.
fucus the drone, OHG. treno, Lith. tranas ; but then the head of
the bees is made a king, our weiser (pointer), MHG. wisel, OHG.
wJso, dux, Pliny's € rex apium/ Lith. bittinis, M. Lat. chosdrus
(Ducange sub v.), yet AS. beom6dor, Boh. matka. The Gr.
icrarjv is said to have meant originally the king-bee, and to have
acquired afterwards the sense of king or priest, as fii\ur<ra also
signified priestess, especially of Demeter and Artemis. Even
gods and goddesses themselves are represented by the sacred
animal, Zeus (Aristaeus) as a bee, Yishnu as a blue bee. A
Soman Mellona (Arnob. 4, 131), or Mellonia (Aug. de civ. Dei
4, 24), was goddess of bees ; the Lith. Austheia was the same,
jointly with a bee-god Bybylus. Masculine too was the Lett.
Uhsinsh, i.e., the hosed one, in reference to bees' legs being
covered with wax (' waxen thighs,' Mids. Dream 3, 1). From all
these fancies, mostly foreign, we might fairly make guesses about
our own lost antiquities ; but we should have to get more exact
information as to the legend of the Bee-wolf (pp. 369, 673) and
the mythic relationship of the woodpecker (Lith. melleta) to the
bee (see Suppl.).



Digitized by



Google



CHAPTER XXTT.
SKY AND STARS.

The visible heavens have in many ways left their mark on the
heathen faith. Not only do gods, and the spirits who stand
next them, have their dwelling in the sky, and get mixt np with
the stars, but earthly beings too, after their dissolution, are
transported thither, and distinguished heroes and giants shine
as constellations. From the sky the gods descend to eartb,
along the sky they make their journeys, and through the sky
they survey unseen the doings of men. And as all plants turn
to the light of heaven, as all souls look up to heaven, so do the
smoke of sacrifice and the prayers of mankind mount upwards.

Heaven covers earth, and our word 'himmel' comes from
the root hima (tego, involvo, vestio, Gramm. 2, 55 ; conf. Lith.
dangus coelum, from dengiu tego; OHG-. himilezi laquear). The
Goths and Old Norsemen agree in preferring the form himins,
himinn, and most other Teutons himil; even Swed. Norw. Dan.
have himmel. The Saxon race has moreover two terms peculiar
to itself: one is OS. hebhan, hevan, AS. h'eofon, Engl, heaven,
and still in Lower Saxony and Westphalia, heben, heven, haven,
hawen. I have endeavoured to make out the area over which
this name extends (Gramm. I, xiv.). The Frisians did not use
it, for the N. and W. Fris. patois of to-day owns to nothing but
'himmel/ 1 Nor does the Nefcherl. dialect know it; but it is
found in Westphalia, in L. Saxony as far as Holstein, and beyond
the Elbe in Mecklenburg and Pomerania. The AS. and Engl,
are wholly destitute of the word himel ; OS., like the present
LS. and Westph., employs both terms alike, yet apparently so
as to designate by hevan more the visible heaven, and by himil
the supersensual. Alb. of Halberstadt (ed. 1545, 145 b ) uses



1 Himel, Lapekoerfen Gabe acroar, Dimter 1834, p. 101. 108. hemmel, Hansens
Geizhalz, Sonderbg. 1833. p. 148. himel, Friesche wetten 348. himul, As. 274.

698



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SKY. HEAVEN. 699

heben (rhym. neben) of the place. Reinolt von der Lippe conples
the two words : ' himel rind heben von vreuden mnz irkrachen/
burst with joy. People say : ' de heven steit niimmer to ' ; € wenn
de heven fallt, ligg wi der all unner ; ' € de sterren an dem haven ; '
in Westphalia hebenecheer means a sky overcast without rain, and
even heben alone can signify cloud. 1 In havenhiine (p. 156), in
kuknk vam haven (p. 676), the physical sense preponderates,
whereas one would hardly speak otherwise than of 'going to
himel/ or himelrik. Yet this distinction seems to be compara-
tively recent : as the AS. heofon can be used in a purely spiritual
sense, so the poet of our Heliand alternates between hvmilrihi
149, 8 and hebanriH 143, 24, himdlfader 145, 12 and Kebancuning
148, 20. And of course himil had originally, and has everywhere
in HG., the physical meaning too ; hence uphimil in Hel. 88, 15,
just like upheofon in Caedm. 270, 24. The root of hebhan, hevan,
heofon, is probably a lost Gothic, ' hiba, haf/ cognate with Lat.
capio, so that it is the all-capacious, ON. viSfeftmir, wide-fathom-
ing or encompassing sky. 9

The other Saxon term may be placed on a level with the Gr.
aidrjp (thin upper air), whilst himil and hevan answer to ovpavo? ;
it is OS. radur, AS. rodor. In Casdmon we find rodor 188, 19.
207, 8. uprodor 179, 10. 182, 15. 205. 2. rodortungol (star),
100, 21. rodorbeorht 239, 10. Its root had lies buried as yet
in obscurity ; it has disappeaipd from all modern dialects [except
as Bother in proper names ?] . I am inclined to connect with
it the ON. roffull (sol), which has nothing to do with ratfSr
(ruber). From the AS. poets using indifferently s wuldres gim'
and € heofones gim ' (Beow. 4142. Andr. 1269) ; heofonbeorht,
rodorbeorht, ivuldorbeorht ; heofontorht, swegltovhh, wuldortorht ;
we might almost infer that wuldor (glory) originally meant
coelum, which would throw light on the OHG. name Woldarhilt.
And the same with swegel (aether, coelum) : conf. swegles begong,

1 San&kr. nabas, Slav. n6bo (ooelum), pi. nebesa, Gr. w4<fa % Lat. nubes, nebula ;
Ir. neamh, Wei. nev, Armor, nef, Lett, debbes (coelum), debbess (nubes) ; oonf . Lith.
dangus above [and sky, welkin, with ON. so J, Germ, wolke, cloud] .

* * Hills oi heaven ' are high ones, reaching into the clouds, often used as proper
names : himinfioll, Sam. 148*. Yngl. saga cap. 39 ; Himinbidrg, Sem. 41, 92 b is
an abode of gods ; spirits haunt the Himilinberg (mons coelius, Pertz 2, 10) ;
HimiUiberg in Hesse (Kuohenbeoker's Anal. 11, 137. Arnsb. urk. 118) ; a Him-
meUberg in Vestgotland, and one in Holland (said to be HeimSalTs) ; Himalterc,
Frauendienst 199, 10.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



700 SKY AND STABS.

Beow. 1713; under swegle (sub coelo), Beow. 2149; sweghdA
(coeli currus), Cod. exon. 855, 47 ; OS. suigli.

I call attention to the AS. sceldbyrig, Ceedm. 283, 23, which
has no business to be translated refugium or sheltering city ; it is
distinctly our schildburg (aula clypeis tecta), a bit of heathenism
the poet let fall inadvertently ; so the Edda speaks of Valhoil
as ' skioldum }?okt, lagt gyUum ekioldum, sva sem span^ak/ Sn. 2,
thatched with golden shields as with shingle-roof (p. 702 and
Suppl.).

Eddie names in Seem. 49 b . Sn. 177; all masculine, some
obviously founded on personification. Heaven is pictured as
a husband, embracing the female earth; he is not however
admitted into the circle of the gods, like Ovpavos, whereas Earth
does stand among the goddesses. To us heaven signifies simply
a certain space, the residence of gods. Two poetic names for
it have reference to that enigmatical being Mimir (p. 379) :
hreggmimir, rain-shedder, from hregg imber ; and vetmimir,
moistener ? conf. vseta humor.

To express star, constellation (sidus), our older speech, in
addition to stairno, sterno, steorra, stiarna (Gramm. 3, 392) and
OHG. himilzeichan (Hymn. 4, 2), has a symbolical term, OHG.
himilzvnga, Diut. 1, 526 b and Ql. Doc. 249 ; OS. himiltungal, Hel.
18, 2; AS. heofontungol, rodortungol; ON. himintungl. Even
the simple tungol has the same sense in AS., and a Gothic gloss
on Gal. 4, 3, gives ' tuggl astrum/ whilst in ON. tungl means the
moon. This neuter noun tungal, tungol, tungl, is no doubt from
tunga (lingua), which word itself appears in OHO. himilzunga
(Graff 5, 682) : the moon and some of the planets, when partially
illuminated, do present the appearance of a tongue or a sickle,
and very likely some cosmogonic belief 1 was engrafted on that ;
I know of nothing like it in other languages.

All the heavenly bodies have particular spots, seats, chairs
assigned them, which they make their abode and resting-place ;
they have their lodges and stages (sterrono girusti, O. i. 17, 10).
This holds especially of the sun, who daily sinks into his seat



1 A translation of the tongue to heaven. Or was the twinkling of the stars
likened to a tingling [zungeln, a quivering flickering motion like that of the
tongue]? The moon's steady light does not bear that out, nor the OHG. form
without the I .



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SUN. MOON. 701

or settle (see Chap. XXIII) ; but similar chairs (KM. 25), and
a seat-going (sedelgang) are attributed to all the stars. N. Bth.
210. 223 says, Bootes 'tr&go ze sedele gauge/ and f tiu zeichen
ne gftnt nicht in sedeV As chair and table are things closely
connected, the stars may have had tables of their own, or, what
comes to the same thing, may have been regarded as tables of
the sky ; in saying which, I am not thinking of the Egyptian
sun-table, but more immediately of the € bioSum yppa/ sidera
extollere, of the Voluspft (S»m. l b ), the three creative 'Bors
synir ' having set up as it were the tables of the firmament :
bioSr is the Goth, biuds, OHG. piot (pp. 88. 68). As the
stationary stars had chairs and tables, the planetary ones, like
other gods, had steeds and cars ascribed to them (see Suppl.). 1

The two principal stars are the sun and moon, whose gender
and appellations I have discussed in Gramm. 3, 349. 350 : a MHG.
poet calls the sun ' daz merere lieht,' the greater light, Fundgr.
2, 12. It is worth mentioning that some of the Eddie names
for the moon are still preserved in patois dialects of Up. Germany.
As the dwarfs named the moon skin (jubar), the East Franks
call her schein (Reinwald's Henneb. id. 2, 159) ? In the under-
world the moon bore the name of hverfcmdi hvel, whirling wheel,
and in Styria (esp. the Bruck distr.) she is gmoa-rat (Sartori's
Styria, p. 82), if I may translate that by rota communis, though
it may perhaps mean gemeiner rath (vorrath), a common pro-
vision at the service of all men. Tnat the sun was likened to a
wheel of fire, and the element blazing out of him was represented
in the shape of a wheel, has been fully shewn, p. 620. Tit. 2983
speaks of the sun's wheel. The Edda expressly calls the sun
fagrahvel, fair wheel, Sarni. 50* Sn. 177. 223. The Norse
rune for S is named sol sun, the AS. and OHG. sigil, sugil, for
which I have proposed (Andr. p. 96) the readings segil, sagil,
sahil, and may now bring in support the Goth, sduil and
Gr. rjXios. But the Gothic letter Q (= HV) is the very symbol
of the sun, and plainly shews the shape of a wheel ; we must

1 Wagen waggon belongs to weg way, as earpentum does to oarpere (viam) ; the
car of heaven is also that of the highest god. Otfr. i. 6, 6. says of the herald angel :
* flong er snnnum pad, sterrono $trdza, wega wolkdno.' The Indians also call the
sky path of clouds, Somadeva 1, 17. 2, 157.

9 So in Mod. Gr. jxyydpi brilliance, a name whose surprising identity with the
ON. fengari (Sn. 177) I have already noticed elsewhere.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



702 SKY AND STABS.

therefore suppose it to have been the initial of a Goth.
hvil = AS. hweol, ON. hvel. From r hvel' was developed the
Icel. hiol, Swed. Dan. hjul, O. Swed. hiughl; and from 'hweol,
hweobl' the Engl, wheel, Nethl. wiel, and Pris. fial (Richth. 787).
In view of all these variations, some have even ventured to
bring in the ON. jol, Swed. Dan. jul (yule), the name of the
winter solstice, and fasten upon it also the meaning of the wheel ;
on that hypothesis the two forms must have parted company
very early; supposing the Gothic name of November jiuleis to
be cognate. 1 The word wheel seems to be of the same root as
while, Goth, hveila, OHG. huila, i.e. revolving time ; conf . Goth,
hveila-hvairbs, OHG. huil-huerblc, volubilis.

Another symbolic epithet of the sun seems to be of great age :
the warlike sentiment of olden times saw in him a gleaming
circular shield, and we noticed above (p. 700) that the sky itself
formed a sceldbyrig. Notker cap. 71, finding in his text the
words 'sinistra clypeum coruscantem praeferebat (Apollo)/
translates : c an dero winsterfin truog er einen roten skilt,' then
adds a remark of his own : ' wanda selbiu diu sunna einemo
skilte gelih ist/ In German law and German poetry we catch
the glimmer of these ' red shields/ Even Opitz 2, 286 calls the
sun ( the beauteous shield of heaven.'

The very oldest and most universal image connected with
the sun and other luminaries seems after all to be that of the
eye. Ancient oosmogonies represent them as created out of eyes.
To Persians the sun was the eye of Ahur6mazd&o (Ormuzd), to
Egyptians the right eye of the Demiurge, to the Greeks the
eye of Zeus, to our forefathers that of Wuotan ; and a fable in
the Edda says 0$inn had to leave one of his eyes in pledge
with Mimir, or hide it in his fountain, and therefore he is pic-
tured as one-eyed. In the one-eyed Cyclopes mouth Ovid puts
'the words (Met. 13,851):

Unnm est in media lumen mihi fronte, sed instar
ingentis clypei ; quid, non haec omnia magno
sol videt e coelo ? soli tamen unions orbis.

1 The None initial H is occasionally dropt : in Icel. both Inula and jtda
etand for the babbling of infants. The dialect of the Saterland Frisians has an
actual jule, jole (rota). It is worthy of notice, that in some parts of Schleswig they
nsed at Christmas-time to roll a wheel into the village, and this was called * at trille
juul i by, 1 trundling yule into town ; Outaen sub. v. jdl, p. 145.



Digitized by



Google



SUN. MOON. 703

Like the giant, the god (Wuotan, the sky) has but one eye,
which is a wheel and a shield* In Beow. 1135 ' beacen Godes'
is the sun, the great celestial sign. 1 With this eye the diyinity
surveys the world, and nothing can escape its peering all-piercing
glance 9 ; all the stars look down upon men. 3 But the ON. poets,
not content with treating sun, moon and stars as eyes of heaven,
invert the macrocosm, and call the human eye the sun, moon, or
star of the skull, forehead, brows and eyelashes ; they even call
the eye the shield of the forehead : a confirmation of the similar
name for the sun. Another title they bestow on the sun is
'gimsteinn himins' (gemma coeli) ; so in AS. 'heofones gim,'
Beow. 4142 and ' wuldres gim/ Andr. 1289 (see Suppl.).

And not only is the sun represented as the god's eye looking
down, but as his full face and countenance; and that is how we
draw his picture still. Otfried says of the sun being darkened
at the Saviour's death, iv. 83, 5 :

In ni liaz si nuzzi thaz scduaz annuzzi,

ni liaz in scinan thuruh thaz ira gisiuni bltdaz.

The Edda speaks of the sun and moon as brother and sister,
children of a mythic Mundilfori. Several nations beside tbe
Lithuanians and Arabs (G-ramm. 3, 351) agree with us in ima-
gining the moon masculine and the sun feminine. The Mexican
Meztli (luna) is a man ; the Greenlanders think of Anningat, the
moon, as pursuing his sister Mallina, the sun. An Ital. story
(Pentam. 5, 5) makes Sole and Luna children of Talia (in
Perrault they are named Jour and Aurore). The Slavs make the
moon masc, a star fern., the sun neut. ; thus in a Servian lay
(Yuk 1, 1 34), God calls the sun .(suntse, Buss, solntse, -tse dim.
suff.) his child (chedo), the moon (mesets) being its brother, and
the star (zvezda) its Bister. To think of the stars as children or
young suns is nothing out of the way. Wolfram says in Wh. 254,
5 : € jungiu sunneUn mehten wahsen,' f

1 The Servians call the deepest part of a lake oho (eye), Yak's Montenegro 62.
9 When the Iliad 14, 844 says :

oW ftp rwt 8ia8p&K<H 'H £\i6s r«/>,
odre iced 6£vraTov r Acrat <pdoi elffopdaaSai,
it resembles the lay of Wolfram 8, 28 :

Obe der snnnen dri mit blioke waren (if there were 8 sons looking),
sin mohten zwischen si gelinhten (they could not shine in between].
1 npirfurrar brrpuv vvkt6i tydaXfidt, Aesch. Sept. o. Th. 890.



Digitized by



Google



704 SKY AND STAES.

Down to recent times, our people were fond of calling the
sun and moon frau sonne and heir mond. 1 Aventin 19 b : 'frauw
Sonne geht zu rast und gnaden/ In the country between the
Inn and Salzach they say ' der her Man/ meaning no more than
simply moon, Schm. 2, 230. 582. Gesner in Mithrid., Tur. 1555,
p. 28 : c audio veteres Germanos Lunum quoque deum coluisse et
appellasse hermon y id est dominum Lunum, quod forte parum
animadvertentes aliqui ad Hermann, i.e. Mercurium trans-
tulerunt; ' this last guess has missed the mark. Halderic. Eyben
de titulo nobilis, Helmst. 1677. 4, p. 136 : ' qua etiam ratione
in veteri idololatrico luna non domina, dominus appellatur :

bis gottwillkommen, neuer mon, holder herr,
mach mir meines geldes mehr I *

Also in Nicolaus Magni de Gawe (Superst. E, 10): 'vetulam
novi, quae credidit solem esse deam, yocans earn sanctam domi-
nant, ; ' and earlier still in Eligius (Sup. A) : ' nullus dominos
solem aut lunam vocet.' 8

In these invocations lingers the last vestige of a heathen
worship; perhaps also in the sonnenlehn, sun-fief (RA. 278) ? I
have spoken on bowing to the sun, p. 31, and cursing by him,
' der sunnen haz vara/ p. 19, where he is made equal to a deity. 4
In the same way the knees were bent and the head bared to the
new moon (Sup. E, 11). In taking an oath the fingers were
extended toward the sun (Weisth. 8, 349) ; and even Tacitus iu
Ann. 13, 55 relates of Bojocalus : ' solem respiciens et cetera
sidera vocans, quasi coram interrogabat, vellentne intueri inane
solum ' (see Suppl.).

That to our remote ancestry the heavenly bodies, especially
the sun and moon, were divine beings, will not admit of any
doubt. Not only do such symbolic expressions as 'face, eye,
tongue, wheel, shield, table, car' bring us face to face with a
vivid personification ; we have also seen how significantly Caesar

1 Frau Sunne (Gorres Moisted. 184). Hence in J"r. Solaus, without the
article, Bekker on Ferabras p. 168.

9 His authority is Dynkelspuhl tract. 1, praeo. 1, p. 59. Is this the Nicolaus
Dinkelspuel in Jdcher ?

8 Conf. the wind addressed as lord, p. 681 ; and dobropan, p. 180 note.

* Some would trace the name of Salzwedel, Soltwedel in the Altmark to heathen
sun-worship, (Ledebur's Allg. arch. 14, 870. Temme's Altmark p. 29), though the
first syll. plainly means salt ; * wedel ' will be explained when we oome to the moon.



Digitized by



Google



SUN. MOON. 705

couples together Sol, Vulcanus and Luna, p. 103. conf. p. 602.
As Sol is reckoned among tains in the Edda (Sn. 39), and is
sister to Mani (Sn. 12), this last has claims to an equal rank.
Yet Sffim. l b calls S61 ' sinni M&na/ companion of the moon,
sinni being the Goth, gasinpja, OHG. kasindeo, sindo ; and it is
remarkable that the Merseburg Lay gives the divine Sunnd not
a companion brother, but a sister Sindgund (supra p. 308), whose
name however still expresses attendance, escort ; l may she have
been a morning or evening star ? We should have to know first,
what distinction a dim remote antiquity made between scmil and
sunno in respect of gender and mythical use ; if ' sauil, sagil/ like
sol and tJXto?, was masc, then Sunn& and Sindgund might be
imagined as female moons like Luna and SeX^vrj, yet s61 is always
fern, in ON., and our sunne so late as in MHGr. strangely wavers
between the two sexes, Gramm. 3, 350 (see Suppl.).

Be that as it may, we have a right to add in support of the
sun's divinity, that 'she ' is described like other gods (pp. 17. 26.
324), as blithe, sweet and gracious. O. iv. 33, 6 speaks of her
f gisiuni blidaz, thes sih ioh worolt frewita/ whereof the world
had aye rejoiced ; and a 13th cent, poem (Zeitschr. f. d. alt. 1,
493-4) thus describes the greetings addressed to her :

Wol dirfrouwe Sunne ! 'Hail to thee, Lady Sun !

du bist al der werlt wunne ! Art all the world's delight/

so ir die Sunnen vro sehet, When ye see the sun glad,

schoenes tages ir ir jehet, The fair day to her ye ascribe,

der 6ren ir der Sunnen jehet, To her ye give the honour,

swenn ir si in liehtem schlne sehet. Whenever ye see, etc.

Other passages in point are reserved for next chapter.

The personality of the sun and moon shews itself moreover in
a fiction that has wellnigh gone the round of the world. These
two, in their unceasing unflagging career through the void of
heaven, appear to be in flight, avoiding some pursuer. A pair of
wolves are on their track, Skoll dogging the steps of the sun,
Rati of the moon ; they come of a giant race, the mightiest of
whom, Mdnagarmr (moon-dog), apparently but another name for
Hati, is sure some day to overtake and swallow the moon. How

1 Conf. sunnagahU, tungiht (solis iter), p. 617 n., and sunnan tUTfat (iter),
Caedm. 182, 25.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



706 SKY AND STABS.

extensively this tradition prevailed, has already been shewn
(pp. 244-5) . l A parhelion or mock-sun (vadersol) is in Swed.
called solvwrg, solulf, sun-wolf, Ihre's Dial. lex. 165.

One of the most terrific phenomena to heathens was an eclipse
of the sun or moon, which they associated with a destruction of
all things and the end of the world ; they fancied the monster
had already got a part of the shining orb between his jaws, and
they tried to scare him away by loud cries. This is what Eligius
depounces ( Supers t. A) : ' nullus, si quando luna obscuratur,
vociferare praesumat ;' it is the cry of ' vince luna I ' * that the
Indicul. paganiar. means in cap. 21 de defectione lunae, and
Burchard (Sup. C, 193 b ) by his ' clamoribus aut auxilio splendorem
lunae deficientis restaurare.' The Norse writings, while minutely
describing the threatened deglutition, make no allusion to the
shouting: it may have been more customary with Celts and
Romans than with Teutons. A 5th cent, father, St. Maximus of
Turin, in a Homilia de defectu lunae, preaches thus : ' Cum ante
dies plerosque de vestrae avaritiae cupiditate pulsaverim, ipsa die
circa vesperam tanta vociferatio populi exstitit, ut irreligiositas
ejus penetraret ad coelum. Quod quum requirerem, quid sibi
clamor hie velit, dixerunt mihi, quod laboranti lunae vestra vocife-
ratio subveniret, et defectum ejus suis clamoribus adjuvaret.' 8 The
same ' laborans ' (in distress) is used by Juvenal 6, 442 :

Jam nemo tubas, nemo aera f atiget ;
una laboranti poterit succurrere lunae.*

I may safely assume that the same superstitious notions and
practices attend eclipses among nations ancient and modern. 6
The Indian belief is, that a serpent eats up the sun and moon
when they are eclipsed (Bopp's Gloss. 148 a ), or a demon (rahus)
devours them (Bopp's Nalas, pp. 153. 272. Somadeva 2, 1 5. 187).

1 I add from Fischart's Garg. 130 b : 'sab den wolf des mom.* Rabelais 1, 11
has : la lune de$ loupg. In old calendars, eclipses are represented by two dragons
holding the son and moon in their mouths, Mone's Untersuch. p. 188.

* This would be in OHG. ' Karih mAno ! ' in Goth. » jiukai mena ! ' but we
find nothing of the kind even later.

3 Ducange 6, 1618 quotes the passage sub v. vinceluna ; but the reprint of the
Horn. Maximi taurin. * De defectu lunae ' (in Mabillon's Mus. Ital., torn. i. pars 2,
pp. 19. 20) has it not.

* Conr. Tac. Annal. 1, 28 and Booth, de consol. 4 metr. 5 : • lassant crebris
pulsibus aera.*

* It is only among Greeks and Slays that I have not come across them.



Digitized by



Google



ECLIPSES. 707

To this day the Hindus consider that a giant lays hold of the
luminaries, and tries to swallow them (Broughton's Pop. poetry
of Hind. p. 131). The Chinese call the solar eclipse zhishi (solis
devoratio), the lunar yueshi (lnnae devoratio), and ascribe them
both to the machinations of a dragon. Nearly all the populations
of Northern Asia hold the same opinion: the Tchuvashes use
the phrase ' vubur siat/ daemon comedit (Guil. Schott de lingua
Tschuw, p. 5) ; the Finns of Europef have a similar belief, the
Esthonians say the sun or moon ' is being eaten/ and formerly
they sought to hinder it by conjuring spells (Thorn. Hiarn, Mitau
1794 p. 39). The Lithuanians think a demon (Tiknis or Tiklis)
attacks the chariot of the sun, then darkness arises, and all
creatures are in fear lest the dear sun be worsted ; it has been
staved off for a long time, but it must come to that at the end
of the world (Narbutt 1, 127. 142). In eclipses of the moon, the
Greenlanders carry boxes and kettles to the roofs of their houses,
and beat on them as hard as they can (Cranz's Gronland 3, 294) .
An English traveller says of the Moors in Africa : When the sun's
eclipse was at its height, we saw the people running about as if
mad, and firing their rifles at the sun, to frighten the monster who
they supposed was wishing to devour the orb of day. The plains
and heights of Tripoli resounded with the death-dirge (the cry
€ wulliali wu ! '), and the same all along the coast. The women
banged copper vessels together, making such a din that it was
heard leagues away (see Suppl.). l

A Mongolian myth makes out that the gods determined to
punish Arakho for his misdeeds, but he hid so effectually, that
no one could find out his lurkingplace. They therefore asked
the sun, who gave an unsatisfactory answer; but when they
asked the moon, she disclosed his whereabouts. So Arakho was
dragged forth and chastised ; in revenge of which, he pursues both
sun and moon, and whenever he comes to hand-grips with one of
them, an eclipse occurs. To help the lights of heaven in their
sad plight, a tremendous uproar is made with musical and other
instruments, till Arakho is scared away. 9 Here a noticeable

1 Morgenblatt 1817 p. 159*; conf. Niebuhr's Besohr. Arab. 119. 120.

1 Benj. Bergmann's IjTomad. streifereien 3, 41. Aoo. to Georgii Alphab. tibe-
tan. p. 189, it is monsters called Tracehn, with their upper parts shaped like men,
and the lower like snakes, that lie in wait for the son and moon. [South of L.
Baikal it is the king of hell that tries to swallow the moon.— Trass.]



Digitized by



Google



708 SKY AND STABS.

feature is the inquiry made of the sun and moon, who overlook
the world and know all secrets (CastrSn's Myth. 62) . So in our
fairytales the seeker asks of the sun, moon and stars (Kinderm.
no. 25. 88 ; conf. 8, 218-9), some of whom are found helpful and
sympathizing, others cruel and cannibal (Vuk no. 10). In Ser-
vian songs the moon and the morningstar (danitsa) hold a colloquy
on the affairs of men (Vuk 3, 3). During an eclipse of the sun
(I don't know whether of *the moon also) our people cover the
wells up, else their water would turn impure, Superst. I, 589.

Is there a trace of moon-worship to be found in the fact that
people had an image of the moon carved on rocks and stones that
marked a boundary? In RA. 542 an Alamannic doc. of 1155 is
given, which traces the custom all the way up to king Dagobert.
In Westphalian docs, as late as the 17th cent. I find halfmonds-
schnad-stones, 1 unless the word halfmoon here means something
else.

In Bavaria there is a Mondsee, OHG-. Mdninseo (lunae lacus),
in Austria a Manhcvrt (lunae silva, 17 Aoyva i\rf in Pbolemy); 9 we
may safely credit both with mythic associations.

As time is more easily reckoned by the changes of the moon,
which visibly mark off the week (p. 126-7), than by the sun, our
ancestors seem to have had, beside the solar year, a lunar one
for common use, whose thirteen months answered to the twelve
of the solar year. The recurring period of from 29 to 30 days
was therefore called menofcs, mdnod, from m&na, mano. Hence
also it was natural to count by nights, not days : c nee dierum
numerum sed noctium computant, sic constituunt, sic condicunt,
nox ducere diem videtur/ Tac. Germ. c. 11. And much in the
same way, the year was named by its winter, which holds the
same relation to summer as night to day. A section of time was
measured by the number of se'ennights, fortnights, months or
winters it contained.

And that is also the reason why the phases of the moon had
such a commanding influence on important undertakings. They
are what Jornandes cap. 11 calls lunae commoda incommodaque.
It is true, the performance of any kind of work was governed by

1 Defence of Wulften castle, Vienna 1766. euppl. p. 71-2. 162.
* Can Manhart have oome from Maginhart ? Helbl. 18, 190 has Meinhartt-
Urc.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



PHASES OF THE MOON. 709

the day and solar time, whether of warriors (RA. 297), or of
servants (853), or of tribunals especially (814-6). If, on the
other hand, some new and weighty matter was to be taken in
hand, they consulted the moon ; which does not mean that the
consultation was held or the action begun in the night, but on
those days whose nights had an auspicious phase of the moon :
' coeunt, nisi quid fortuitum et subitum incident, certis diebus,
quum aut inchoatur luna aut impletur; nam agendis rebus hoc
auspicatissimum initium credunt/ Tac. Germ. 11. So in Tac.
Ann. 1, 50 a nox Munis is chosen for a festival.

Now the moon presents two distinct appearances, one each
fortnight, which are indicated in the passage just quoted : either
she is beginning her course, or she has attained her full orb of
light. From the one point she steadily increases, from the other
Bhe declines. The shapes she assumes between are not so sharply
defined to the sense.

Her invisibility lasts only the one night between the disappear-
ance of her last quarter and the appearance of her first, at new-
moon (conjunction of sun and moon) ; in like manner, full-moon
lasts from the moment she attains perfect sphericity till she loses
it again. But in common parlance that ' nox illunis ' is included
in the new-moon, and similarly the decline is made to begin
simultaneously with the full.

The Gothic for irava&Xqvov w&sfullij>8 m., or fullij> n. (gen. pi.
fullij^), from which we may also infer a niujifa for vovfiyjvia.
Curiously, this last is rendered fullty in Col. 2, 16, which to my
mind is a mere oversight, and not to be explained by the supposi-
tion that the Goths looked upon full-moon as the grander festival.
The AS. too must have called ftill-moon fylleS, to judge by the
name of the month ( winterfylliS/ which, says Beda (de temp,
rat. 13), was so named 'ab hieme et plenilunio'; but the later
writers have only niwe mono, and full mdna. So there may have
been an OHG. niuwid and fullid, though we can only lay our
finger on the neuters niumani and folmani, 1 to which Graff 2, 222
adds a niwilune ; MHG. daz niumcene and volmaene, the last in
Trist. 9464. 11086. 11513 (see Suppl.).

1 Also niuwer m&no, N. ps. 80, 4. toiler m&no, pa. 88, 88. In Gap. 107-8 he
uses vol and wan (empty), and in Cap. 147 hornaht, halbscaftig and fol; oonf. Hel.
Ill, 8 voanod ohtho wahrid.



Digitized by



Google



710 SKY "AND STABS.

In ON. the two periods are named by the neuters ' ny ok ni9/
habitually alliterating ; ny answers to novilunium, it signifies the
new light, and ni9 the declining, dwindling, from the lost root
nrSa na^, from which also come the adv. nrSr (deorsum) and the
noun nfrS (quies, OHG. gin&da) . So that nf lasts from the begin-
ning of the first quarter to the full, and nr8 from the decrease of
-the full to the extinction of light in the last quarter. The two
touch one another at the border-line between the faintest streaks
of waxing and of waning brightness. But nrS meant especially
the absence of moonlight (interlunium), and niSamyrkr total
darkness (luna silens) . Kind gods created these for men of old
to tell the year by : 'ny ok ntdT skdpo n£t regin oldum at Ar-tali/ 1
Saem. 34 a . ( Manx st^rirgongu tAngls, oc r88"Sr nyjum oc niffum/
Sn. 12, M&ni steers the going of the moon, and rules new moons
and full. Probably even here personification comes into play,
for in VoluspS, 11 (Saem. 2 b ) Nyji and Ni&i are dwarfs, i.e. spirits
of the sky, who are connected, we do not exactly know how, with
those lunar phases nf ok ntfS. 3 Of changeful things it is said ' J?at
gengr eptir n^um ok nvSum/ res alternatur et snbit lunae vices.
0. Swed. laws have the formula ' ny oc nvSar/ for * at all times,
under any phase/ Gutalagh p. 108. So ( i ny ok nida/ Sudh.
bygn. 32. Upl. vidh. 28, 1. Vestg. thiuv. 22, 1; but here the
second word seems to have given up its neut. form, and passed
into a personal and masc. Mod. Swed. has 'ny och nedan' ;
Dan. 'ny og nee/ 'det gaaer efter nye og ncee/ ' hverken i nye eller
nee/ He. never, 'naar nyet tandes/ quando nova luna incenditur ;
this n® was in 0. Dan. ned, need. To the nrSamyrkr above
answers a Swed. nedmork, pitchdark. The Norse terminology
differs in so far from the H. Germ., that it expresses the total
obscuration by ni*8, while we designate it by neumond (i.e. nf) ;
with us new-moon is opposed to full-moon, with the Scandina-
vians nrS to nf, each of them standing for one half of the moon's
course. Since a mention of the first and last quarters has come
into use, full-moon and new-moon signify simply the points of
fullness and vacancy that lie between ; and now the Swedes and
Danes have equally adopted a fullm&ne, fuldmaane, as counter-



1 Ace. to Alvismfil, the ftlfar call the moon drtali (OHG. jarzalo ?), Saem. 49 b .

2 Comp. with * niti ok n£ ' the Or. ft»iy kcU via*



Digitized by



Google



PHASES OF THE MOON. 711

part to nymane, nymaane, whereby the old ' ned, n® ' has become
superfluous, and the meaning of f ny ' somewhat modified. 1

Though the OHG. remains do not offer us a neuter niuwi, 2 such
a form may have existed, to match the Norse ny, seeing that the
Miilhausen statute of the 13th cent. (Grasshof p. 252), in granting
the stranger that would settle in the town a month's time for the
attempt, says ' ein nuwe und ein wedil, daz sint vier wochin ; '
that Martin von Amberg's Beichtspiegel has ' das vol und das
neUy Dasypodius still later c das newe, interlunium/ and Tobler
331 br das neu, der wachsende mond.' For the waning moon,
Tobler 404 b gives € nid si gehender (going down)/ which reminds
one of ntTT; otherwise 'der schwined mo/ OHG*. r diu suinenta
m&nin/ N. ps. 88, 88, its opposite being ' diu folia ' (see Suppl.).

I have yet to bring forward another expression of wide range
and presumably old, which is used by turns for one and another
phase of the moon's light, oftenest for plenilunium, but some-
times also for interlunium : MHG. wedel : ' im was unkunt des
m&nen wedel/ Martina 181°; NHG. wadel, wadel, but more among
the common folk and in the chase than in written speech. Pic-
torius 480, Staid. 2, 456, Tobler 441 b have wedel, wadel full-moon,
wadeln to become full-moon, when her horns meet, i.e., when she
completes her circle. Keisersperg's Postille 138 b : ' ietz so ist er
niiw, ietz fol, ietz alt, ietz die erst qvart, ietz die ander qvart,
ietz ist es wedel } ; here full-moon and wedel are not so clearly
defined as in another passage of Keisersperg (Oberlin 1957)
on March : € wan es ist sein wedel, sein volmon.' In Dasy-
podius : ' plenilunium, der volmon, wadel' 8 The Germans in
Bohemia commonly use wadel for full-moon, and Schm. 4, 22
produces other notable authorities. But the word is known in
Lower Germany too ; Bohmer's Kantzow p. 266 spells it ivadel,*

1 Modern Ioel. names are : bldnp (black new, interlunium) ; prim (nova luna),
also n^qveikt tungl ; hdlfvaxid tungl (first quarter) ; fullt tungl (plenilunium) ;
h&lfprotid tungl (last quarter). Here too the old names have gone out of use,
• blan? ' replaces ni$, and * prim ' n? .

9 Notker's Capella 100 has * manen niwi ' fern.

8 Tet under luna he has ' plenilunium Tollmon oder bruch,' and the same under
bruch (— abbruch) a breaking off, falling off, defeotus; which confirms my view,
that we reckon the wane from full-moon itself (Wtb. 2, 408). Ace. to Muchar's
Koricum 2, 36 the waxing and waning moon are called the geninde and the kranke
man (well and ill).

4 Following Tacitus, he says, the Germani always chose either new or full-moon,
for after the wadel they thought it unlucky. Wadel then comprehends the two phases
of new and full moon, but seems to exclude those of the first and last quarter.



"VOL. II.

Digitized by



1

Google



712 SKY AND STABS.

the Brem. wtb. 5, 166 'waal, vollmond' (like aal for adel, a
swamp), and Kilian ' waedel, senium lunae.' From the phrase-
ology of Superst. I, 973 one would take wadel to be a general
name for the moon, whether waxing or waning, for € the bad wadel '
[new-moon] surely implies a good wadel favourable to the oper-
ation. Now wadel, wedel means that which wags to and fro, and
is used of an animal's tail, flabrum, flabellum, cauda ; it must
either, like zunga and tungl, refer to the tip or streak of light in the
crescent moon, or imply that the moon cruises about in the sky. 1
The latter explanation fits a passage in the AS. poem on Finnes-
burg fight, line 14 : ' nu seine's }>es mdna waSol under wolcnum/
i.e., the moon walking [wading] among the clouds, wa$ol being
taken for the adj. vagus, vagabundus. Probably even the OHG.
wadal was applied to the moon, as an adj. vagus (Graff 1, 776),
or as a snbst. flabellum (1, 662). But, as this subst. not only
signifies flabellum [whisk], but fasciculus [wisp], the name may
ultimately be connected with the bundle of brushwood that a
myth (to be presently noticed) puts in the spots* of the full-moon
(see Suppl.).

Lith. jdunas menu novilunium, pilnatis plenilunium, puspilis
first quarter, pusdylis last qu., delczia luna decrescens, lit. trunca,
worn away, twrpijos interlunium (from tarp, inter) ; puspilis
means half-full, pusdylis half-worn, from the same root as delczia
truncation, deorease. There is also a 'menu tusczias/ vacant
moon; and the sickle- shaped half-moon is called dalgakynos.
Lettic : jauns mehnes novilun., pilna mehnes plenilun., mehnes

punte luna accrescens, wezza mehnes * luna senescens. Finnic :

uusikuu novil., taysikuu plenil., ylikuu luna accr., alakuu deer.,
formed with uusi novus, taysi plenus, yli superus, ala inferus,

which supports our explanation of the ON. niS. The Servians

divide thus : miyena novil., mladina luna accr., lit. young, puna
plenil., ushtap luna deer. Sloven mlay, mlad novil., polna plenil.,
ship plenil., but no doubt also luna deer., from shipati to nip,
impair. Pol. now and Boh. nowy novil., Pol. pelnia and Boh.

i The Engl. waddle, which is the same word, would graphically express the
oscillation of the (visible) moon from side to side of her path ; and if wedel meant
that oscillation, it would apply equally to new and to full moon. — Trans.

8 Wezza mehnes, the old moon. In a Scotch ballad : * I saw the new moon late
yestreen wi' he auld moon in her arm.' Jamieson 1, 159. Percy 1, 78. Halliwell
pp. 167-8.



Digitized by



Google



PHASES OF THE MOON. 713

auplneh plenil. Here we see another instance of the ruder races
having more various and picturesque names for natural pheno-
mena, which among the more cultivated are replaced by abstract
and uniform ones. No doubt Teutonic speech in its various
branches once possessed other names beside nift and wadel.

Tacitus merely tells us that the Germani held their assemblies
at new moon or full moon, not that the two periods were thought
equally favourable to all enterprises without distinction. We may
guess that some matters were more suitable to new moon, others
to full ; the one would inspire by its freshness, the other by its
fulness. 1

Caesar 1, 50 reports to us the declaration of wise women in the
camp of Ariovistus : 'non esse fas Grermanos superare, si ante
novam lunam proelio contendissent.' A happy issue to the Ijattle
was expected, at all events in this particular instance, only if it
were fought at new moon.

As far as I can make out from later remnants of German
superstition, with which that of Scotland should be compared
(Chambers 35 b . 86*), new-moon, addressed by way of distinction
as ' gracious lord ' p. 704, is an auspicious time for commence-
ments properly speaking. Marriages are to be concluded in it,
houses to be built : ' novam lunam observasti pro domo facienda
aut conjngiis sociandis ' (Sup. C, 193 b ), the latter just the same
in Esth. Sup. no. 1. Into a new house you must move at new
moon (Sup. I, 429), not at the wane (498) ; count money by the
new moon (228), she will increase your store (conf. p. 704) ; on
the other hand, she loves not to look into an empty purse (107).
All through, the notion is that money, married bliss and house
stores will thrive and grow with the growing light. So the hair
and nails are cut at new-moon (French Sup. 5. Schiitze's Hoist,
id. 3, 68), to give them a good chance of growing; cattle are
weaned in the waxing light (I, 757), in the waning they would
get lean; Lith. Sup. 11 says, let girls be weaned at the wane,

1 New-moon was peculiarly holy to ancient peoples, thus to the Greeks the by
xal w4a, which was also expressed by by alone -Sanakr. ami (new moon). The
return of Odysseus was expected at that season, Od. 14, 162 :

rod pb <j>8lvorros pijvdt, rod b* hrrafjuhoio.

Rami's birth is fixed for the new-moon after vernal equinox (Sohlegel on Bamay.
i. 19, 2). Probably bealteine were lighted at this new-moon of spring.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



714 SKY AND STARS.

boys at the full, probably to give the one a slim elegant figure*
and the other a stout and strong. Healing herbs and pure dew
are to be gathered at new-moon (ton an des manen niwi gelesen,
N. Cap. 100, conf. 25), for then they are fresh and unalloyed.
When it says in I, 764 that weddings should take place at fall-
moon, and in 238 that a new dwelling should be entered with the
waxing or full moon/ this full-moon seems to denote simply the
utmost of the growing light, without the accessory notion of
incipient decline. If our ancestors as a rule fought their battles
at new-moon, they must have had in their eye the springing
up of victory to themselves, not the defeat and downfall of
the enemy. 1

At full-moon (as opposed to new), i.e. by a waning light, you
were to perform operations involving severance or dissolution,
cutting down or levelling. Thus, if I understand it rightly, a
marriage would have to be annulled, a house pulled down, a
pestilence stamped out, when the moon is on the wane. Under
this head comes in the rule to cut wood in the forest when it is
wadel, apparently that the timber felled may dry. In a Calendar
printed by Hupfuff, Strasb. 1511 : 'with the moon's wedel 'tis
good to begin the hewing of wood/ The same precept is still
given in many modern forest-books, and full-moon is therefore
called holz-wadel: 'in the bad wadel (crescent moon) fell no
timber/ Sup. I, 973. In Keisersperg's Menschl. baum, Strasb.
1521, 19 : ' Alway in wedel are trees to be hewn, and game to be
shot/ 2 Grass is not to be mown at new, but at full moon (Lith.
Sup. 7) ; that the hay may dry quickly ? and treasures must be
lifted at full-moon. If a bed be stuffed when the moon is grow-
ing, the feathers will not lie (I, 372. 914) ; this operation too
requires a waning light, as if to kill the new-plucked feathers
completely, and bring them to rest. If you open trenches by
a waxing moon, they will soon grow together again; if by a
waning, they keep on getting deeper and wider. To open a vein
with the moon declining, makes the blood press downwards and

i The Esthonians say to the new-moon : « Hail, moon ! may you grow old, and
I keep young I ' Thorn. Hiarne p. 40.

* In Demerara grows a tree like the mahogany, called walala ; if out down at
new-moon, the wood is tough and hard to split, if at full, it is soft and splits easily.
Bamboo planks out at new-moon last ten years, those cut at full-moon rot within
the year.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



PHASES OF THE MOON. 715

s

load the legs (Tobler 404 b ) ; set about it therefore by the mount-
ing moonlight. Vuk sub v. miyena says, the Servian women will
wash never a shirt at new-moon, they declare all the linen would
get mooned (omiyeniti) in the water, i.e. bulge and pucker, and
soon tear; one might find another reason too for washing by
the waning moon, that stains and dirt should disappear with the
dwindling light (see Suppl.) .

Behind superstitious practices I have tried to discover a
meaning, which may possibly come near their original signifi-
cation. Such symbolical coupling of means and end was at all
events not foreign to antiquity anywhere : the holy water floats
all misfortune away with it (p. 589), the spray from the millwheel
scatters all sickness (p. 593). So the sufferer stands with his
face to the waning moon, and prays : ' as thou decreasest, let my
pains diminish ' (I, 245) ; he can also go on the other tack, and
cry to the new moon : ' may what I see increase, and what I suffer
cease' (492). Turning the face toward the luminary I take to
be a relic of heathen moon- worship. 1

Superstitions of this kind have long been banished to the
narrower limits of agriculture and cattle-breeding; we should
arrive at a clearer knowledge of them, had their bearing on
public life been described for us in early times. Observation of
the lunar changes must in many ways have influenced sacrifices,
the casting of lots and the conduct of war. Some things now
appear bewildering, because we cannot review all the circum-
stances, and some no doubt were different in different nations.
German superstition (I, 856) thinks it a calamity for the master
of the house to die during the moon's decline, for then the whole
family will fall away ; the Esthonian view (41) is, that a death at
new-moon is unlucky, perhaps because more will follow ? Fruits
that grow above ground are to be sown at the waxing, those under
ground at the waning (Jul. Schmidt p. 122) ; not so Westendorp
p. 129: 'dat boven den grond wast, by o/hemende maan, dat
onder den grron4,wast, by toenemende maan te zaaien.' Gutslaf
(Wohhanda p. 49, conf . errata) remarks, that winter-crops are
not to be sown while the moon stands at the idle quarter (third,

1 Whoever at play turns his back to the moon, has bad luck (I, 801). But the
seaman in his hammock takes care not to face the full-moon, lest he be struck with
blindness.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



716 SKY AND STARS.

kus se kuh maal). In the sermon of Eligius (Snp. A), the
sentence ' nee luna nova quisquam timeat aliquid operis ampere *
is unintelligible so long as we do not know what sort of operation
is meant.

The spots or shady depressions on the full-moon's disc have
given rise to grotesque but similar myths in several nations. To
the common people in India they look like a hare, i.e. Chandras
the god of the moon carries a hare (sasa), hence the moon is
called sasin or sas&nka, hare mark or spot. 1 The Mongolian
doctrine also sees in these shadows the figure of a hare. 9 Bogdo
Jagjamuni or Shigemuni [the Buddha Sakyft-muni], supreme
ruler of the sky, once changed himself into a hare, simply to
serve as food to a starving traveller ; in honour of which meri-
torious deed Khormusta, whom the Mongols revere as chief of
the tenggri [genii] , placed the figure of a hare in the moon.
The people of Ceylon relate as follows : While Buddha the great
god sojourned upon earth as a hermit, he one day lost his way
in a wood. He had wandered long, when a hare accosted him :
' Cannot I help thee ? strike into the path on thy right, I will
guide thee out of the wilderness/ Buddha replied: 'Thank
thee, but I am poor and hungry, and unable to repay thy kind-
ness/ ' If thou art hungry/ said the hare, ' light a fire, and kill,
roast and eat me/ Buddha made a fire, and the hare immediately
jumped in. Then did Buddha manifest his divine power, he
snatched the beast out of the flames, and set him in the moon,
where he may be seen to this day. 8 To the Greenlander's fancy
these spots are the marks of Malina's fingers, with which she
touched the fine reindeer pelisse of Anninga (Major's Myth,
taschenb. 1811. p. 15).

An ON. fable tells us, that M&ni (the moon) took two children,
Bil and Hiuki, away from the earth, just as they were drawing
water from the well Byrgir, and carrying the pail Ssegr on the
pole Simul between their shoulders. These children walk behind

1 SchlegeTs Ind. bibl. 1, 217. Aoo. to Bopp's Gloss. 346% a Sanskrit name for
the moon means lepore praeditus, leporem gerent.

8 Bergmann's Streifer. 3, 40. 204. Major's Myth. wtb. 1, 540.

* Donee's Illustr. of Shaksp. 1, 16 from the lips of a Frenoh traveller, whose
telescope the Cingalese had often borrowed, to have a good look at the hare in the
moon.



Digitized by



Google



MAN IN THE MOON. 717

M&ni, as one may see from the earth (sv& sem si& m& af iorSu),
Sn. 12. That not the moon's phases bat her spots are here
meant, is plain enongh from the figure itself. No change of the
moon conld suggest the image of two children with a pail slung
on their shoulders. Moreover, to this day the Swedish people see
in the spots of the moon two persons carrying a big bucket on
a pole. 1 Bil was probably a girl, and Hiuki a boy, the former
apparently the same as the &synja named together with Sol in
Sn. 39 ; there it is spelt Bil, bat without sufficient reason ; the
neater ' bil ' signifies momentum, interstitium, a meaning that
would suit any appearance of the moon (conf. p. 874 on OHG.
pil). What is most important for us, out of this heathen fancy
of a kidnapping man of the moon, which, apart from Scandinavia,
was doubtless in vogue all over Teutondom, if not farther, there
has evolved itself since a christian adaptation. They say the
man in the moon is a wood-stealer, who during church time on
the holy sabbath committed a trespass in the wood, and was then
transported to the moon as a punishment ; there he may be seen
with the axe on his back and the bundle of brushwood (dornwelle)
in his hand. Plainly enough the water-pole of the heathen story
has been transformed into the axe's shaft, and the carried pail
into the thornbush ; the general idea of theft was retained, but
special stress laid on the keeping of the christian holiday ; the
man suffers punishment not so much for cutting firewood, as
because he did it on a Sunday. 3 The interpolation is founded on
Numb. 15, 32-6, where we are*told of a man that gathered
sticks on the sabbath, and was stoned to death by the congrega-
tion of Israel, but no mention is made of the moon and her spots.
As to when this story first appeared in Germany I have no means
of telling, it is almost universally prevalent now ; s in case the
full-moon's name of wadeL wedel in the sense of a bunch of twigs *

1 Dalin 1, 158: men anna fins den meningen bland var almoge. Ling's
Eddoraas sinnebildsl&ra 1, 78 : anna sager allmanheten i S&draswerge, att m&nens
flackar aro tvenne varelser, som bara en brygg&i (bridge-bucket, slung pall).

3 A Westphalian story says, the man dressed the church with thorns on
Sunday, and was therefore put, bundle and all, into the moon.

* Hebel has made a pretty song about it, pp. 86-9 : ' me het em gsait der
DieterleJ on which Schm. 2, 583 asks : is this Dietrich of Bern, translated in
classic fashion to the sky ? We must first make sure that the poet found the name
already in the tradition.

4 In the Henneberg distr. wadel means brushwood, twigs tied up in a bundle,
esp. fir-twigs, wadeln to tie up brushwood (Beinwald 2, 137) ; this may however
come from the practice of cutting wood at full-moon.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



718 SKY AND STAJRS.

has itself arisen out of the story (p. 712), it must be of pretty
high antiquity. In Tobler's Appenzell sprachsch. 20 b we are
told : An arma ma (a poor man) het alawU am sonnti holz
ufg'lesa (picked up wood). Do hed em der liebe Gott d'wahl
g'loh (let him choose), 6b er lieber wott i' der sonn verbrenna,
oder im mo ; verfrura (burn in sun, or freeze in moon. Var. :
in'n kalta mo* ihi, oder i' d' holl abi). Do will' er lieber in'n mo'
ihi. Dromm sied ma* no' ietz an 9 ma 9 im mo* inna, wenn's wedel
ist. Er hed a* puscheli uff'em rogga (bush on his back). Kuhn's
Mark, sagen nos. 27. 104. 130 give us three different accounts :
in one a broom-maker has bound twigs (or a woman has spun) on
a Sunday, in another a man has spread manure, in the third he
has stolen cabbage-stumps; and the figure with the bunch of
twigs (or the, spindle), with the dungfork, with the cabbage-stalk,
is supposed to form the spots in the moon. The earliest authority
I know of is Fischart's Garg. 1 30 b : g sah im mon ein mannlin,
das holz gestohlen hett ; ' Praetorius says more definitely, Welt-
beschr. 1, 447 : the superstitious folk declared the dark spots on
the moon to be the man that gathered sticks on the sabbath and
was stoned therefor. The Dutch account makes the man steal
vegetables, so he appears in the moon with the ' bundel moes ' on
his shoulders (Westendorp p. 129). The English tradition seems
pretty old. Chaucer in his Testament of Creseide 260-4 de-
scribes the moon as lady Cynthia :

Her gifce (gown) was gray and ful of spottis blake,

and on her brest a chorl paintid ful even

bering a bush of thomis on his bake,

which for his theft might clime no ner the heven.

In Ritson's Anc. songs (Lond. 1 790), p. 35 is a ' song upon
the man in the moon,' beginning thus :

Mon in the mone stond and strit (standeth and strideth),

on his bot forks is burthen he bereth;

hit is muche wonder that he na doun slyt (slideth),

for doutelesse he valle, he shoddreth and shereth,

when the forst freseth much chele he byd (chill he bideth) ;

the thornes beth kene, is hattren to-tereth.

Shivering with cold, he lugs on his fork a load of thorns, which
tear his coat, he had cut them down and been impounded by the
forester; the difficult and often unintelligible song represents



Digitized by VjOOQIC



MAN IN THE MOON. 719

him as a lazy old man, who walks a bit and stands a bit, and
is drunk as well ; not a word about desecration of the sabbath.
Shakspeare alludes more than once to the man in the moon;
Tempest ii. 2 : ' I was the man i' th' moon, when time was' . . .
' I have seen thee in her, and I do adore thee : my mistress shewed
me thee and thy dog and thy bush.* Mids. N. Dr. iii. 1 : i Ono
must come in with a bush of thorns and a lanthorn, and say he
comes to present the person of Moonshine/ In Gryphius too
the player who acts the moon ties a bush round his body (conf.
Ir. elfenm. no. 20).

Two more, and those conflicting, interpretations of the moon's
spots are likewise drawn from the Bible. Either it is Isaac bear*
ing a burthen of wood for the sacrifice of himself on Mount Moriah
(Praetor. Weltbeschr. 1, 447) ; or it is Cain carrying a bundle of
thorns on his shoulders, and offering to the Lord the cheapest gift
from his field. 1 This we find as far back as Dante, Parad. 2, 50.

che sono i segni bui
di questo corpo, che laggiuso in terra
fan di Cam favoleggiare altrui ?

And Inferno 20, 126 : Gaino e le spine. On this passage Landino
remarks : ' ciod la luna, nella quale i volgare vedendo una certa
ombra, credono che sia Oaino, c' habbia in spalla una forcata di
pruni.' And another commentator : ' accommodandosi alia favola
del volgo, che sieno quelle macchie Oaino, che inalzi una forcata
di spine. 9

Nearly all these explanations agree in one thing : they suppose
the spots to be a human figure carrying something on its shoulder,
whether a hare, a pole and bucket, an axe and thorns, or the load
of thorns alone. 2 A wood-stealer or fratricide accounts for the
spots of the moon, as a chaff-stealer (p. 357) does for the streaks
in the milky way.

There must have been yet more traditions. A Netherl. poet
of the 14th century speaks of the dark stripes that stand

1 The story of the first fratricide seems to have made a peculiarly deep im-
pression on the new converts from heathenism ; they fancy him a wicked giant,
conf. Beow. 213 seq., and supra p. 525.

3 Water, an essential part of the Norse myth, is wanting in the story of the
man with the thorn bosh, but it re-appears in the Carniolan story (for kramerisch
read krainerisch) cited in Brentano's Libussa p. 421 : the man in the moon is called
Kotar, he makes her grow by pouring water.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



720 SKY AND STARS.

recht int midden van der mane,
dat men in duitsche heet ludergheer ;

in another passage it is lendegher 1 (for leudegher?); and Willems
in Messager de Gand, 1, 195, following a MS. of 1351, reads, ' dat
men in dietsch heet lodegeer ; ' but none of these forms is intel-
ligible to me. Perhaps the proper name Ludgfir, Leodegarius,
OHG. LiutkSr, has to do with it, and some forgotten legend of
the Mid. Ages. A touching religious interpretation is handed
down by Berthold 145, surely not invented by himself, that the
moon is Mary Magdalene, and the spots her tears of repentance
(see SuppL).

The Sun has had a slighter influence than the moon on super-
stitious notions and observances. Magical herbs must be
gathered, if not by moonlight, at least before sunrise (p. 621),
and healing waters be drawn before sunrise (p. 586). The
mounting sun dispels all magic, and bids the spirits back to their
subterranean abode.

Twice in the year the sun changes his course, in summer to
sink, in winter to rise. These turning-points of the sun were
celebrated with great pomp in ancient times, and our St. John's
or Midsummer fires *are a relic of the summer festival (p. 617
seq.). The higher North, the stronger must have been the im-
pression produced by either solstice, for at the time of the sum-
mer one there reigns almost perpetual day, and at the winter one
perpetual night. Even Procopius (ed. Bonn. 2, 206) describes
how the men of Thule, after their 35 days' night, climb the
mountain-tops to catch sight of the nearing sun. Then they
celebrate their holiest feast (see SuppL).

Tacitus tells us (cap. 45), that the sun after setting shoots up
such a radiance over the Suiones, that it pales the stars till
morning. ( Sonum insuper audiri, formas deorum et radios capitis
aspici, persuasio adjicit.' I would have turned this passage to
account in Chap. VI., as proving the existence of Germanic gods,

1 Van Wyn's Avondstonden 1, 806. Bilderdijk's Verklarende gestachtlijst der
naamworden 2, 198 has ludegeer, ludegaar, and explains it, no doubt wrongly, as
lnikenaar (leodiensis). However, he tells the old story : « 't mannetjen in de maan,
dat gezegd werd een doornboseh op zijn rag te heben, en om dat hy 't gestolen had,
niet hooger ten hemel te mogen opklimmeD, maar daar ingebannen te zijn. 1 Exactly
as in Chancer.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SOLSTICE. SUNSET. 721

had it not seemed credible that such accounts may not have
reached the Romans from Germany itself, but been spread among
them by miscellaneous travellers' tales. Strabo 3, 1 (Tsch. 1,
868) quotes from Posidonius a very similar story of the noise
made by the setting sun in the sea between Spain and Africa :
fi€%o) Svvetv rbv fjkiov iv ry TrapoorceavlTiSt, fiera yfro<f>ov 7rapair\n-
<tIq>$, wcravel cr/fovTO? rov irekarfov? /caret, cfiiciv avrou 8ia to
ifiirLirreiv et? rbv fivdov. But the belief may even then have
prevailed among Germans too ; the radiant heads, like a saint's
glory, were discussed at p. 323, and I will speak of this mar-
vellous music of the rising and setting sun in the next chapter.
Meanwhile the explanation given of the red of morning and
evening, in the old AS. dialogue between Saturn and Solomon
(Thorpe's Anal. p. 100), is curious : 'Saga me, forhwan by3 seo
sunne redd on cefen ?' ' Ic ]>e secge, for]?on heo 16ca3 on helle.'
' Saga me, hwl scineB heo sw& redde on morgene ?' € Ic )>e secge,
forjjon hyre twynaS hwaafter heo meeg cSe [orig. )>e] ne meeg
Jrisne middaneard eondisctnan sw& hyre beboden is/ The sun
is red at even, for that she looketh on hell; and at morn, for
that she doubteth whether she may complete her coarse as she is
bidden.

Not only about the sun and moon, but about the other stars,
our heathen antiquity had plenty of lore and legend. It is a very
remarkable statement of Jornandes cap. 11, that in Sulla's time
the Goths under Dicenaeus, exclusive of planets and signs of the
zodiac, were acquainted with 344 stars that ran from east to west.
How many could we quote now by their Teutonic names ?

The vulgar opinion imagines the stars related to each individual
man as friend or foe. 1 The constellation that shone upon his birth
takes him under its protection all his life through ; this is called
being born under a good or lucky star. From this guidance, this
secret sympathy of dominant constellations, fate can be foretold.
Conversely, though hardly from native sources, it is said in the
Renner 10984 that every star has an angel who directs it to the
place whither it should go.



1 Swem die sternen werdent gram,
dem wirt der m&ne lihte alsam. Frid. 108, 3.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



722 SKY AND STAES.

There is a pious custom of saluting the celestial luminaries
before going to bed at night (Sop. I, 112), and among the Mod.
Greeks, of offering a prayer when the evening star is on the rise.

According to the Edda, all the stars were sparks of fire from
Muspells-heim, that flew about the air at random, till the gods
assigned them seats and orbits, Sn. 9. S»m. 1.

Ignited vapours, which under a starry sky fall swiftly through
the air like fiery threads — Lat. trajectio stellae, stella transvolans,
Ital. stella cadente, Fr. 6toile filante, Span, estrella vaga, Swed.
stjernfall, Dan. stiernskud (star-shoot), what the Greeks call
Sidyew trajicere — are by our people ascribed to a trimming of
the stars 1 light ; they are like the sparks we let fall in snuffing a
candle. We find this notion already in Wolfram's Wh. 822, 18 :

Dehein sterne ist sd lieht, No star so bright

emfurbe sich etswenne. 1 but trims itself somewhen.

Hence our phrase of ' the stars snuffing themselves/ and our
subst. 8ternputze, stemschnuppe. These falling stars are ominous, 8
and whoever sees them should say a prayer (Sup. I, 595) : to the
generous girl who has given away her all, they bring down with
them [or turn into] gold- pieces (Kinderm. 153) ; nay, whatever
wish you form while the snuff is falling, is fulfilled (Tobler 408 b ).
The Lithuanians beautifully weave shooting stars into the fate-
mythus : the verpeya (spinneress) begins to spin the thread of the
new-born on the sky, and each thread ends in a star; when a man
is dying, his thread snaps, and the star turns pale and drops
(Narbutt, 1, 71).

A comet is called tail-star, hair-star in Aventin 74 b . 119 b ,
peacock-tail (Schm. 1, 327) ; and its tail in Detmar 1, 242 schin-
schove, from schof a bundle of straw. Its appearing betokens
events fraught with peril, especially the death of a king (Greg,
tur. 4, 9) : ' man siht an der zit einen sterren, sam einen pfawen
zagel wit (wide as a peacock's tail), sd miiezen siben sachen in
der werlt ergftn/ MsH. 3, 468 h (see Suppl.).

Our old heathen fancies about the fixed stars have for the most
part faded away, their very names are almost all supplanted by

1 MS. n. reads ' subere sich.' Even OHG. has furban (mundare, expiare).
3 So with the Greeks (Beinh. fuchs p. lxxii.). In a poem of Beranger: ' mon
enfant, un mortel expire, son etoile tombe a Tinstant.'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SHOOTING STAR. COMET. PLANET. 723

learned astronomic appellations; only a few have managed to
save themselves in ON. legend or among the common people.

Whether the planets were named after the great gods, we
cannot tell : there is no trace of it to be found even in the North.
Planet-names for days of the week seem to have been imported,
though very early, from abroad (p. 126 seq.) Other reasons
apart, it is hardly conceivable that the heathen, who honoured
certain fixed stars with names of their own, should not have
distinguished and named the travelling stars, whose appearances
and changes are so much more striking. The evening and
morning Venus is called eveningstar, morningstar, OHG. apant-
8terno, tagasterno, like the Lat. vesper and lucifer. 1 The tunkeU
sterne in Ms. 1, 38 b seems to be vesperugo, the eveningstar be-
ginning to blaze in the twilight, conf. Oramm. 2, 526. An OHG.
uhtosterno morningstar, N. Bth. 223, is from uht&, Goth, uhtvd
crepusculum. Gl. Trev. 22 b have stelbom hesperus; can this be
stellbaum, the bird-catcher's pole? But in Rol. 240, 27 'die
urm&ren stalboume ' stands for stars in general, and as every star
was provided with stool or stand (p. 700-1), we may connect stel-
boum, stalboum with this general meaning. There is perhaps
more of a mythic meaning in the name nahtfare for eveningstar
(Heumanni opusc. 453. 460), as the same word is used of the witch
or wise-woman out on her midnight jaunt. The Anglo-Saxons
called the eveningstar swana steorra (bubulcorum stella), because
the swains drove their herd home when it appeared. Again, in
0. iv. 9, 24 Christ is compared to the sun, and the apostles to
the eleven daystars, ' dagasterron ' here meaning not so much
luciferi as the signs of the zodiac. There are no native names
for the polar star (see Suppl.) .

Twice the Bdda relates the origin of particular stars, but no
one knows now what constellations are meant. The legend of
Orvandih-ta and the AS. Earendel, OHG. Orentil, has been cited,
p. 374 ; this bright luminary may have meant the morningstar.
Then the &ses, having slain the giant Thiassi, had to atone for it
to his daughter SkaSi. 0$inn took Thiassi's eyes and threw
them against the sky, where they formed two stars, Sn. 82-3.
These augu Thiassa are most likely two stars that stand near

1 In an old church-hymn Lucifer is provided with a chariot: ourrus jam poscit
phosphorus (reita giu fergdt tagastern), Hymn. 2, 8.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



724 SKY AND STABS.

each other, of equal size and brightness, perhaps the Twins ?
This is another instance of the connexion we found between stars
and eyes ; and the toe translated to heaven is quite of a piece
with the ' tongues ' and the correspondence of the parts of the
body to the macrocosm, p. 568 (see Suppl.).

The milky -way and its relation to Irmin I have dealt with,
pp. 356-8.

Amongst all the constellations in our sky, three stand pro-
minent to the popular eye : Ursa major, Orion and the Pleiades.
And all of them are still known by native names ; to which I
shall add those in use among the Slavs, Lithuanians and Finns,
who give them the same place of honour as we do.

The Great Bear was doubtless known to our ancestors, even
before their conversion, as waggon, wain; which name, un-
borrowed, they had in common with kindred [Aryan] nations,
and therefore it is the common people's name for it to this
day : they say, at dead of night the heavenly wain turns round
with a great noise, conf. p. 745. So the Swiss (Tobler 264*) :
when the herra-waga stands low, bread is cheap, when high, it is
dear. 0. v. 17, 29 uses the pi. f wagano gistelli/ meaning at
once the greater waggon and the less ; which last (Ursa minor)
Berthold calls the wegelin. 1 So 'des wagenes gerihte/ Wackern.
lb. 772, 26. It comes of a lively way of looking at the group,
which circling round the polar star always presents the appear-
ance of four wheels and a long slanting pole, deichsel (temo), on
the strength of which the AS. sometimes has Jrisl alone : wcenes
Jnsla (thill), Boeth. Eawlins. 192 b . References are given at
p. 151, also the reasons for my conjecture that the waggon meant
is that of Wuotan the highest god. True, an 0. Swed. chronicle
connects the Swed. name harlwagen with Thfirr, who stepping
into his chariot holds the seven stars in his hand (Thor statt
naken som ett barn, siu stjernor i handen och Karlewagn), which
I will not absolutely deny ; but it is Wdden stories in particular
that are transferred to the Frankish Charles (p. 153). When
in Gl. Jun. 188 f Arturus' is rendered wagan (though Gl. Hrab.

1 Ich hftn den glanzen himelwagen tmd daz gestirne besehen, Troj. 19062.
There may for that matter be several himel wagons, as there were many gods with
cars. Cervantes too, in a song of the gitaniUa (p. m. 11), says : Si en el cielo hay
estrellas, que lucientes carrot forman.



Digitized by



Google



CHARLES'S WAIN. 725

951 b has s arctus' the bear = wagan in himile), that is explained
by the proximity of the star to the Great Bear's tail, as the very
name ap/cTovpo? shews. 1 I have to add, that Netherland cities
(Antwerp, Groningen) have the stars of the Great or the Lesser
Bear on their seals (Messager de Gand 3, 339), and in England
the Charles-wain is painted on the signboards of taverns.

The Greeks have both names in use, ap/cro? bear, and afia^a
waggon, the Romans both ursa and plaustrum, as well as a
septentrio or septentriones from trio, plough-ox. Pr. chew, charriot,
Ital. Span, carro. Pol. woz (plaustrum*), woz niebieski (heavenly
wain), Boh. wos, and at the same time ogka (thill, sometimes og,
wog) for Bootes ; the Illyrian Slavs Jcola, pi. of kolo wheel, there-
fore wheels, i.e. wain, but in their Jcola rodina and rodokola ' I
cannot explain the adjuncts rodo, rodina. Lith. gryzulio rats,
gryido rats, from ratas (rota), while the first word, unexplained
by Mielcke, must contain the notion of waggon or heaven ; 3 Lett.
ratti (rotae). Esth. wanhri tahhed, waggon-stars, from wanker
(currus) ; Hung, gontzol szekere, from szeker (currus), the first
word being explained in ' Hungaria in parabolis * p. 48 by a
mythic Gontzol, their first waggoner. Prominent in the Finnish
epos are paiwa the sun, Jcuu the moon, and otawa, which Castr£n
' translates karla-vagnen, they are imagined as persons and divine,
and often named together ; the Pleiades are named seulainen.

Never, either in our OHG. remains, or among Slavs, Lithu-
anians and Finns, 4 do we find the name borrowed from the
animal (ursa), though these nations make so much of the bear
both in legend and perhaps in worship (p. 668).

The carro menor is called by Spanish shepherds bocina, bugle ; 6
by Icelanders fiosakonur a lopti, milkmaids of the sky, Biorn sub
v. P. Magnusen's Dag. tid. 104-5 (see Suppl.).

1 [Prom otpot keeper, not odp& tail] . 'ApKrwfwXat [bear-ward, or as we might
say] Waggoner, is Bootes, of whom Greek fable has much to tell. Aretnros .stands
in Bootes, and sometimes for Bootes. An OHG. gloss, Dint. 1. 167% seems
curiously to render Bootes by ttuffala, Graff 6, 662. Is this stuphila, stipula,
stubbier

3 Bosnian Bible, Ofen 1881. 3, 154. 228. In Vuk roda is stork, whence the
adj. rodin, but what of that ? This roda seems to be rota, rad, wheel over again.

8 Lith. Bible, Konigsb. 1816, has in Job 9, 9 gryzo wezimnuu; gryzdas,
grizulas is thill, and wezimmas waggon.

4 Can this be reconciled with the statement, p. 729, that Finn, otawa-bear?
The Mongol, for bear is utSg6. — Trans.

* Don Quixote 1, 20 (ed. Ideler 1, 232 ; conf. 5, 261).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



726 SKY AND STARS.

The small, almost invisible star just above the middle one in
the waggon's thill has a story to itself. It is called waggoner,
hind, in Lower Germany dumeke, thumbkin, dwarf, Osnabr.
dumlte, Meckl. duming, in Holstein 'Hans Diimken, Sans Dumkl
sitt opm wagn/ They say that once a waggoner, having given
our Saviour a lift, was offered the kingdom of heaven for his
reward ; but he said he would sooner be driving from east to
west to all eternity (as the wild hunter wished for evermore to
hunt). His desire was granted, there stands his waggon in the
sky, and the highest of the three thill-stars, the ' rider ' so-called,
is that waggoner. Another version in MullenhofPs Schles. Hoist,
sagen no. 484. I daresay the heathen had a similar fiction about
Wddan's charioteer. Joh. Praetorius De suspecta poli declina-
tione, Lips. 1675, p. 35: 'qui hanc stellam non praeteriissent,
etiamsi minor quam Alcor, das knechtgen, der dumeke, das reuter-
lein, hnechtfinh fuisset; ' and again on the thief's thumb, p. 140 :
' fabula de pollicari auriga, dumeke, fuhrman.' That the same
fancy of the waggoner to this constellation prevails in the Bast,
appears from Niebuhr's Arabia, and the Hungarian Oontzol seems
closely related to him ; in Greek legend likewise Zeus places the
waggon's driver (rjvloxo?) or inventor Erichthonius among the
stars, though not in the Great Bear, but between Perseus and
the Twins in the galaxy. The Bohemian formdnek, wozatag
(auriga) or bowozny signify Arcturus, Bootes and Erichthonius
(Jungm. 1, 550. 3, 401), and palecky u wozu thumblings on
waggon. But in Slovenic, it seems, hervor (Murko 85. Jarnik
229 b ) and burovzh mean the waggoner and the Polar Star.

The cluster of brilliant stars in which the Greeks recognised
the figure of Orion l had various Teutonic names, the reasons of
which are not always clear to us now. First, the three stars in
a line that form Orion's belt are called in Scandinavia Friggjar-
rockr, Friggerok (pp. 270. 302-3), and also by transfer to Mary
Mariarok, Marirok (Peter Syv in the Danske digtek. middelald.
1, 102), Mariteen; here is plain connecting of a star-group with
the system of heathen gods. The same three stars are to this
day called by the common folk in Up. Germany the three mowers,
because they stand in a row like mowers in a meadow : a homely

1 Our MHG. poets adopt Orion without translating it, MS. 1, 87*. The
Romans, ace. to Varro and Festus, called it Jugula, it is not known why.



Digitized by



Google



WAGGONER. ORION. 727

designation, like that of waggon, which arose in the childlike
fancy of a pastoral people. OHG. glosses name Orion pfluoc
(aratrum), and in districts on the Rhine he is called the rake
(rastrum) : he is a tool of the husbandman or the mower. The
Scotch pleuch, Engl, plough, is said of Charles's wain. Some
AS. (perhaps more OS.) glosses translate Orion by eburSring,
eburffrung, ebirdring, ebirthiring (Gl. Jan. 369. 371), l which in
pure AS. would have been eoforSryng, eforSring ; it can mean
nothing but boar-throng, since J>ryng, as well as \ rang, Mid.
Lat. drungus, is turba. How any one came to see a herd of wild
boars in the group, or which stars of Orion it included, I do not
know : the wild huntsman of the Greek legend may have nothing
to do with it, as neither that legend nor the group as seen by
Greek eyes includes any hunted animal ; the boars of the Teutonic
constellation have seemingly quite a different connexion, and
perhaps are founded on mere comparison. OHG. glosses give
us no epurdruncy but its relation to Iuwaring and Iring was
pointed out, p. 359 note. In the latter part of the Mid. Ages
our ' three mowers ' or the Scandinavian ' Mary's distaff* is called
Jacobs-stab, Boh. JahubahM; the heathenish spindle, like the
heathenish Irmin-street (p. 357 note), is handed over to the
holy apostle, who now staff in hand, paces the same old heavenly
path ; in some parts Peter 9 8 staff is preferred. The Esthonians
call Orion warda tahJied, spear stars, from ' wardas ' spear, and
perhaps staff, like St. James's staff. The Lithuanians szenpjuwis,
hay-star? from 'szen' foenum (Nesselmann 515), as August is
called szenpjutis ; because the constellation rises at hay-harvest ?
perhaps also with reference to the € three-mowers ' ? for in the
same way several Slav nations have the name kosi scythes, Boh.
kosy (Jungm. 2, 136), Pol. kosy (Linde 1092*), Sloven, koszi
(Murko 142) mowers. Other Slavic names of Orion are shtupka
(Bosn. Bible, 3, 154), for which we ought to read shtapka, in Vuk
shtaka crutch, crosier, from our stabchen, Carniol. pdlize staves,
'in Stulli babini sctapi old wives' staves ; and hruzilice,* wheelers,
rovers? from 'kruziti' vagari (see Suppl.).

1 The second passage has * eburdnung,' an error, but an evidence of the MS.'s
age, for in the 8-9th cent, the second stroke of r was made as long as that of n.

3 Dobrowsky's Slavin p. 425 ; the Pol. hruilic is crocklet, mag. Hanka's
Altbohm. glossen have 66, 857 kruzlyk ciroulea, 99, 164 krusslyk liz, which I do
not understand. Can it be crutch 7



VOL. n.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



728 SKY AND STABS.

Between the shoulders of the Ball is a space thickly sown with
stars, but in which seven (really six) larger ones are recognis-
able; hence it is called sieben-gestirn, OHG. thaz sibunstirri,
0. v. 17, 29. Diut. i. 520\ Gl. Jun. 188 (where it is confounded
with the Hyades not far off, in the Ball's head) . Beside this
purely arithmetical denomination, there are others more living :
Gr. II\€id$€$, Ion. IlXrjZdSes, seven daughters of Atlas and
Pleione, whom Zeus raised to the sky, II. 18, 486. Od. 5, 272,
and who, like the Norse Thiassi and Orvandill, are of giant kin ;
but some explain these Pleiads from irekeids wild dove, which
is usually iriXeca. 1 Lat. Vergiliae, of which Festus gives a lame
explanation. A German poet writes virilie, Amgb. 42 b .

The picture of the Pleiades that finds most favour among the
people in Germany and almost all over Europe is that of a hen
and seven chickens, which at once reminds us of the Greek seven
doves? Mod. Gr. irovKia (Fauriel 2, 277). Our klucke, kluckerin,
klucklienne, brut-henne mit den hiinlein ; Dan. aften-hone, even-
ing-hen (-honne, Dansk. digtek. middelald. 1, 102) ; Eugl. hen with
her chickens ; Fr. la poussiniere, in Lorraine poucherosse, covrosse
(couveuse, brood-hen, qui conduit des poussins) 8 ; Gris. cluotschas
or cluschas the cluck-hens ; Ital. gallinelle ; Boh. slepice s kufdtky
hen with chickens ; Hung, fiastik, fiastyuk from tik, tyuk gallina,
and fiazom pario. The sign of the cluck-hen seems to me inter-
grown with our antiquity. Nursery tales bring in a peculiar
feature, viz. that three nuts or eggs having been given as a pre-
sent, out of them come a golden dress, a silver dress, and a cluckie
with seven (or twelve) chickies, the three gifts representing sun,
moon and seven-stars. Kinder m. no. 88 (2, 18). So in the
Introd. to the Pentamerone, out of the miraculous nut comes a
voccola co dudece polecine. Now the Hungarian tale in Gaal p. 381
has ' golden hen and six chickens, 9 meaning the Pleiades ; and the
maiden, seeking her lost lover, has to obtain access to him by the
valuables contained in three nuts ; these were three dresses, on
which severally were worked the sun, the moon, and the seven-
stars (conf. Wigal. 812), being gifts of Sun, Moon, and Seven-

1 The Suppl. adds : ' the Pleiades, like doves, cany ambrosia to Zeus, bat one
alwayi gett lost in passing the Flanctae rocks, and Zens fills up their number again,
Athen. 4, 825-6.'— Homer tells the story simply of doves, WAauu, Od. 12, 61.— Teaks.

8 Conf. Pen tarn. 4, 8 * li sette palommielle,' seven children transformed.

» Mem. des antiq. 4, 876. 6, 121-9.



Digitized by



Google



PLEIADES. 729

stars, bestowed upon her in her wanderings. The third dress
tradition at last converted into the cluckie herself. Treasure-
hunters dig for the costly cluckie with her chicks ; . conf. the
sunken hoard, Chap. XXXII. A € hen and twelve hiinkeln ' was
also an earthly fine, Weisth. 1, 465. 499. I am not sure that wo
are entitled to connect the nut with ' Iduns huot ' ; but what is
( sun, moon and cluckie ' with us, is with the Finns far more
plainly 'paiwa, kuu, otawa/ i.e. sun, moon, bear. The Span, name
is ' las siete cabrillas ' seven kids. 1 Pol. baby old wives, Buss.
baba old wife [and nasedka sitting hen], Linde 1, 38*;. Serv.
vlashitsi (Vuk 78), vlashnitsi, (Bosn. Bible 3, 154, 223), Slov&n.
vlastovtse swallows? but Jarnik 229 b explains it € ramjstabe/ which
I do not understand. The 0. Boh. name too is obscure, sczyet-
nycze pleiades (Hanka's Glossen 58 b )=itetnice, bristly ones, from
st&tina seta? Sloven, gostoseotsi, gostozhirtsi the thick-sown?
The last name agrees with the Lith. and Finn, view, viz. the conr
stellation is a sieve having a great many holes, or sifting out a
heap of flour : Lith. s'etas Lett, setinsh, Esth. sool or soggel, Finn.
seula, seulainen. Why does Suchenwirt 4, 326 say, ' daz her daz
tailt sich in daz lant gleich recht als ain sibenatirn ' ? because the
army is so thickly spread over the land ?. (see Suppl.).

The origin of the Pleiades is thus related : Christ was passing
a baker's shop, when He smelt the new bread, and sent his dis-
ciples to ask for a loaf. The baker refused, but the baker's wife
and her six daughters were standing apart, and secretly gave.it.
For this they were set in the sky as the Seven-stars, while the
baker became the cuckoo (p. 676 baker's man), and so long as
he sings in spring, from St. Tiburtius's day to St. John's,, the
Seven-stars are visible in heaven. Compare with this the Nor-
wegian tale of Gertrude's bird (p. 673).

There may be a few more stars for which popular names still
exist. 3 In Lith. the Kids are artqjis su jduczeis plougher with
oxen, and Capella neszeja walgio food-bearer (f.).. Hanka'd 0.
Boh. gl. 58 b gives hrusa for Aldebaran, przyczek for Arcturus.
We might also expect to find names for the Hyades and Cas-

1 Don Quixote 2, 41 (Idel. 4, 83 ; conf. 6, 242).

* Cymric and Gaelic Bibles (Job 9, 9), retain the Latin names from the Vulgate;
from which it does not follow that these languages lack native names for stars.
Armstrong cites Gael, crannarain, baker's peel, for the Pleiades, and dragblod, fire-
tail, for the Lesser Bear.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



730 SKY AND STARS.

siopeia. But many stars are habitually confounded, as the
Pleiades with the Hyades or Orion, and even with the Wain and
Arcturus ; l what is vouched for by glosses alone, is not to be
relied on. Thus I do not consider it proved as yet that the names
plough and eburdrung really belong to Orion. By ' plough ' the
Irish Fairy-tales 2, 123 mean the Wain rather than Orion, and
who knows but the ' throng of boars ' may really stand for the
'TdSe? (from u?) 2 and the Lat. Suculae ? (see Suppl.).

Still more unsafe and slippery is the attempt to identify the
constellations of the East, founded as they are on such a different
way of looking at the heavens. Three are named in Job 9, 9 :
t£^ ash, HD^S klmeh, bv$ kstl ; 8 which the Septuagint renders
w\etaSe9, e<mrepo$, ap/crovpo?, the Vulgate 'Arcturus, Orion,
Hyades/ and Luther s the Wain, Orion, the Glucke (hen)/ In
Job 38, 31 klmeh and ksll are given in the LXX as irXeuiSe^
'flpltov, in Vulg. as c Pleiades, Arcturus/ in Diut. 1, 520 as
' Siebenstirni, Wagan/ and m Luther as ' Siebenstern, Orion.'
For kstl in Isaiah 13, 10 the LXX has 'fipuov, Vulg. merely
' splendor/ Luther ' Orion/ In Amos 5, 8 ktmeh and ksil are
avoided in liXX, but rendered in Vulg. ' Arcturus, Orion/ and
by Luther 'the Glucke, Orion/ Michaelis drew up his 86
questions on the meaning of these stars, and Niebuhr received
the most conflicting answers from Arabian Jews ; * on the whole
it seemed likeliest, that (1) ash was the Arabian constellation
om en nosh, (2) kimeh or chima the Arab, toriye, (3) kstl the
Arab, sheil (sihh61) ; the three corresponding to Ursa major,



1 Keisersperg's Postil 206 : * the sea-star or the Wain, or die henn mit den hiinlin
as ye call it. 1 Grobianus 1572 fol. 93 b : * wo der wagen stent, und wo die gluck mit
hunkeln gent.' Several writers incorrectly describe the * diimke, dtiming ' as ' sie-
bengestirn ' ; even Tobler, when he says 370 b * three stars of the siebeng. are called
the horses, near which stands a tiny star, the waggoner,' 1 is evidently thinking of the
Wain's thill [Germans often take the 4 seven-stars' for Ursa instead of Pleiades] .

* It has long been thought a settled point, that Suculae (little sows) was a blun-
dering imitation of 'To5«, as if that came from 5s a sow, whereas it means ' the
rainers ' from 0«i» to rain (* ab imbribus,' Cicero ; * pluvio nomine,' Pliny). Does
the author mean to reopen the question? Did the later Greeks and Komans,
ashamed of having these ' little sows ' in the sky, invent the * rainers ' theory ?
May not Suculae at all events be a genuine old Roman name, taken from some meri-
torious mythical pigs? — Trans.

8 In Hebr. the three words stand in the order ' Ash, k'sil, kimah ; and their
transposition here does some injustice to the 'Vulg. and Luther. As a fact, two out
of the four times that k'sil occurs, it is 'fl/^wv in LXX, and the other two times it is
Orion in Vulgate. Luther and the Engl, version are consistent throughout. — Trans.

4 Beschr. von Arabien p. 114 ; some more Arabian names of stars, pp. 112 — 6.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CONSTELLATIONS. 731

Pleiades and Sinus. If we look to the verbal meanings, nosh,
which some Arabs do change into ash, is feretrum, bier or
barrow, 1 a thing not very different from a ' wain ' ; kimeh, kima
seems to signify a thick cluster of stars, much the same sense as
in that name of ' sieve ' : Icdl, means foolish, ungodly, a lawless
giant, hence Orion.

Constellations can be divided into two kinds, according to
their origin. One kind requires several stars, to make up the
shape of some object, a man, beast, etc. ; the stars then serve as
ground or skeleton, round which is drawn the full figure as
imagination- sees it. Thus, three stars in a row form St. James's
staff, distaff, a belt ; seven group themselves into the outline of a
bear, others into that of a giant Orion. The other kind is, to my
thinking, simpler, bolder, and older : a whole man is seen in a
single star, without regard to his particular shape, which would
disappear from sheer distance ; if the tiny speck drew nearer to
us, it might develop itself again. So the same three stars as
before are three men mowing ; the seven Pleiads are a hen and
her chickens ; two stars, standing at the same distance on each
side of a faintly visible cluster, were to the ancient Greeks two
asses feeding at a crib. Here fancy is left comparatively free
and unfettered, while those outline-figures call for some effort of
abstraction ; yet let them also have the benefit of Buttmann's apt
remark, 8 that people did not begin with tracing the complete
figure in the sky, it was quite enough to have made out a portion
of it; the rest remained undefined, or was filled up afterwards
according to fancy. On- this plan perhaps the Bear was first
found in the three stars of the tail, and then the other four
supplied the body. Our Wain shews a combination of both
methods : the thill arose, like the Bear's tail, by outline, but the
four wheels consist each of a single star. One point of agree-
ment is important, that the Greek gods put men among the
stars, the same as Th6rr and OSinn do (pp. 375. 723; see Suppl.).

The appearance of the rainbow in the sky has given rise to a
number of mythic notions. Of its rounded arch the Edda makes
a heavenly bridge over which the deities walk ; hence it is called



1 Bocharti hierorz., ed. BosenmiUler 2, 680.

2 Origin of the Ork constell. (in Abh. der Berl. aead. 1826, p. 19-63).



Digitized by



Google



732 SKY AND STABS.

Asbru (Seem. 44*), more commonly Bif-rost (OHG. would be pipa-
rasta) the quivering tract, for rost, Goth, and OHG. rasta, means
a definite distance, like mile or league. It is the best of all
bridges (Srem. 46*), strongly built out of three colours ; yet the
day cometh when it shall break down, at the end of the world,
when the sons of Muspell shall pass over it, Sn. 14. 72. The
tail of this bridge l extends to Himinbiorg, Heimdall's dwelling
(Sn. 21), and Heimdallr is the appointed keeper of the bridge ;
he guards it against hrimthurses and mountain-giants, 3 lest they
make their way over the bridge into heaven, Sn. 18. 30. The
whole conception is in keeping with the cars in which the
gods journey through heaven, and the roads that stretch across
it (conf. p. 361). It was Christianity that first introduced the
O. Test, notion of the celestial bow being a sign of the covenant
which God made with men after the >rain of the Deluge : OHG.
reganpogo, AS. scurboga, shower-bow, Caedm. 93, 5. Meanwhile
some ancient superstitions linger still. The simple folk imagine,
that on the spot where the rainbow springs out of the ground,
there is a golden dish, or a treasure lies buried; that gold coins
or pennies drop out of the rainbow. When gold- pieces are picked
up, they are cMed'regenbogen-sehusselein (-dishes), patellae Iridis,
which the sun squanders in the rainbow. In Bavaria they call
the rainbow himmelring, sonnenring, and those coins himmelring-
8chiis8eln (Schm. 2, 196. 3, 109 : conf. supra p. 359 note). The
Romans thought the bow in rising drank water out of the ground :
' bibit arcus, pluet hodie/ Plant. Curcul. 1, 2 ; € purpureus pluvias
cur bibit arcus aquas ? ' Propert. iii. 5, 32. Tibull. i. 4, 44. Virg.
Georg. 1, 380. Ov. Met. 1, 271. One mustnotf point with fingers
at the rainbow, any more than at stars, Braunschw. anz. 1754, p.
1063. Building on the rainbow means a bootless enterprise (note
on Freidank p. 319. 320, and Nib. Lament 1095. Spiegel,
161, 6) ; and setting on the rainbow (Bit. 2016) apparently

1 Brfar-spordr (we still speak of a bridge's head, ttte de pont), as if an animal
had laid itself across the river, with head and tail resting on either bank. But we
must not omit to notice the word tpordr (prop, cauda piscis) ; as rost, rasta denote
a certain stadium, so do the Goth. spaHrdt OHG. spurt a recurring interval, in the
sense of our '(so many) times': thus, in Fragm. theot. 15, 19, dhrim spurtim
(tribus vicious), where rastom would do as well. Do the ' runar & brtianpordi,*
Sam. 196* mean the rainbow?

9 Giants are often made bridge-keepers (p. 656 n.) : the maiden Mdtiguur guards
giallarbru, Bn. 67.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



RAINBOW. 733

exposing to great danger? Is 'behflsen nnebene Af regenbogen*
(Tit. Hahn 4061) to be unequally seated? In H. Sachs ii. 287 a
man gets pushed off the rainbow. The Finns have a song in
which a maiden sits on the rainbow, weaving a golden garment.
Might not our heathen ancestors think and say the like of their
piparasta ? There is a remarkable point of agreement on the
part of the Chinese: 'tunc et etiamnum viget superstitio, qua
iridem orientalem digito monstrcure nefas esse credunt ; qui hano
monstraverit, huic subito ulcus in manu futurum. Iridem habent
Sinae pro signo libidinis effrenatae quae regnat.' 1

The Slavic name for the rainbow is 0. SI. duga, Serv. and
Buss, duga, duga nebeskia, Boh. duha, prop, a stave (tabula, of a
cask), hence bow; the Servians say, any male creature that
passes under the rainbow turns into a female, and a female into
a male (Vuk sub v.). 2 Two Slov&nic names we find in Murko :
mdvra, mdvritsa, which usually means a blackish-brindled cow ;
and bozhyi stolets, god's stool, just as the rainbow is a chair of
the Welsh goddess O&ridwen (Dav. Brit. myth. 204); conf.
s God's chair/ supra p. 136. Lett, warraurihksne, liter, the
mighty beech ? Lith. Laumes yosta, Lauma's or Laima's girdle
(sup. p. 416) ; also dangaus yosta heaven's girdle, kilpinnis
dangaus heaven's bow, AroryJcszte weather-rod ; more significant
is the legend from Polish Lithuania, noticed p. 580, which
introduces the rainbow as messenger after the flood, and as
counsellor. Finn, taiviancaari, arcus coelestis. In some parts
of Lorraine courroie do 8. Lienard, couronne de 8. Bernard. In
Superst. Esth. no. 65 it is the thunder-god's sickle, an uncom-
monly striking conception.

To the Greeks the Z/w was, as in the 0. Test., a token of the
gods, II. 11, 27 ; but at the same time a half-goddess *I/w, who
is sent out as a messenger from heaven. The Indians assigned
the painted bow of heaven to their god Indras. In our own
popular belief the souls of the just are led by their guardian-
angels into heaven over the rainbow, Ziska's Oestr. volksm.
49. 110.

As for that doctrine of the Edda, that before the end of the



1 Chi-king ex Iat. P. Lacharme, interpr. Jul. Mohl, p. 242.

9 Like the contrary effects of the planet Venus on the two sexes in Superst. 1, 167.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



734 SKt AOT) STABS.

world Bifrost will break, I find it again in the German belief
■during the Mid. Ages that for a number of years before the
Judgment-day the rainbow will no longer be seen : € ouch hfirt
ich sagen, daz man stn (the regenpogen) nieht ensehe drizich jar
(30 years) vor deme suontage/ Diut. 3, 61. Hugo von Trim-
berg makes it 40 years (Eenner 19837) :

S6 man den regenbogen siht,
so enzaget diu werlt niht
dan darn&ch iiber vierzecjdr;

so the rainbow appear, the world hath no fear, until thereafter 40
year. Among the signs the Church enumerates of the approach
of the Last Day, this is not to be found (see Suppl.).



Digitized by



Google



CHAPTER XXIII.
DAT AND NIGHT.

All the liveliest fancies of antiquity respecting day and night
are intertwined with those about the sun, moon and stars : day
and night are holy godlike beings, near akin to the gods. The
Edda makes Day the child of Nighfc.

Norvi, a iotunn, had a daughter named Nott, black and dingy
like the stock she came of (svort oc dock sem hon &tti sett til) ; l
several husbands fell to her share, first Naglfari, then Anar (Onar) 2
a dwarf, by whom she had a daughter I6r5, who afterwards
became OSin's wife and Thfir's mother. Her last husband was
of the fair race of the &ses, he was called Dellingr, and to him
she bore a son Dagr, light and beautiful as his paternal ancestry.
Then All-father took Night and her son Day, set them in the sky,
and gave to each of them a horse and a car, wherewith to journey
round the earth in measured time. The steeds were named the
rimy-maned and the shiny-maned (p. 655-6).

The name Dellingr, the assimilated form of Deglingr, includes
that of the son Dagr, and as -ling if it mean anything means
descent, we must either suppose a progenitor Dagr before him,
or that the order of succession has been reversed, as it often is
in old genealogies.

For the word ' dags, dagr, daeg, tac ' I have tried to find a root
(Gramm. 2, 44), and must adhere to my rejection of Lat. ' dies'
as a congener, because there is no consonant-change, and the
Teutonic word develops a g, and resolves its a into o (uo); yet
conf. my Kleinere schriften 3, 11 7. 8 On the other hand, in ' dies'
and all that is like it in other languages, there plainly appeared

1 This passage was not taken into account, p. 528 ; that Night and Helle
should be black, stands to reason, but no conclusion can be drawn from that about
giants as a body. Notice too the combination * svort ok dock,' conf. p. 445. Here
giant and dwarf genealogies have evidently overlapped.

* Conf. Haupt's Zeitscbr. 3, 144.

* [Sanskr. dah urere, ardere (Bopp's 01. 165) does seems the root both of dies
and Goth, dags, which has exceptionally kept prim, d unchanged. MHG. tac still
retained the sense of heat : * fiir der heizen sunnen tac t * MS. 2, 84*.— Suppl.]

785



Digitized by



Google



736 DAY AND NIGHT.

an interlacing of the notions € day, sky, god/ p. 193. As Day
and Donar are both descended from Night, so Dies and Deus
(Zeus) fall under one root ; one is even tempted to identify Donar,
Thunor with the Etruscan Tina (dies), for the notion day, as we
shall see, carries along with it that of din : in that case Tina
need not stand for Dina, but would go with Lat. tonus and toni-
trus. Deus is our Tiw, Ziu, for the same name sometimes gets
attached to different gods ; and it is an additional proof how
little ' dies ' has to do with our ' d»g, tag ' ; likewise for
coelum itself we have none but unrelated words, p. 698-9. Prom
the root div the Ind. and Lat. tongues have obtained a number
of words expressing all three notions, gods, day and sky ; the
Greek only for gods and sky, not for day, the Lith. for god and
day, not sky, the Slav, for day alone, neither god nor sky, and
lastly our own tongue for one god only, and neither sky nor day.
Here also we perceive a special affinity between Sanskrit and
Latin, whose wealth the. remaining languages divided amongst
them in as many different ways. The Greek rjjiap, qftipa I do
regard as near of kin to the Tent, himins, himil ; there is also
'Hjiipa a goddess of day.

The languages compared are equally unanimous in their name
for night : Goth, nahts, OHG. naht, AS. niht, ON. nott (for natt),
Lat. nox noctis, Gr. vv% wktos, Lith. naht is, Lett, nahts, 0. SI.
noshti, Pol. and Boh. noc (pron. nots), Slovdn, nozh, Serv. notj,
Sanskr. nahta chiefly in compounds, the usual word being nii,
nisd (both fern.). Various etymologies have been proposed, but
none satisfactory. 1 As day was named the shining, should not
the opposite meaning of ' dark ' lurk in the word night ? Yet it
is only night unillumined by the moon that is lightless. There is
a very old anomalous verb r nahan J proper to our language, from
whose pret. nahta 3 the noun nahts seems to come, just as from
magan mahta, lisan lista come the nouns mahts, lists. Now

1 [Bopp 198* and Pott 1, 160 explain nida as * lying down ' from st to lie ; and
naktam as ' while lying.' Benfey assumes two roots, nakta ' not-waking,' 2, 369
and nis conn, with Lat. niger 2, 57. — Suppl.]

* The plurals of Goth, ganah, binah are lost to us ; I first assumed ganahum,
binahum, but afterwards ganauhum, because binauht — {(core in 1 Oor. 10, 23, and
ganauha afrrdpKcia occurs several times. The u (au before an h) is the same as in
skal skulum, man munum, OHG. mac mugum, in spite of which the noun is maht.
But the Goth, mag magum proves the superior claim of a, so that nahts (nox)
would presuppose an older nah nahum, nahta, even though Ulphilas had written
nan nauhum, nauhta.



Digitized by



Google



DAY. NIGHT. 737

Goth, ganahan, OHG. kinahan, means snfficere, so that nahts
would be the sufficing, pacifying, restful, quiet, at the same time
e/ficient, strong, ap/cta, which seems to hit the sense exactly.
Add to this, that the OHG. duruh-naht is not only pernox, totam
noctem durans, but more commonly perfectns, consummatus,
' f ullsummed in power/ MHG. darnehte, durnehtec, where there
is no thought of night at all. Where did Stieler 1322 find his
' durchnacht, nox illunis'?=the Scand. nrS (p. 710), and meaning
the height of night (see Suppl.).

Both day and night are exalted beings. Day is called the
holy, like the Greek lepbv jj/tap: r sam mir der heilic tac I '
Ls. 2, 311. 'sa mir daz heilige liehtl' Both. ll b . 'die lieben
tage,' Ms. 1, 165*. r der Uebe tag, 9 Simplic. 1, 5. Hence both
are addressed with greetings: 'heill Dagr, heilir Dags synir,
heil Nott ok nipt J oreiSom augom lttit ockr ]?innig, ok gefifc
sitjondom sigurl' they are asked to look with gracious eyes
on men, and give victory, Ssem. 194*.; and the adoration of day
occurs as late as in Mart, von Amberg*s Beichtspiegel. € diu edele
naht, Ms. 2, 196 b . 'diu heilige naht/ Gerh. 3541. r sam mir diu
heilic naht hint J', so (help) me Holy Night to-night, Helbl. 2,
1384. 8, 606. 'frau Naht, Ms H. 3,428* (see Suppl.).

Norse poetry, as we saw, provided both Night and Day with
cars, like other gods; but then the sun also has his chariot, while
the moon, as far as I know, has none ascribed to her. Night
and Day are drawn by one horse each, the Sun has two ; con-
sequently day was thought of as a thing independent of the sun,
as the moon also has to light up the dark night. Probably the
car of Day was supposed to run before that of the Sun, 1 and
the Moon to follow Night. The alternation of sexes seems not
without significance, the masculine Day being accompanied by
the feminine Sun, the fern. Night by the masc. Moon. The
Greek < myth gives chariots to Helios and Selene, none to the
deities of day and night; yet Aeschylus in Persae 386 speaks
of day as 7s*vk6wc»\os yfiipa, the white-horsed. The riddle in
Beinmar von Zweter, Ms. 2, 136, lets the chariot of the year be
drawn by seven white and seven black steeds (the days and
nights of the week). Here also the old heathen notion of riding

1 i.e. day or morning is there before the sun, who backs them up, bo to speak :
unz daz diu sunne ir liehtez sehinen b6t dem morgen fiber berge, Nib. 1564, 2.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



738 DAY AND NIGHT.

or driving deities peeps out. Again, a spell quoted in Mone's
Anz. 6, 459 begins with € God greet thee, holy Sunday ! I see
thee there come riding.' This is no doubt the heathen god Tag
riding along on Scinfahso with his shiny mane (ON. Skinfaxi,
Sn. 11) ; but if we took it for the white god Paltar on his foal
(p. 222-4), we should not be altogether wrong. We shall have
more to say presently on the personification of Day; but that
spell is well worthy of consideration (see Suppl.) .

Nevertheless our poets express the break of day by the sun's
uprising, and more especially the fall of night by his setting ;
but neither the beginning nor end of night by the moon, whose
rising and setting are seldom simultaneous with them. I will
now give the oldest set phrases that express these phenomena.

The sun rises, climbs : Goth, sunna ur-rinnij>, Mk. 4, 6. 16, 2.
OHG. ar-rinnit; daran&h ir-ran diu sunna, N. ps. 103, 22 ; MHG.
si was fif er-runnen, Mar. 189. ON. }>& rann dagr upp, 01. helg.
cap. 220. Rinnan is properly to run, to flow, and here we see
a strict analogy to the 0. Rom. idiom, which in like manner uses
manare of the rising day : ' diei principium mane, quod turn
manat dies ab oriente/ Varro 6, 4 (0. Miiller p. 74) ; f manat
solem dicebant antiqui, cum solis orientis radii splendorem jacere
coepissent' (Festus sub v.). Ulphilas never applies ur-reisan
(surgere) to the sun. The Span, language attributes to the
rising sun a pricking (apuntar) : s yxie el sol, dios, que fermoso
apuntaba,' Cid 461; 'quando viniere la manana, que apuntare
el sol/ Cid 2190. After rising the sun is awake, 'with the sun
awake' means in broad daylight (Weisth. 2, 169. 173. 183),
' when sunshine is up ' (2, 250) . AS. s h&dor heofonleoma com
llican,' Andr. 838 (see Suppl.).

The sun sinks, falls : Goth, sagq sunn6 (pron. sank), Lu. 4, 40.
gasagq sduil, Mk. 1, 32. dissigqdi (occidat), Eph. 4, 26. OHG.
sunn& pifeal (ruit) , pisluac (occidit), 1 Gl. Ker. 254. Diut. 1, 274*.
MHG. siget : diu sunne siget hin, Trist. 2402. diu sunne was ze
tal gesigen, Wh. 447, 8. nu begund diu sunne slgen, Aw. 1, 41.
ON. both sdlar/aZZ and sblsetr, Engl, sunset; so OHG. 'denne
sunnft Jcisaz/ cum sol occumberet, Diut. 1, 492*, implying that he
sits down, and that there is a seat or chair for him to drop into

1 Intrans., as we still say niederschlagen, zu boden sohlagen.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



SUNRISE. SUNSET. 739

at the end of his journey. His setting is called OHG. sedalkanc,
Hym. 18, 1 ; sedal ira k&t (goeth) 14, 2. AS. setelgong, 1 setlrdd,
Caedm. 184, 19. oftSaat sunne gewat to sete glidan, Andr. 1305.
O'SSast beorht gewat sunne swegeltorht to sete glidan 1248. OS.
seg sunne td sedle, Hel. 86, 12. sunne ward an sedle 89, 10.
geug thar &band tuo, sunna ti sedle 105, 6. scr6d wester dag,
sunne te sedle 137, 20. so thuo gisfigid warth sedle n&hor h£dra
sunna mid hebantunglon 170, 1. Dan. for vesten gaaer sol en til
sods, DV. 1, 90, in contrast to f sdl er % austri (east)/ Vilk.
saga p. 58-9. The West (occasus) stands opposed to the East •
(oriens), and as OHG. kibil means pole, and Nordkibel, Sunt-
kibel the north and south poles (N. Bth. 208), a set phrase in
our Weisthumer may claim a high antiquity: 'bis (until) die
Sonne unter den Westergibel geht ' (1, 836) ; 'bis die sonne an
den Wg. schint' (2, 195); 'so lange dat die sonne in den Wes-
tergevel schint ' (2, 159). The first of these three passages
has the curious explanation added : ' till 12 o'clock.' 2 Ovid's
' axe sub hesperio ' Met. 4, 214 is thus given by Albrecht :
in den liehten westemangen. The similar expression in ON.
seems to me important, Gr&g&s 1, 26 : 'fara til logbergs, at sdl
s£ & gidhamri enum vestra/ gi&hamarr being chasmatis rupes
occidentalis. I shall have more to say about that in another
connexion; conf. however Landn&ma b6k 215: sol i austri ok
vestri. MHG. diu sunne gie ze sedele, Diut. 3, 57. als diu
sunne in ir gesedel solde g&n, Morolt 38*; but what place on
earth can that be, whose very name is told us in 14 b , ' ze Geilat,
d& diu sunne ir gesedel h&t ' ? the capital of India ? (see p. 743
note.) I suppose kadam, MHG. gaden (cubiculum), Mor. 15 a is
equivalent to sedal, unless the true reading be ' ze guaden.' The
sun gets way-worn, and longs for rest : do hete diu muede sunne

1 ON. and AS. distinguish between two period* of the evening, an earlier ap tan
<s/Wi= vespers, and a later qveld, cwild=coniic'mium: 'at qveldi,' Seem. 20*. 73 b ,
means at full evening, when night has fallen and its stillness has set in. I derive
cwild, qveld from owellan, qvelja to quell or kill, as in many passages it means liter,
interitas, occisio, nex ; so we may explain it by the falling or felling of the day
(cadere, whence caedere), or still better by the deathlike hush of night ; conf. Engl.
1 dead of night, deadtime of n.\ the conticinium, AS. owildtld. If * chuiltiwerch '
in a doc. of 817 means owildweorc, work in the late evening, which is not to be put
upon maidservants, then OHG. too had a chuilt corresp. to cwild and qveld, qvdld.
In Cffidm. 188, 111 propose to read : * owildrdfu eodon on laftra last, 1 i.e. (belluae)
vesperi famosae ibant in vestigia malorum.

3 In fixing boundary-lines Westergibel is even used topographically, Weisth. 1,
464-5. 485. 498. 550-6.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



740 DAT AND NIGHT.

ir liehten blio hinz ir gelesen, Parz. 32, 24. He goes to his
bed, his bedchamber : Dan. 'solen ganger til senge, 9 DV. 1, 107.
'solen gik til hvile,' 1, 170. MHG. diu snnne gerte lazen sich
zuo reste, Ernst 1326. diu sunne dd ze teste gie, Ecke (Hag.)
110. nu wolte din sunne ze reste und ouch ze gemache nider gan,
Dietr. 14 d ; so M. Opitz 2, 286 : ' muss doch zu ruste gehen, so
oft es abend wird, der schone hinimels-schild/ OE. the sun
was gon to rest, I wan 3612. Our gnade (favour), MHG. genade,
OHG. kinada, properly means inclining, drooping, repose
(p. 710), which accounts for the phrase 'diu sunne gienc ze
gnaden' (dat. pi.), Mor. 37*. Wolfdietr. 1402. Even Agricola no
longer understood it quite, for he says in Sprichw. 737: 'it
lasted till the sun was about to go to gnaden, i.e. to set, and deny(!)
the world his gnade and light by going to rest/ Aventin (ed .
1580 p. 19 b ) would trace it back to our earliest heathenism and
a worship of the sun as queen of heaven : ' never might ye say
she set, but alway that she went to rost and gnaden, as the silly
simple folk doth even yet believe/ The last words alone are
worth noticing; the superstition may be of very old standing,
that it is more pious, in this as in other cases, to avoid straight-
forward speech, and use an old half-intelligible euphemism. On
this point Vuk 775 has something worthy of note : you must say
' 8mirilo se suntse' (the sun is gone to rest, conquievit), and not
zadye (is gone) nor syede (sits) ; if you say zadye, he answers
' zashao pa ne izishao ' (gone, not come out) ; l if you say syede,
he tells you ' syeo pa ne ustao ' (sat down, not risen) ; but to
' smirl se' the answer is ( smiry<5 se i ti ' (rest thee also thou).*
And with this I connect the Eddie saw on the peculiar sacredness
of the setting sun : ' engi skal gumna t gogn vega si&sJcinandi
systor Mana/ Saem. 184 b , none shall fight in the face of the
late-shining sister of the Moon (see Suppl.)

Lye quotes an AS. phrase 'asr sun go to glade,' which he
translates c priusquam sol vergat ad occasum, lapsum/ The
noun formed from glidan (labi) would be glad, and gltdan is

1 Kopitar tells me, ' zashao etc.' is rather an imprecation : mavst thou go in (per-
haps, lose thy way) and never get out ! So ' syeo etc.', mayst thou sit down and
never get up !

« Mod. Greek songs say, 6 Ifaos ipacrltevc, ipcurCKcfe (Fauriel 1, 66. 2, 300. 432),
i.e. has reigned, reigns no more in the sky, is set ; and the same of the setting
moon (2, 176).

Digitized by VjOOQIC



SUNSET. 741

actually used of the sun's motion : heofones gim glad ofer
grundas, Beow. 4140 [and 'to sete glldan' twice in Andreas].
But 'gongan td glade ' seems nonsense; perhaps we ought to
suppose a noun gleede with the doable meaning of splendor and
gaudium. Both the ON. glaflr and OHG, klat signify first
splendidus, then hilaris, two notions that run into one another
(as in our heiter = serenus and hilaris) ; Mat is said of stars, eyes,
rays (Graff 4, 288), and the sun, 0. ii. 1, 13 : fir wurti sunna s6
glat (ere he grew so bright). The MHG. poet quoted on p. 705
says (Warnung 2037) :

sd ir die sunnen vro sehet, When ye see the sun glad,

schoenes tages ir ir jehet, Ye own the fine day is hers,

des dankt ir ir, und Gote niht. Ye thank her, not God.

In Switzerland I find the remarkable proper name Sunnenfroh
(Anshelm 3, 89. 286). But now further, the notions of bliss,
repose, chamber, lie next door to each other, and of course
brightness and bliss. The setting snn beams forth in heightened
splendour, he is entering into his bliss : this is what ' gongan td
glasde ' may have meant. In ON. I have only once fallen in with
solarglaffcm (occasus), Fornald. sog. 1, 518. We learn from
Ihre's Dialectlex. p. 57 a 165 a , that in Vestgotland 'gladas' is said
of the snn when setting : solen gladas or glaas (occidit), sole-
g landing, solgladjen (occasus), which may mean that the setting
sun is glad or glitters. That is how I explain the idiom quoted
by Staid. 1, 463. 2, 520: the sun goes gilded = sets, i.e. glitters
for joy. So in Kinderni. no. 165 : sunne z'gold gauge ; in a song
(Eschenburg's Denkm. 240) : de sunne ging to golds ; and often
in the Weisthiimer : so die sun fur gold gat (1, 197), als die
sonne in golt get (1, 501). Again, as the rising sun presents
a like appearance of splendour, we can now understand better
why the vulgar say he leaps for joy or dances on great festivals
(p. 291); he is called 'the paschal piper/ Haupt's Zeitschr. 1,
547. Nor would I stop even there, I would also account for that
noise, that clang once ascribed to the rising and setting sun
(p. 720-1) by a deep affinity between the notions of light and
sound, of colours and tones, Gramm. 2, 86-7. A strophe in
Albrecht's Titurel describes more minutely the music of sunrise :



Digitized by VjOOQIC



742 DAY AND NIGHT.

Darn&ch kund sich dia sunne

wol an ir zirkel riden (writhe) :

der siieze ein uberwunne,

ich ween die siieze nieman moht erltden.

mit done dd din zirkel rnorte ;

seitenklanc nnd vogelsanc

ist alsam gllch der golt g6n kapfer fuorte.

(Then in his orb the sun to whirling took, I weeii such glut of
sweetness none might brook ; with dulcet din his orb he rolled,
that clang of strings or bird that sings were like as copper beside
gold.) Who can help thinking of the time-honoured tradition of
Memnon's statue, which at sunrise sent forth a sound like the
clang of a harpstring, some say a joyful tone at the rising and a
sad at the setting of the sun. 1 Further on we shall be able to
trace some other fancies about the break of day and the fall of
night, to light and sound (see Suppl.) .

But whither does the evening sun betake himself to rest, and
where is' his chamber situated ? The oldest way of putting it is,
that he dives into the sea, to quench his glow in the cool wave.
The AS. Bth. (Rawl. 193 a ) : ' and J?efih monnum J?ynce* }*»t hio
on mere gange, under see swife, ]?onne hio on setl glide's/ So
the ancients said Svvac and mergere of the sun and stars, c occasus,
interitus, vel solis in oceanum mersio ' (Pestus). 2 Boeth. 4 (metr.
5) says of Bootes : cur mergat seras aequore flammas ; and metr. 6 :
nee, cetera cernens sidera mergi, cupit oceano tingere flammas;
which N. 223 translates : alliu zeichen sehende in sedel g&n,
niomer sih ne ger6t Tcebadon (bathe) in demo merewazere. So,
' sol petit oceanwm, 3 Rudlieb 4, 9. But the expression comes so
naturally to all who dwell on the seacoast, that it need not be a
borrowed one ;' we find it in ON. t sdl gengr % cegi,' Fornm. sog.
2, 302, and in MH6. ' der se, dk diu sunne ftf g&t ze reste/ MS.
2, 66 b . And, as other goddesses after making the round of the
country are bathed in the lake, it is an additional proof of the
Sun's divinity that ' she ' takes a bath, a notion universally preva-

1 Pausan. 1, 42. Philostr. Vita Apoll. 6, 4. Heroic. 4. Pliny 86, 11. Tae.
Ann. 2, 61. Juven. 15, 5.

1 Setting in the lake is at the same time depositing the divine eye as a pledge
in the fountain. I will add a neat phrase from Wolfram, Parz. 32, 24 : dO hete dia
miiede sunne ir liehten hlic hinz ir gelesen.



Digitized by VjOO^IC



DATBEBAK. 743

lent among the Slavs also : at eve she sinks into her bath to
cleanse herself, at morn she emerges clean with renewed grandeur.
The sea was thought to be the Sun's mother, into whose arms
she sank at night. 1

To inhabitants of the inland, the horizon was blocked by a
wood, hence the phrases : sdl gengr til vidar (Biorn sub v. vidr) ;
solen g&r winder vide (Ihre sub v.) . 2 But the AS. word in :
' h&dor seagl wuldortorht gew&t under wa&u, scrtSan,' Andr. 1456,
seems to be a different thing, the OHG. weidi (p. 132 n.). We
say the sun goes behind the hills, to which corresponds the AS.
' sunne gew&t under niflan noes,' sub terra© crepidinem, Andr.
1306 (conf. under neolum naesse, El. 831); a Dan. folksong:
solen gik til iorde, down to earth, DV. 1, 170 ; Ecke (Hagen) 129 :
diu sunne uz dem himel gie. Or, the sun is down, MHG-. € der
sunne (here masc.) hinder geg&t/ MS. 2, 192 b (see Suppl.). 8

We will now examine other formulas, which express daybreak
and nightfall without any reference to the sun.

What is most remarkable is, that day was imagined in the
shape of an animal, which towards morning advances in the sky.
Wolfram begins a beautiful watchman's song with the words :
'sine Jcldwen dvfrch die wolken sint gestagen (his claws through the
clouds are struck), er stfget ftf mit grdzer kraft, ih sih ihn gr&wen,
den tac ;' and in part third of Wh. (Cass. 317*) we read: 'daz
diu wolken w&ren gr&, und der tac sine eld hete gestagen durch die
naht* Is it a bird or a beast that is meant ? for our language
gives claws to both. In AS. there is a proper name Dag-hrefn,
Beow. 4998, which in OHG. would be Taka-hraban ; and Beow.
3599 describes daybreak in the words: 'hrofn bl&ca heofones
wynne blt8-heort boddde/ niger corvus coeli gaudium laeto corde
nuntiavit. 5 That piercing with the claw to raise a storm (p. 633)
makes one think of an eagle, while an Oriental picture, surprisingly



1 Hairasch, Slay. myth. p. 281, who connects with it the splashing with water
at the Kupalo feast, and derives that name from kupel, k^piel.

* Esth. paaw katsnb metsa ladwa, the son walks on the tips of the wood.

8 Gudr. 116, 2: 'der sunne sohin gelao verborgen hinter den wolken ze
Gtutr&te verre ' I understand no better than Qeildte (p. 789) ; but both seem to
mean the same thing.

4 So in a Weisthum (8, 90) : ' de sunne uppe dem hogesten gewest clawendich.'

* Oonf. volucris dies, Hor. Od. iii. 28, 6. iv. 18, 16.



VOL. II. 2

* Digitized by



Google



744 DAY AND NIGHT.

similar, suggests rather the king of beasts, who to us is the bear. 1
AH Jelebi in his Humayun-nameh (Diez p. 153) describes the
beginning of day in language bombastic it may be, yet doubtless
a faithful reflex of ancient imagery : ' When the falcon of the
nest of the firmament had scattered the nightbirds of the flicker-
ing stars from the meadow of heaven, and at sight of the claws
of the lion of day the roe of musk-scented night had fled from
the field of being into the desert of non-existence. 1 The night,
a timid roe, retires before the mighty beast of day : a beautiful
image, and full of life. Wolfram again in another song makes
day press forward with resistless force (see Suppl.).

But the dawn is also pictured in human guise, that of a beautiful
youth, sent like Wuotan's raven as harbinger of day : ' d»g by3
Dryhtnes sond ' says the Lay of Runes. And in this connexion
we ought to consider the formation of such names as Bd&ldceg,
Swipcfaegr, etc., for gods and heroes. This messenger of the gods
stations himself on the mountain's top, and that on tiptoe, like the
beast on his claws, that he may the sooner get a glimpse of the
land : ' jocund day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops,'
Rom. and J. 3, 5; a popular image, I have little doubt, and one
that Hebel also uses about Sunday morning : c und lisli uf de
zeche goht und heiter uf de berge stoht de sunntfg.' He climbs
and pushes on swiftly, irrepressibly : der tac stigende wart, Trist.
8942. der tac begund herdringen, Wolfd. 124. In AS. s y& w®8
morgen leoht scofen and scynded' (praecipitatus et festinatus,
shoved and shindied), Beow. 1828. Hence our poets call him
der riche, the mighty, as they do God (p. 20) : riche als6 der tac,
MS. 1, 163*. riche muotes alsam der tac, Wigal. 5222. der tac
wil gerichen (prevail, prosper), MS. 1, 27 b . 2, 23 b ; he is not to be
checked, he chases night away. Put impersonally : tho iz zi dage
want (turned), Otfr. iii. 8, 21 ; but also : der tac wil niht erwinden
(turn aside, give it up), MS. 1, 147 b . morge fruo, als der tac
erstcvrket (gathers strength), Eracl. 587. dd die naht der tac
vertreip, Frauend. 47. 58. He hurls her from her throne, and
occupies it himself : ez taget, diu naht muoz ah ir trone, den sie
ze Kriechen hielt mit ganzer vrdne, der tac wil in besitzen, MS.
1, 2 b ; conf. ftaariKevetv said of the sun (see Suppl.).

1 The Arabs call the first glimmer of dawn the wolfs tail, Buckert's Hariri 1,
215.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



DAYBBEAK. 745

Sometimes it appears as if the day, whether pictured as man
or as beast, were tethered, and delayed in dawning : ligata,fune
ligata dies, Beinh. lxiv ; he approaches slowly, hindered by the
bands : ein nacht doch nicht gepunden ist an einen steichen, hoer
ich sagen, Suchenw. 22, 30. Has that in Fergut 1534, ' quam
die dach ghestrici in die sale/ anything to do with this ? In a
Hungarian fairy-tale (Mailath 1, 137), midnight and dawn are so
tied up, that they cannot get forward, and do not arrive among
men. Stier's Volksm. pp. 3. 5. One MHG. poem-represents day
as on Bale and to be had for money, Zeitschr. f. d. a. 1,27; like
a slave bound by a cord 7

The Romance tongues (not the Teut.) often signify the break
of day by a word meaning to prick : Fr. poindre, Sp. puntar,
apuntar (said of the sun also, p. 738), It. spuntare ; thus, & la
pointe du jour, at daybreak. This may indeed be understood of
the day's irst advance, as though it presented a sharp point, but
also it may refer to day as a rider who spurs his steed, or to the
tramping and trotting of a beast, which is also poindre, Beinh.
p. xxxix (see Suppl.).

But more significant and impressive are the phrases that
connect with daybreak (as well as with sunrise) the idea of a
flutter and rustle, which might be referred to the pinions of the
harbinger of day, but which carries us right up to the highest
god, whose sovereign sway it is that shakes the air. Wuotan,
when spoken of as Wuomo, Wdma, is a thrill of nature (p* 144),
such as we actually experience at dawn, when a cool breeze
sweeps through the clouds. Expressions in point are the AS.
dceg-woma Crodm. 199, 26. Cod. exon. 175, 4. dagred-woma,
Andr. 125, 8. Cod. exon. 179, 24. morgen-sweg, Beow. 257.
dyne on dasgrfid, Csedm. 289, 27. »r daagrdde Jwt se dyne becom,
C»dm. 294, 4; conf. Introd. to Andr. and El. xxx. xxxi, and the
allusion to Donar, p. 736. To this I would trace the 'clang'
sent forth by the light of sunrise and sunset. And I venture to
put the same sense on an 0. Fr. formula, which occurs only in
Carolingian poems: Gerard De Viane 1241, <lou matin par son
Vaube esclarcie/ Cod. reg. 7183, 3 a , € un matin par son Vaube,
quant el fu aparue ' ; ibid. 5*, ' un matin par son Vaube, quant
li jor esclaira ' ; ibid. 161°, s au matin patr son Vaube, si con chante
li gaus (gallus).' Cod. 7535, 69°, ' a matin par son Vaube. I

Digitized by VjOOQIC



746 DAY AND NIGHT.

add a few instances from the Charlemagne, ed. Michel 239, ' al
matin sun la (?) lalbe' ; 248. 468. 727, 'al matin par sun lalbe' ;
564, ' le matin par sun lalbe. 9 Was it not originally per sonum
(sonitam) albas ? Later they seem to have taken it in a different
sense, viz. son=summura, snmmitas, Fr. sommet; Michel in
Gloss, to Charlem. 133 gives a passage which spells ' par som
laube/ and elsewhere we find ' par son leve/ on the top of the
water, f en snn eel pin/ up on this pine, Charlem. 594. 760, s en
son/ on the top, Renart 2617. In Provencal, Ferabras 182, 'lo
mati 8U8 en lalba ' ; 8484, ' lo matinet 8U8 lalba.' In It., Baovo
p. m. 84. 99. 155, una mattina su V alba, i.e. sur l'aube, which
gives only a forced meaning, as though it meant to say 'when the
alba stood over the mountain top.'

The English use the expression 'peep of day' : 'the sun began
to peep ' says a Scotch song, Minstr. 2, 430 ; so the Danes have
pipefrem : f hist piper Bolen frem, giv Gud en lyksom dag ! ' says
Thorn. Kingo, a 17th cent, poet (Nyerup's Danske digtek. mid-
delalder 1, 235). Both languages now make it a separate word
from ' to pipe/ Dan. ' pibe/ But, just as in the Fr. ' par son '
the sound became a coming in sight, so the old meaning of
c piping ' seems to have got obliterated, and a new distinction to
have arisen between peep and pipe, Dan. pipe and pibe. Our
Gryphius therefore is right in saying (p. m. 740), 'the moon
pipes up her light/ It is the simultaneous breaking forth of
light and noise in the natural phenomenon. We have the same
thing in ' shreik of day* (Hunter's Hallamsh. gloss, p. 81), which
can mean nothing but ' shriek ' ; and in the NethP. € kriek, krieJcen
van den dag/ Plattd. 'de krik vam dage' for the morning
twilight, the chirking (so to speak) of day, as the chirping insect
is called cricket, kriek, krikel, krekel (cicada). A remarkable
instance of the two meanings meeting in one word is found in
the Goth, svigla (aiikos), OHG. suekala (fistula), by the side of
the AS. swegel (lux, cether), OS. suigli (lux).

Our own word ambrechen (on-break) implies a crash and a
shaking, MHG. sa do der ander tac ftf brack (Frauend. 53. 109) ; l

i Conf . Bon. 48, 68 ; and I must quote Ls. 3, 259 : < dd brack der tac dA herfBr,
din naht Ton dem tao wart Hnent (became yawning, was split ? conf. supra p. 558),
diu snnne wart wol sohtnent.* The Gate Fran has twice (1539. 2451) : ' dd der tac
durch daz tach (thatch) luhte nnde brack. 9 We might pern, derive * uf brach » from
brehen, but we now say anbrechen, anbruch.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



DAYBREAK. TWILIGHT. 747

Engl, break (as well as rush, blush) of day. Span, 'el alva
rompe.' 0. Sp. ' apriessa cantan los gallos, e qnieren quebrar
albores/ Cid 235. 'ya quiebran los albores, e vinie la manana'
460. ' trocida es la noche, ya quiebran los albores ' 3558. O. Fr.
' 1'aube crieve,' Ren. 1 186. ' ja estoit l'aube crevee * 11 75. ' tan tost
con Faube se creva' 16057. Prov. 'can lalba fo crevada/ Ferabr.
3977. This romper, quebrar, crevar (Lat. crepare) is the quiver-
ing and quaking of the air that precedes sunrise, accompanied
by a perceptible chill ; and crepusculum contains the same idea.
The* Spaniard says also 'el alva se rie, } laughs; and the Arab
'the morning sneezes 3 (see Suppl.). 1

But here the notion of Twilight, and the oldest words by which
it is expressed, have to be examined more minutely.

The very first glimmer of dawn, or strictly that which precedes
it, the latter end of night, is expressed by the Goth, uhtvo
(evwx oy )> Mk- 1> 35, OHG-. uhta, or as N. spells it uohta, OS.
uhta, AS. uhte (most freq. 'on uhtan/ Caedm. 20, 26. 289, 31.
294, 2. Cod. exon. 443, 24. 459, 17. 460, 14. 'on uhtan mid
®rd89ge/ Beow. 251), ON. otta (Biorn says, from 3 to 6 a.m.).
The root has never been explained ; probably the Swiss Uchtland
and Westphalian TJchte may be named from uht&. Closely
bordering on it is the AS. cerdasg (primum tempus), Beow. 251.
2623. 5880 ; ON. ardagi (conf. fcrdegis, mane) ; an OHG. firtac or
ertago is unknown to me. Next comes the notion of diluculum,
ON. dagsbrun, dagsbiarmi, dagsbirta, from brun = ora, margo, as
if supercilium, and biarmi, birta=lux: but OHG. tagarod, tagarot
(Graff 2, 486-7) ,- AS. dcegrSd, Csedm. 289, 27. 294, 4; MLG.
dagerdt, En. 1408 ; M. Nethl. dagheraet (Huyd. op. St. 2, 496) :
a compound whose last syllable is not distinctly traceable to rob
(ruber), but is perhaps allied to the rodur, roSull (coelum) on
p. 699. The gender also wavers between masc. and fern. 8 We
catch glimpses of a mythic personality behind, for N. in Cap.
102 translates Leucothea (the white bright goddess, a Perahta)
by ' der tagerod/ and carries out the personification : ' ube der

1 BtLokert's Hariri 1, 875. In the Novelas of Maria da Zayas 1, 8 is a song
oeginning : * si se He el alva,' elsewhere she has ' quando el alva muestra tu alegre
rita ; ' conf. p. 502 on laughter that shakes one. The ItaL * fare ridere una botta *
is an expressive phrase for shaking a cask so that it rnns over.

3 Yet conf. OHG. morgan-rot, -r6to, and -rota (Graff 2, 486); MHG. nfetader
morgenrdt (is it morgen r6t ?), Walth. 4, 6 ; but daz morgenrot, Trigt. 8285. 9462.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



743 DAY AND NIGHT.

tagerod sina facchelun inzundet habe,' have kindled his torches.
And in nrknnden we meet with a man's name Dagharot (Falke's
Trad. corb. p. 5), also a place named Wirm-tagaroth (Hofer's
Zeitschr. 2, 170). When OHG. glosses put tagardd for crepus-
culum, it comes of unacqnaintance with the Latin idiom ; it can
be nothing but diluculum, aurora. In O.Pr. there is a woman's
name Brunmatin = dawn, Ren. 15666. 15712. 16441 [conn, with
dagsbrftn, Suppl.] . The ON. has no dagsrod, but it has sokvrrod
aurora, Pornm. sog. 8, 346. [Suppl. adds 'meft dagroeffom,'
Seam. 24 a ]. The M. Nethl. has a second term dachgrake,
dagherake (fern.), grahen for the night's blackness brightening
into gray ; so MH6. der grawe tac, *daz grdwe licht, MS. 2, 49*,
der tac wil grawen, Wolfr. 4, 11; 'si kds den alten jungen
grdwen grisen (tac)' ; 'junc unde grd der morgen Af gat,' MsH. 3,
427 b (see Suppl.).

After aurora follows the full morning, Goth, maurgins, OHG.
morkan, OS. morgan, ON. morgun, strictly avpiop. I suspect it
has a sense allied to the day's ' breaking or bursting/ for the
Goth, gamaiirgjan means to cut and shorten, like ginnen, secare
(see Suppl.).

To names for the rising day stand opposed those for the sink-
ing. For tye, 6-fyla Ulphilas puts andanahti, the times towards
night, but also seifiu (serum), as the Mod. Greeks call evening
the slow, late, to ftpdSv, and morning the swift, early, to rayy,
therefore also the short (conf. gamaiirgjan). The OHG. dpant,
OS. aband, AS. osfen, ON. aptcm is of one root with aba, aftar,
aptr, which expresses a falling off, a retrograde movement. The
OHG. demar, our dammerung, stands especially for crepusculum,
and is connected with AS. dim, Lith. tamsus, Slav, temni [dark,
from tma, tenebro] . AS. c&fenrim, cefenglom crepusculum. What
has peculiar interest for us, the Tagar6d above is supported by
an undoubtedly persoqal Apantrod, a giant of our heroic legend :
Abentrot is the brother of Ecke and Fasolt, in both of whom we
recognised phenomena of the sea and air (pp. 239. 636). If day
was a godlike youth, morning and evening twilight may have
been conceived as the giants Tagardd and Apantrod (see
Suppl.). 1

1 MHG. der dhentrM, Walth. 30, 15 ; but « d6 diu Abentrot (f.) witen ir lieht der
«rden bdt, f Uolrioh 1488.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



DAYBREAK. TWILIGHT. 743

To the Greeks and Romans Ha>9, Awrora, was a goddess, and
she is painted in the liveliest colours. She rises from the couch
(etc Xexicov, as oar sun goes to bed, p. 740) of her husband
Tithonos, Od. 5, 1; she is the early-born (rjpiyiveta) f the rosy-
fingered (poSoSaKTvTw;, H. 1, 477) ; she digs her ruddy fingers
into the clouds as day does his claws, p. 743 ; she is also called
ypwbOpovo? golden-throned, like Hera and Artemis. The Slavs,
instead of a goddess of dawn, appear to have had a god, Tutrix
bogh (see Suppl.).

There is another belief of the Slavs and Hungarians, which,
having strayed over to us, must not be passed over in silence.
In Hungary dawn is called hajnal (Bsth. haggo), and the watch-
men there cry to one another : € hajnal vagyon szep piros, hajnal,
hajnal vagyon ! ' aurora est (erumpit) pulcra purpurea, aurora,
aurora est. The same word heynal, eynal is in use among the
Poles, who cry: 'heynal £wita!' aurora lucet (Linde 1,623).
Now Dietmar of Merseburg tells us under the year 1017 (7, 50
p. 858) : ' Audivi de quodam baculo, in cujus summitate manus
erat, unum in se ferreum tenens circulum, quod cum pastore illius
villao Silivellun (Selben near Merseb.), in quo (1. qua) is fuerat,
per omnes domos has singulariter ductus, in primo introitu a
portifcore suo sic salutaretur: vigila Hennil, vigila! sic enim
rustica vocabatur lingua, et epulantes ibi delicate de ejusdem se
tueri custodia stulti autumabant.' And, coming to our own
times, I quote from Ad. Kuhn's Mark, sagenp. 330: 'An old
forester of Seeben by Salzwedel used to say, it was once the
custom in these parts, on a certain day of the year, to fetch a tree
out of the common- wood, and having set it up in the village, to
dance round it, crying : Hennil, Hennil wache ! ' Can this have
come out of Dietmar ? and can this ' Hennil, wake 1 y and
' Hennil vigila ! ' so far back as the 11th cent, have arisen
through misunderstanding the Hung, vagyon (which means ' est/
not ' vigilat ') ? Anyhow, the village watchman or shepherd,
who went round to all the houses, probably on a certain day of
the year, carrying the staff on which was a hand holding an iron
ring, and who called out those words, seems to have meant by
them some divine being. A Slovak song in Kollar (Zpievanky
p. 247, conf. 447) runs thus :



Digitized by VjOOQIC



750 DAY AND NIGHT.

Haincd sviti, gi£ den biely, H. shines, now day is white,

stavayte velky i maly ! arise ye great and small !

dosti sme gii dlnho spali. long enough have we now slept,

Bohemian writers try to identify this Hajnal, Heynal, HennU
with a Servian or Bohemian god of herdsmen Honidlo; 1 I know
not how it may be about this god, but honidlo is neuter in form,
and the name of a tool, it must have been gonidlo in Polish, and
totally unconnected with eynal, heynal (see Suppl.).

We saw that the rising sun uttered a joyful sound, p. 741-2
that the rustling dawn laughed* p. 747; this agrees with the
oft-repeated sentiment, that the day brings bliss, the night sorrow.
We say, ' happy as the day/ and Shaksp. 'jocund day ' ; Reinolt
von der Lippe € er verblide als der dag ' ; MS. 2, 192 of depart-
ing day, ' der tac sin wunne verl&t.' Especially do birds express
their joy at the approach of day : ' gaast inne swaaf oj?)?89t hrofn
bl&ca heofenes wynne bWT-heort boddde/ Beow. 3598 ; the heaveifs
bliss that the raven blithe-hearted announces is the breaking day.
' I am as glad as the hawks that dewy-faced behold the dawn
(dogglitir dagsbrun sid),' Seam. 167 b ; ' nu verSr hann sv& feginn,
semfugl degi/ Vilk. saga, cap. 39, p. 94; 'Horn was as fain o'
fight as is the fouls of the light when it ginneth dawe/ Horn and
Rimen. 64, p. 307 ; 'ich warte der frouwen min, reht als des tages
diu kleinen vogelKn,' MS. 1, 51* ; ' froit sich min gemiiete, sam
diu kleinen vogellin, so si sehent den morgenschin,* MS. 2, 102 b .
Hence the multitude of poetic set-phrases that typify the break
of day by the song of cocks (han-kr&t) or nightingales. Biarka-
m&l near the beginning : ' dagr er upp kominn, dynja hana
fi&Srar/ cocks' feathers make a din. ' & la manana, quando los
gallos cantaran/ Cid 317. *li coc cantoient, pres fu del esclairier.'
' Taube est percie, sesclere la jornee, cil oisellon chantent en la
ramee/ € biz des morgens vruo, daz diu nahtigal rief/ En. 12545
(see Suppl.).

Night is represented as swift, overtaking, taking unawares,
do)) rig, II. 10, 394, for does" not she drive a chariot ? She falls
or sinks from heaven, ' la nuit tombe, nuit tombante, & la tombee do
la nuit; ' she bricht ein (breaks or bursts in, down), whereas day
bricht an (on, forth) ; she gathers all at once, she surprises. In *

1 Jnngmann 1, 670. 724. Hanosoh pp. 869-70.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



NIGHTFALL. 751

Matth. 14, 15, where the Vulg. has ' hora jam praeteriit/ Luther
Germanizes it into 'die nacht faltt daher' (on, apace); and 0.
Germ, already nsed the verbs ana gdn, fallow, in this sense : &band
ansih cma geit, ther dag ist sines sindes, O. v. 10, 8. in anc
gdenda naht, N. Bth. 31. der &bent begunde ane gan, Mar. 171.
schiere viel d& diu naht an, Both. 2653. dd dia naht ane gie, Er.
3108. nnz daz der &bent (me gie, Flore 3468. Ls. 1, 314.
Wigal. 1927. 6693. als der Abent ane get, Wigal. 4763. biz daz
der ftbent ane lac, Ls. 1, 243. dia naht diu gat mich an, Wolfd.
1174. din naht get nns vaste zuo, Livl. chron. 5078. In the same
way sigen (sink) : dd der ftbent zuo seic, Dint. 3, 68. alsd iz zuo
deme Abande seic 3, 70. nil seig onoh der ftbent zuo, Prauend. 95,
20. din naht begunde zuo sigen, Bab. 102. begunde sigen an,
367. dd diu naht zuo seic, Dietr. 62 b . diu naht siget an, Ecke
106. der ftbent seic ie nfther, Gudr. 878, 1. ze tal diu sunne was
genigen, und der ftbent zuo gesigen, Diut. 351, diu naht begunde
sigen an, Mor. 1620. 3963. 1 diu tageweide diu wil hin (the day's
delight it will away), der ftbent siget vaste zuo, Amgb. 2*. der
tach is ouch an uns gewant, uns siget der ftvent in die hant,
Ssp. pref. 193. in der sinkenden naht, Cornel, releg., Magd.
1605, P. 5 a . in sinlclichter nacht, Schoch stud. D. 4*. And we
still say 'till sinking night.' 8 Much the same are: nfi. der
ftbent, diu naht zuo gefloz (came flowing up), Troj. 13676. 10499.
AS. 'ffifen com sigeltorht swung en, 3 Andr. 1246. — But this set-
ting in, gathering, falling can also come softly, secretly, like
a thief: diu naht begunde slichen an (creep on), Dietr. 68 b . nil
was diu naht geslichen gar fiber daz gevilde (fields), Ghristoph.
413. do nfi diu naht her sleich, und diu vinster in begreif (dark-
ness caught him) 376 : sd thiu naht bifeng, Hel. 129, 16. d6
begreif in die nacht, Florsheim chron. in Munch 3, 188. wie
mich die nacht begrif, Simplic. 1, 18. hett mich die nacht schon
begriffen, Gotz v. Berl. p. m. 164. In MHG. we find predicated
of night 'ez benemen/ to carry off (the light? the victory?):
unz inz diu naht bencm, Gudr. 879, ,1. ne hete iz in diu naht
benomen, Diut. 3, 81 (conf. Gramm. 4, 334). Hroswitha says, in
Fides et spes : ' dies abiit, nox incumbit.'

1 Both times * segen ' in text ; if sigen an (vinoere) were meant, we should ex-
pect the word day in the dative.

* Goethe says sweetly : For Evening now the earth was rooking, And on the
mountains (rang the Night.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



752 DAY AND NIGHT.

Clearly in many of these expressions Night is regarded as a
hostile, evil power, in contrast to the kindly character of Day, who
in tranquil ease climbs slowly np above the mountains ; hence
night is as leisurely about ending, as she is quick in setting in :
' diu naht gemeehlich ende nam/ slowly the night took ending,
Frauend. 206, 21. 'Night is no man's friend ' says the proverb,
as though she were a demon (see SuppL).

Between Day and Night there is perennial strife. Night does
not rule till day has given up the contest : ' unz der tac Uez sinen
strit/ Parz. 423, 15. 'der tac nam ein ende, diu naht den sige
gewan/ the victory won, Wolfd. 2025. ' dd der tac verquam, und
diu naht daz lieht nam/ En. 7866. ' Nu begunde ouch struchen
der tac, daz sin schtn vil nftch gelac, unt daz man durch diu
wolken sach, des man der naht ze boten jach, manegen stern der
balde gienc, wand er der naht herberge vienc. Nftch der naht
baniere kom sie selbe schiere.' 1 In this pleasing description
the stars of evening precede the Night herself, as pioneers and
standard-bearing heralds, just as the morning star was messenger
of Day. 2

On p. 742 we had a sunrise taken from the Titurel; a de-
scription of failing day, which immediately precedes, deserves to
stand here too :

Dd diu naht zuo slichen

durch nieman wolte l&zen,

und ir der tac entwf chen

muoste, er fuor s& wester Kin die strazen,

alsd daz man die erd in sach verslinden,

unz er ir moht empfliehen,

d& kund' er sich von 6rient uf winden. 8

Earth devours the departing day (see SuppL).

I find the older poets dwelling more on the sense of gloominess :

i The Day 'gan founder then and fall, and much was shent his wonted sheen,
till thro* the clouds might they be seen, whom couriers of the Night we call, full
many a star that fleetly fares, and harbourage for her prepares. Next her banners,
soon Night herself came on.

2 Lucifer interea praeoo scandebat Olympo, Walthar. 1188. Lucifer ducebat
diem, Aen. 2, 801. Evening is called in B&nakr.rajanimukha, night's mouth, which
reminds one of ' Hella's mouth : ' so is morning ahamukha, day's mouth. Bopp's
gloss. 27*. 284 b .

3 Then Night came creeping on, for no man would she stay, and Day must
needs be gone, retreating down the western way ; the earth devouring him thou
see'st, until that he might from her flee, then could he hoist him up from east.



Digitized by



Google



NIGHTFALL. NIGHT. 753

vvl; 6p<f>vatr) the dusky, in Homer. ' th6 warth ftband cuman, naht
mid neflu,' Hel. 170, 25. c die finstere ragende nacht/ gloomy low-
ring (jutting), Schreckensgast, Ingolst. 1590, p. 114. 'die eitele
und finstere nacht/ Kornmann's Mons Ven. 329. 'nipende niht/
Beow. 1088. 1291, conf. genip (caligo). € scaduhelm/ Beow. 1293.
'nihthelm geswearc deorc ofer dryhtguman' 3576. 'nihthelm t6
gl&d/ Andr. 123. El. 78 : to her, as a goddess, is ascribed, quite
in the spirit of our olden time, a terrible and fearful helmet, like a
cloak-of-darkness, ' niht helmade ' (put on her helmet) we are told
in Andr. 1306. Still finer perhaps is that ' eye of black night/
tceXcuvfj? wktos Sfifia in Aeschylus (Pers. 428) for thick dark-
ness as opposed to the bright eye of night, the moon, p. 702
(see Suppl.). 1

The poetic images I have here collected remove all doubt as to
Day and Night having been in the remotest antiquity both alive
and divine. But the sentiment must very early have lost some
of its hold over the Teutons, from the time they laid aside that
name for day, which of itself bespoke his kinship with the gods.

Beckoning by nights instead of days does indeed rest on the
observance of lunar time (p. 708), but may have another reason
too, the same that prompted men to count winters and not sum-
mers. The heathens used to fix their holy festivals for, or prolong
them into, the night, especially those of the summer and winter
solstices, as we see by the Midsummer and Christmas fires ; the
fires of Easter and May also bear witness to festal nights. The
Anglo-Saxons kept a hcerfestniht (ON. haustndtt, haustgrima),
the Scandinavians a hokundtt (P. Magn. Lex. 1021). Beda in his
De temp. rat. cap. 13 has preserved a notable piece of informa-
tion, though its full meaning is beyond our ken : € Incipiebant
annum (antiqui Anglorum populi) ab octavo cal. Jan. die, ubi nunc
natale Domini celebramus ; et ipsam noctem, nunc nobis sacro-
sanctam, tunc gentili vocabulo modranecht (mddra niht), 8 i.e. ma-
trum noctem appellabant ob causam, ut suspicamur, ceremoniarum
quas in ea pervigiles agebant.' Who were these mothers ?

1 Images now familiar to us, about quenching the lamps of day, I have not met
with in the old poets ; but the night burns her tapers too. Shaksp. describes the
end of night by • night's candles are burnt,' Rom. & J. 8, 5.

1 Afzelius 1, 4. 13 has no right to speak of a modernatt, which is not founded
on Norse does., but simply borrowed from Beda. [Can * mddre niht * have meant
4 muntere nacht/ wakeful night ? oonf. • pervigiles.']



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CHAPTER XXIV.
SUMMER AND WINTER.

The Seasons, which, like day and night, depended on the near-
ness or distance of the sun, have maintained their personality a
great deal more vigorously and distinctly. Their slow revolution
goes on with a measured stateliness, while the frequent change of
day and night soon effaced the recollection of their having once
been gods.

Day and night resemble summer and winter in another point,
viz. that the break of day and the arrival of summer are greeted
with joyful songs by the birds, who mourn in silence during night
and winter. Hence the Eddie kenningar of gledifugla (laefcitia
volucrum) for summer, and sut ok striff fugla (dolor et angor
avium) for winter. This sympathy of nature finds utterance no
end of times in the lays of our minnesingers (see Suppl.).

The olden time seems at first to have recognised only two
seasons in the year, afterwards three, and lastly four. To this
the very names bear witness. Our jahr, Goth, jer, OHG. jdr, M.
Nethl. jaer, OS. ger, AS. gear, Engl, year, ON. dr, is plainly the
Pol. iar, iaro, Boh. gar, garo, which signify spring. 1 In the
same way the Slavic Veto, lieto, liato, strictly summer, and seem-
ingly akin to our lew, OHG. lenzo, lengiz, MHG. lenze, lengez,
AS. lencten, lengten (lent, spring) has come by degrees to cover
the whole year. Thus both j&r and 16to mean the warmer season
(spring or summer) ; and southern nations reckoned by them, as
the northern did by winters.

Ulphilas renders 2ro? by jer, and iviavros either by afin, Gal.
4, 10, or atajmi, John 18, 13, a word that has died out of our
language everywhere else, but still lingers in the Gothic names
Athanagildus, Athanaricus (AJmagilds, AJmareiks) ; it seems

1 The Pol. iar looks like lap, bat this is understood to be for Map, Pieap, Lat.
▼er for verer, veser, closely conn, with Lith. waaara (aestas) and Sanskr. vasanta,
Benfey 1, 809. Of the same root seems the Slav, veana, wiosna (spring)! bat hardly
the ON. vasatSr, which means sharp winter.

764



Digitized by



Google



SEASONS. 755

akin to Sros, perhaps to the Slavic grid, godfna, which in Bass,
and Serv. mean a year, while in 0.S1. they stood, as the Pol.
g<Sd, Boh. h<Sd, hodine still stand, for time in general. The
relation between £7*09 and iviavros remains uncertain, for in Od.
1, 16 (ft-09 fj\0e irepinfKofthwv ipiavr&v, a year went past with
circling seasons) iviavrol are sections of a year, while other
accounts make an iviavro? contain three err). This comp.
iviavTo? holds in it the simple evok, Lat. annus 1 (see Suppl.).

The year was supposed to make a circle, a ring (orbis, circulus) :
j&res umbi-hring, jar-hrvng, umbi-huwrfh; MHG. j&resumbe-ganc,
-ring, -vart, -trit j and the completion and recommencement of
this ring was from a very early period the occasion of solemn
festivities. Eligius preaches: 'nullus in kal. Jan. nefanda aut
ridiculosa, vetulos aut cervulos aut joticos faciat, neque mensas
super noctem componat, neque strenas aut bibitiones superfluas
exerceat.' This was apparently a Celtic and Roman custom,
'strenae ineunte anno' are mentioned by Suetonius (Cal. 42. Aug.
57), and the holy mistletoe tfas plucked amid joyful cries of
f a-gui-lan-neuf !' [Michelet 2, 17: guy-na-n£, maguillanneu,
gui-gne-leu. Suppl.]. Nothing of the kind seems to have been
known in Germany ; but it is worth while to notice the New-
year's hymns and wishes in Clara Hatzlerin's book as late as the
14th cent. (57 b . 77% espec. 196—201 in Haltaus's ed.) where the
year is pictured as a newborn babe, a newborn god, who will grant
the wishes of mortals. Immediately, no doubt, this referred to
Christmas and the Saviour's birth, in places where the new year
began with that day ; yet some heathen practices seem to have
got mixed up with it too, and I cannot overlook the use in these
hymns of the bare adj. new, without the addition of 'year' or
'child' (just as in naming the new-moon, p. 710, nf, niuwi) :
[' des giinn dir alles der newgeborn ! ' this the Newborn grant
thee all, Hatzl. 196 b . So in other new-year's wishes : s wunsch
ich dir ain vil gdt jftr zu disem new, 9 Wolkenst. p. 167. 'gen
disem saeligen guoten newen,' Ad. Keller's Altd. ged. p. 10. —
Suppl.] .

Otherwise I hardly find the yewr as a whole (conf. the riddle,
p. 737) exalted into a person, except in adjurations, spells and

1 For amnos, says Bopp's Gloss. Skr. 16* ; Benfey 1, 810 explains biavros by
Skr. amavat, Any being ama, new-moon.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



756 STJMMEB AND WINTER.

•

curses : ' sam mir daz heilecjdr I ' so (help) me holy year, Ls. 1,
287. Haupt's Zeitschr. 7, 104. The two following refer to the
year's commencement only : € ein scelec jar gang dich an ! ' a
blessed year betide thee, Ls. 3, 111 ; and ' daz dich ein veiges jar
muez ane komen!' a doomed (fey) year be thy dole, Ls. 1, 317.
In AS. 'o$ J?89t ofter com gear in geardas/ Beow. 2260 (see
Sappl.).

Bat even in the earliest times the year had fallen into halves,
to which AS. and ON. give the curious name of missere, misseri,
and the AS. poems seem to reckon chiefly by these. We find
'missera worn/ store of m., Caadm. 71, 10; 'fela missera' 180,
23. Beow. 306 ; * hund missera/ Beow. 2996. 3536 = the 50
winters in 4413; 'misserum frod, missarum frod/ Csedm. 104,
30. 141, 16 (wise with age, like 'gearum, daegrime, fyrndagum
fr&d/ Gramm. 1, 750). In the Edda I find only 212 ab , 'ein
misseri ' (per unum annum), and 'sams misseris' (eodem anno) ;
but the Gr&g&s has also misseri (semestrium). The etymology of
the word is not easy : one would expect to find in it the words
half (medius, dimidius) and year, but the short vowel of the
penult conflicts with the ON. &r and AS. gear, and it appears
to be masc. besides (einn misseri, not eitt m.) ; the ON. misseri
(bad year, annonae caritas, neut.) is quite another thing. Again,
why should the d of the AS. midde (Goth, midja, OHG. mitti)
have passed into 88 ? It must be admitted however, that in
the relation of Lat. medius to Goth, midja we already observe a
disturbance in the law of change ; misseri may have come down
and continued from so remote an antiquity that, while in appear-
ance denying its kindred, it will have to own them after all, and
the ' miss ' is in the same predicament as the Gr. picos, fieo-tro?
compared with Sanskr. madhyas, or fivaao? =/8u0O9. No 'mis-
seri, missiri ' meets us in the OHG. remains, but the lost hero-
lays may have known it, as even later usages retain the reckoning
by half-years; when the Hildebr.-lied says 'ih walldta sumaro
enti wintro sehstic ur lante/ it means only 60 misseri (30 sum-
mers and 30 winters), which agrees with the ' 30 years ' of the
more modern folk-song; and we might even guess that the
'thirteen years' and e seven years' in Nib. 1082 and 1327, 2,
which make Chriemhild somewhat old for a beauteous bride, were
at an older stage of the epos understood of half-years. In the

Digitized by VjOOQIC



SEASONS. 757

North, where winter preponderates, so many winters stood for
so many years, and 'tfilf vetra gamall' means a twelve-year-old.
That in OHG. and even MHG. summer and winter represent the
essential division of the year, I infer even from the commonly
used adverbs sumerlanc, winterlanc, while we never hear of a
lengezlanc or herbestlanc; the ON. sumarl&ngr, vetrl&ngr, are
supplemented by a haustlangr (the whole autamn) .

The Greek year has only three seasons, cap, Oipos, ^eifjuop,
autumn is left out. Our two great anniversaries, the summer
and winter solstices, marked off two seasons; the harvest-feast
at the end of Sept. and the fetching-in of summer are perhaps
sufficient proof of a third or fourth. The twofold division is
further supported by the AS. terms midsumor and midwinter,
ON. midsumar, miffvetr, which marked, the same crises of solstice,
and had no midhearfest to compete with them ; an AS. midlencten
(Engl, midlent) does occur, and is about equivalent to our mil-
fatten. Now in what relation did the missere stand to midsumor
and midwinter f The day (of 24 hours) likewise fell into two
halves of 12 hours each, the AS. dogor, ON. dcegr ; and d&gor
bears the same relation to drag as missere to gear. Our ancient
remains have no tuogar attending upon tac, but a Gothic dogr by
the side of dags may be inferred from fidurd&gs and ahtaud6gs
in Ulphilas (see Suppl.) .

Tacitus, after saying that the Germans cultivate grain only,
and neither enclose meadows nor plant orchards, adds : ' unde
annum quoque ipsum non in totidem digerunt species : hiems et
ver et aestas intellectum ac vocabula habent ; auctumni perinde
nomen ac bona ignorantur.' Here auctumnus evidently refers to
garden-fruit and aftermath, while the reaping of corn is placed
in summer, and the sowing in spring. But when we consider,
that North Germany even now, with a milder climate, does not
get the grain in till August and September, when the sun is
lower down in the sky ; and that while August is strictly the
ernte-month 1 and Sept. the herbst-month, yet sometimes Sept.
is called the augstin and October the herbst-month; theTacitean
view cannot have been universally true even in the earliest times.
Neither does the OHG. herpist, herbist, AS. hearfett, seem at

1 OHG. aranmAnot, from aran (messia), Gofh. asans ; the 0. Saxons said
bactd or teo, Hal. 78, 14. 79, 14 ; Nethl. bouw, touted.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



758 SUMMER AND WINTER.

all younger than other very old words. More correct surely is
the statement we made before, that as we go further north in
Europe, there appear but two seasons in all, summer and winter ;
and as we go south, we can distinguish three, four, or even five. 1
Then also for mythical purposes the two seasons are alone avail*
able, though sometimes they are called spring and winter, or
spring and autumn 8 (see Suppl.) .

With the Goth, vintrus (hiems) we have a right to assume a
masc. 8umru8 exactly like it, though Ulph. in Mk 13, 28 (and
prob. in Matth. 24, 82 and Lu. 21, 80) rendered depot by asans
(harvest- time). The declension follows from OHG. sumar ^
sumaru (for a Goth, sumrs of 1 decl. would bring in its train
an OHG. somar) ; also from AS. sumor with dat. sumera, not
sumere. The ON. sumar bping neut. in the face of a masc. vetr,
OHG. wintar, AS. winter, seems, inorganic ; it must have been
masc. once. The root assumed in my Gramm. 2, 55 runs upon
sowing and reaping of crops.

The Edda takes us at once into the genealogy of these two
worthies. Sumar is the son of Svasuffr (S»m. 34 b . Sn. 23. 127),
a name derived from sv&s (earns, proprius, domesticus), Goth.
8v6s, OHG. su&s, for he is one that blesses and is blest, and after
him is named all that is sweet and blithe (sv&slegt, blitt). But
the father of Vetr is named Vindloni or Vindsvalr (windbringer,
windcool), whose father again was Vasa&r (ibid.) the dank and
moist : a grim coldhearted kindred. But both sets, as we should
anticipate, come before us as giants, Sv&sufr and Sumar of a
good friendly sort, V&saSr, Vindsvalr and Vetr of a malignant ;

1 Spaniards divide spring into primaverh and verano (great spring), see Don
Quix. 2, 53 and Ideler 6, 305. After verano oomes estio, Fr. 6t6, both masc, while
Ital. esta, estate remains fern, like aestas.

8 The Slavs too, as a raoe, hold with two principal seasons : summer and year
are both lUo, i.e. the old year ends with winter, and with summer the new begins ;
16 to, like oar jahr, is neut., and of course impersonal. Winter they call zimh
(fern.). When intermediate seasons have to be named, they say podlHi (subaestas)
for spring, podzim (subhiems) for autumn. But other names have also come into
vogue, beside the garo, iaro above: Buss, and Boh. vesnh, Pol. wiotna; Sloven.
vy-gred (e-grediens, in Germ. Carinthia auswtirt), mlado Uto (young summer),
mla&Uie, po-mland t 8-pomlad, s-proUtUie (fr. s-prot, against), all denoting spring;
the South Slavs espeo. felt the need of parting spring from summer. Autumn is
in Serv. ytsen, Sloven, yizen or predzima (prae-hiems), Buss. 6sen. Zim& must be
very old, Lith. iiema, Gr. x«/*^"» J^**- hiems, Skr. hemanta. Our frtihling, friihjahr
(early year) is neither 0. nor MHG., but formed during the last few cents, on the
model of printemps or prima v^ra ; sptitling, spdtjahr (late year) is also used for
autumn. On auswarts and einwtirts conf. Schm. 1, 117. 4, 161.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SUMMER. 759

so that here again the twofold nature of giants (p. 528-9) is set
in a clear light. The Skaldskaparm&l pats them down among the
ancient iotnar : 209 b Somr (al. S6mir) ok Svdsuffr, 210* Vinfavalr
ok YiSarr (1. Vetr). Even now Summer and Winter are much
used as proper names, and we may suppose them to have been
such from the beginning, if only because [as names of seasons]
they do not agree with any in the Non-Teutonic tongues. An
urkunde in Neugart no. 873 (as early as a.d. 958) introduces us
to two brothers named Wintar and Swmar. Graff 1, 631 has the
proper name Wintarolf in the augmentative form (see p. 762 n.)

Now I will produce plain marks of their personality, which
have long maintained themselves in popular phrases and poetic
turns of speech. We say every day : Summer, Winter is at the
door, comes in, sets in. H. Sachs iv. 3, 21* : ' till Summer step
this way.' l In MHGL the one is commonly called lieb (lief,
dear), the other leid (loathly, sad) : 'der liebe Sumer urloup
genam/ took leave, Ben. 344. ' urloup nam der Winder/ 862.
Both are provided with a retinue : € Sumer, dine holden (retainers)
von den huoben sint gevarn/ 304. € Sumer, din gesinde/ 406.
' mln sane siile des Winters wapen tragen/ my song should W.'s
livery wear, MS. 1, 178 b . € Winder ist mit slnen vriunden komen,'
Ben. 414. Evidently they have marched up with their men, each
with intent to war upon and chase away his foe: r der leide
Winder h&t den Sumer hin verjaget/ 381. € er (der Winter) ist dir
gehaz, er en-weiz niht umbe waz, selten er des ie vergaz, swenne
er dinen stuol besaz, er en-ructe in viir baz, sin gewalt wol tfisend
ellen viir den dlnen g&t/ he hateth thee, he wot not why ; he
seldom forgat, when thy chair he besat, but he pushed it further ;
his power passeth thine, etc. MsH. 3, 258. Ben. 303. c Winter 2
Mt ez hie gerfimet ' cleared out, Ben. 487. — Again, as summer
begins with May, we have that month acting as its representative,
and just as full of life and personality. (All three receive the
title of lord : ' mln herre Winter 1 ' MsH. 3, 267*. ' her Meie ! '
3, 443 b . ' her Meige ! ' Walth. 46, 30). May makes his entry :
' s6 der Meige in gat/ Meist. Alex. 144 b . € s6 der vil siieze
Meige in gat/ Trist. 537. ' Meige ist komen in diu lant/ Ms. 1,

1 Alse die Somer quam int lant, Reinsert 2451. also de Sommer qudme int
lant, Beineke 2311. d6 here de Summer trat, Wiggert 2, 48.

3 Without article, therefore not com. noon; oonf. p. 704 note, Solans.

VOL. II. T



Digitized by VjOOQIC



760 SUMMER AND WINTER.

18 b . Ben. 364. ' der Meie sin ingesinde h&t/ has his retinue 1,
14 b . ' des Meien tur ist uf getdn, MsH. 8, 296*. ' der Mei ist in
den landen hie ' 3, 230*. ' s6 der Meie sinen hrame schouwen
l&t (his store displays), unde in gat mit vil manigem liehten
. mile ' 30, 30 b . ' vil manager hande varwe (full many a hue)
h&t in sfnem hrame der Meige/ MS. 1, 59*. 'der Meie h&t
brieve fiir gesant, daz sie kiinden in diu lant sine kunft den
vruoten/ Ben. 433; like a king who after a long absence
returns victorious, he sends letters on before, to announce his
coming. ' da ist der Meie und al sin kraf t, er und sin geselle-
schaft diu (sic 1.) ringent manige swadre (lighten many a
burden); Meie h&t im angesiget' overcome him (winter), Ben.
449. ' ich lobe dich, Meie, diner kraf t, du tuost Sumer sigehaft/
thou makest S, victorious (both prop, n.), MS. 2, 57*. ' ob der
Meige ze velde lac/ Ls. 1, 199. ' s6 der Meige alrSrst in gat.'
Frauend. 14. ' der Mei hit sin gezelt bestelt/ set up his tents,
camp, MsH. 3, 303 b . ' des Meien echilt,' 3, 307*, ' Sumer der
h&t sin gezelt nu gerihtet liberal/ Ms. 2, 57*. 'des Meien
waldencere kundet an die sumerzit/ May's forester announces
summertide, MsH. 3, 230 b . 'die (waldes ougenweide, forest's
eye-feast) h&t der Meie fiir gesant, daz si kiinden in diu lant sin
kunft ' 8, 22 7 b . € der Meie viieret den wait an siner hende/ leads
the wood by the hand, MS. 2, 81 b ; he is provided with hands
(like Wish, p. 142). Men worship him with thanks and bowing,
like a king or god making his progress (p. 218, Freyr) ; like
them he has his strete (highway) : f des Meigen straze/ Ben. 42.
€ M des Meien strdzen/ MS. 23*. ' Meie, ich wil dir nigenf bow
to, Ben. 398. ' erent den Meien/ Ben. 184. MsH. 1, 147*> b .
' der Meie habe des done I ' thanks thereof, 1 Ben. 434. May and
Summer put on their verdant attire : c der Meie ist uf sin gruenez
zwi gesezzen/ MS. 2, 75*. May hears complaints, he commands
his flowers, 1, 3 b . ' des Meigen vriunt (attendant), der griiene
wase (sward), der het Az bluomen angeleit (laid on) s6 wiinecliohe
sumerkleit/ Trist. 562. ' der Sumer sneit sin kleit/ Ben. 159.
' der Meie sendet dem walde kleider' 436. 'der Sumer gab diu

1 In Gramm. 4, 725 is a coll. of the oft-recurring phrases « des Meigen era
(honour), d. M. gtiete, des Burners giiete (goodness)/ which seem to imply an ancient
worship (p. 29, £ra). I add a few more references : MsH. 1, 52*. 60*. 61*. 194*.
805*. 848*. 8, 222*. Notice: * Got gebe daz der herbest sin %tt volhringel ' that
autumn his worship fulfil, MS. 2, 180*.



Digitized by



Google



WINTER. 761

selben kleit, Abrelle maz, der Meie sneit/ April measured, May
cut out, MS. 2, 94 b . ' diu (kleider) het gegeben in (to them)
der Meie z'einer niuwen wat (weeds, clothing)/ MsH. 3, 286 b .
' Mei hat enprozzen berg und tal ' 3, 188 b . ' Sumer hat gesendet
uz sJn wunne, der Meie spreit uf diu lant sin wat ' (2, 29 1). 1 ' der
bluendent heide voget (heath's controller) ist mit gewalt uf uns
gezoget (has rushed), hoert wi er mit winde broget (blusters) uf
wait und im gevilde/ MsH. 1, 193* (see Suppl.).

But more especially does the antithesis demand attention. In
Winter's train come Rime and Snow, still personifications, and
giants from of old (p. 532). They declare war against Summer :
' dir hat widerseit beidiu Rif and Sne/ Ben. 398. ' der Meie loste
bluomen uz Rifen bande' 437. 'manegen tac stark in stnen
banden lac diu heide (the heath lay fast in Winter's bonds) ; uns
was verirt der wunne hirt von des argen Winter's ntt/ long did
we miss our shepherd of bliss by wicked W/s envy, MsH. 1,
192*. 'der W. und sine knechte (his men), daz ist der Rife und
der Wind/ Hartm. erst, buchl. 834. MsH. 3, 232*. What
Summer clothed, Winter strips bare: 'iiber diu 6ren* er dem
wold sin kleider brach/ tore the wood's clothes over his ears
(ibid.), 'da daz niuwe loup (leafage) 6 was entsprungen, des
hastu nu gevullet dinen sac ' 2, 386 b ; like an enemy or robber,
he fills his sack with booty (saccage). 'bluomen unde loup was
des Rifen firster roup (first plunder), den er in die secke schoitp
(shoved into his sacks), er enspielt in noch enkloup/ Ben. 304.
Yet, ' sunder Rifen danc, allez griienez in froiden lit/ no thanks
to Jack Frost, all green things are in glee, MS. 1, 34 b . ' unbe-
sungen ist der wait, daz ist allez von des Rifen ungenaden (ill-
will) komen/ Ben. 275. Wizlau in one song exclaims : ' Winder,
dich vorhdfce (take heed) 1 der Sumer komt ze mote/ to meet
thee, Amgb. 29*; and Walther 39, 9 : ' weizgot, er lat ouch dem
Meien den strit/ Winter gives up the battle ; conversely, ' der
Suiner sinen strit dem Winder lat/ Warnung 2386. And, what
is more than all, one poem 8 has preserved even the mythic name

1 So that ( des Meigen %o&t, kleit ' MS. 2, 105-6-7 is a metaphor for foliage, and
4 boten (messengers) des Someres ' 1, 97 b for flowers.

8 * Walt hat 6ren, velt hat gesiht,' wood has ears, field has sight, MS. 2, 131» ;
* velt hAt 6ren, wait hat ougen,' eyes, 135 b .

s Ntthart's, Ben. 884. To this poet we owe the liveliest images of Summer
and Winter.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



762 SUMMER AND WINTER.

of the Rime-giant : it is Aucholf, formed just with the suffix -olf,
which like -olt is characteristic of monstrous ghostly beings; 1
the root &uka, OHG. ouhhu, means angeo, so that Oucholf may
contain the notion of enormous, gigantic * (see Suppl.).

Summer and Winter are at war with one another, exactly like
Day and Night (p. 752) ; Day and Summer gladden, as Night
and Winter vex the world. 3

Now the arrival of Summer, of May, or as we now say, of
Spring, was kept as a holiday from of old. In the Mid. Agea
this was called die zit empfdhen, welcoming the season, MS. 1,
200*. 2, 78 b . Ben. 453 ; die zit mit sange begen (keep), Misc.
2, 198; den Sumer empfdhen, MsH. 3, 207 a . 21 l a . 232 a . ' Sumer,
wis (be) empfangen von mir hundert tusent stunt (times) ! ' Ben.
328. c vrouwen und man empfiengen den Meien/ MsH. 3, 185 b .
'd&wartder Mei empfangen wol' 3, 218 b . 219*. 'den Meigen
enpfdhen und tanzen * 1, 47 b . ' nu woluf gruezen (greet) wir den
suezen ! ' 1, 60 b . ' ich wil den Sumer gruezen * 3, 446 b . ' helfent
gruezen mir den Meien/ MS. 1, 202 b . * si (diu vogellln, small
fowl) wellent alle gruezen nu den Meien ' 2, 84 b . ' mllekome her
Meige ! ' 1, 57 b . ' sit willekome her Meie 1 ' 1, 59*. 's6 wol dir,
lieber Sumer, daz du komen bist ! 3 MsH. 2, 316 b . A song in
Eschenburg's Denkm. 458 has the burden ' willkommen Maie ! '
(see Suppl.).

But the coming in of Summer did not happen on any fixed
day of the year, it was determined by accidental signs, the open-
ing of flowers, the arrival of birds. This was called finding
Summer : ' ich h&n den Sumer vunden/ MsH. 3, 202 b .

Whoever had spied f den ersten viol ' 4 made it known ; the
whole village ran to the spot, the peasants stuck the flower on a
pole, and danced around it. On this subject also Ntthart has
some spirited songs, MsH. 3, 298-9 ; conf. 202* (den 6rsten viol

1 Gramm. 2, 834—40 ; conf. Nahtolf, Biterolf, Egisgrimolt (p. 238), Fasolt
(p. 529), Mimerolt (p. 379), Kobolt (p. 414).

* A MHG. poet paints the battle between May and Autumn, in a pretty story
(Fragm. 29), but it does not come within the mythic province, conf. MS. 2, 105.
More to the point is H. Sachs's poem 1, 420-1. A M. Nethl. * spel van den winter
ende sommer ' is printed in Hoffm. hor. belg. 6, 125 — 146. Notker in Gap. 27 calls
* herbest unde lenzo, zwene gen6za,' fellows twain.

8 The Fris. Laws too couple night with winter : * si ilia tenebrosa nebula et
frigidissima hiems in hortos et sepes desoendit,' Bichth. 46 (huersA thiu thiustera
nacht and thi nldkalda winter ur tha tuner hleth).

4 Florum prima ver nuntiantium viola alba, Pliny 21, 11 (38).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HERALDS OF SUMMER. 763

schouwen). H. Sachs iv. 3, 49 seq. describes the same festival;
round the first summer flower they dance and sing. e den ersten
bluomen vlehten/ MS. 1, 41 b (see Suppl.).

That the first cockchafer also was fetched in with ceremonies,
we saw on p. 693-4 ; to this day the passion for hunting these
chafers and playing with them is indestructibly rooted among
boys.

In like manner the first swallow, the first storJc was hailed as
messenger of spring (ayyeXo? eapos;). The swallow's return was
celebrated even by the Greeks and Romans: Athenaeus 8, 15 p.
360 gives a xcXtSoVwr/Aa, 1 chanted by children at Rhodes, who
carried a swallow about and collected eatables. The custom still
survives in Greece; the young people assemble on March 1, and
traverse all the streets, singing a sweet spring-song ; the singers
carry a swallow carved out of wood, which stands on a cylinder,
and keeps turning round. 9 ' Hirundine prima/ says Horace
Epist. i. 7, 13. That in Germany also the first swallow was taken
notice of in the Mid. Ages, is shewn by the superstitious obser-
vance (Sup. G, and I, 217) of digging a coal out of the ground
on her appearance. In Sweden the country folk welcome her
with a thrice repeated shout of joy (Westerdahl p. 55). Both
swallow and stork are accounted sacred inviolable creatures. He
that first announced the return of the stork to the Greeks,
received messenger's pay. As late as last century the warders
of many German towns were required to blow-in the approaching
herald of spring, z and a drink of honour was served out to them
from the town-cellar. An epigram by Joach. Olearius begins :

Ver laetum rediit, rediitque ciconia grata,
aspera dum pulso frigore cessat hiems. 4

The cuckoo may also be regarded as the announcer of spring,
and an O.Engl, song appeals to him : ' sumer is icumen in, Ihude
sing cucul* Hone's Daybook 1, 739 (see Suppl.).

The proclaiming of summer by songs of the younger folk still



1 Ilgen. opusc. philol. 1, 165. Zell's Ferienschr. 1, 53. SS. Schneidewin'a
Delectus 2, 465-6.

3 Fauriel 2, 256. Disc, pr&lim. xxviii. More fully in Theod. Kind p. 12.
8 Alpenrosen (Bern 1817) p. 49 ; conf. Hebel's song Der storch.

4 Rostock 1610 ; conf. Jon. Praetorius's * Storchs und schwalben-winterquartier,'
Francf. 1676, p. 185.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



764 SUMMER AND WINTER.

prevails, or did prevail in recent centuries, almost everywhere in
German and Slav countries, and bespeaks a very ancient origin.
What the minnesingers, with their elegant phrases about the old
' chair, entry, highway, grace and glory of Summer ' as a king
or god, may have led us to guess, is supplemented and illus-
trated by abiding customs of the people, which in rude artless
fashion drive at the main point. The modes of celebration and
the songs vary greatly. 1 Often there is only a wreath, a doll, an
animal carried about in a basket, and gifts demanded from house
to house. 8 Here it is a cock, there a crow or a fox? that the
children take round, as in Poland at the time of col§da (new-
year) they go about with a stuffed wolf, collecting gifts (Lindo
sub v. koleda). These animals do not migrate, and I leave it
undetermined, what right they can have to represent the stork
or swallow, or whether they mean something altogether different.
The approach of Summer is only mentioned in a few words and
phrases, or not at all.

In many places however the collecting of gifts is only the
sequel to a previous performance full of meaning, in which youths
and maidens take part. Two disguised as Summer and Winter
make their appearance, the one clothed with ivy or singrun, the
other with straw or moss, and they fight one another till Summer
wins. Winter is thrown on the ground, his wrappages stripped
off and scattered, and a summer's wreath or branch is carried
about. Here we have once more the ancient idea of a quarrel or
war between the two powers of the year, in which Summer comes
off victorious, and Winter is defeated ; the people supply, as it
were, the chorus of spectators, and break out into praises of the
conqueror.

1 The most diligent collector of them, though in a scattered disorderly way, is
Chr. Heinr. Schmid of Giessen, both in the * Journal von und fur D.' for 1787. 1,
186-98. 480-6; for 1788. 1, 666-71. 2, 409-11 ; for 1790. 1, 310-4 ; for 1791. 1002 ;
and in the ' Deutsche monatsohrift * for 1798. 2, 68-67 ; he gives references to a
great many authors old and new. A still earlier article in * Journal v. u. f. D.' for
1784. 1, 282 is worth consulting. Isolated facts in Kriinitz's Encyclop. 58, 681
seq., Grater's Idunna 1812 p. 41, Busohing's Wdch. naohr. 1, 183-6. 8, 166 and
other places to be cited as they are wanted. The two earliest treatises are by Paul
Chr. Hilscher ' de ritu Dominicae Laetare, quern vulgo appellant den tod austreiben,'
Lips. 1690 (in Germ. 1710), and Joh. Casp. Zeumer ( de Dominica Laetare, 1 Jena
1706.

8 Let the summer-ckildren sell you a summer, and your cows will give plenty
of milk, Sup. 1, 1097.

8 Reinhart, Introd. p. ccxix. Athen. also, ubi supra, speaks of a crow being
carried about, instead of the swallow.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



EXPULSION OP WINTER. 765

The custom just described belongs chiefly to districts on the
middle Rhine, beyond it in the Palatinate, this side of it in the
Odenwald betwixt Main and Neckar. Of the songs that are song
I give merely the passages in point :

Trarira ! der Sommer der ist da ;
wir wollen hinaus in garten
und wollen des Sommers warten (attend),
wir wollen hinter die hecken (behind the hedges)
und wollen den Sommer wecken (wake),
der Winter hats verloren (has lost),
der Winter liegt gefangen (lies a prisoner) ;
und wer nicht dazu kommt (who won't agree),
den schlagen wir mi t stangen (we'll beat with staves) »
Elsewhere : Jajaja ! der Sommertag l ist da,

er hratzt dem Winter die augen aus (scratch "WVs

eyes out),
und jagt die bauern zur stube hinaus (drive the

boors out of doors).
Or : Stab aus ! * dem Winter gehn die augen aus (W.'s

eyes come out) ;
veilchen, rosenblumen (violets and roses),
holen wir dem, Sommer (we fetch),
schicken den Winter ilber 'n Bhein (send W. over

Rhine),
bringt uns guten kiihlen wein.
Also : Violen und die blumen

bringen uns den Sommer,

der Sommer ist so keck (cheeky, bold),

und toirft den Winter in den dreck (flings W. in the

dirt).
Or : Stab aus, stab aus,

bias dem Winter die augen aus (blow W/s eyes out) !

Songs like this must have come down through many centuries ;
and what I have quoted above from poets of the 13th cent, pre-

1 For Sommer ? oonf . Beld&g for Bealdor, p. 222-9, and Day, p. 788.

' Also * ttam aut ' or * sta maus, and * heib aus, treib aw, dem W. ist ein aug'
ans.' Stabaus may be for staubaut « up and away, Sehm. 8, 602 ; oonf. Zingerle
2, 147.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



766 SUMMBB AffD WINTEB.

supposes their existence, or that of songs substantially the same.
The conception and setting of the whole are quite heathenish :
valiant Summer found, fetched, wakened from his sleep; van-
quished Winter rolled in the dust, thrown into chains, beaten
with staves, blinded, banished ; these are demigods or giants of
antiquity. Violets are mentioned with evident reference to the
welcoming of Summer. In some parts the children march out
with white peeled rods, either for the purpose of helping Summer
to belabour the foe, or perhaps to represent the retinue of Winter,
for it was the old custom for the conquered and captive to be let
go, carrying white staves (RA.. 134). One of the band of boys,
marching at their head wrapt in straw, stands for Winter, another
decked with ivy for Summer. First the two fence with their poles,
presently they close and wrestle, till Winter is thrown and his
straw garment stript off him. During the duel, the rest keep
singing :

stab aus, stab aus,

stecht dem Winter die augen aus I

This is completely the ' rauba birahanen, hrusti giwinnan, caesos
spoliare armis ' of the heroic age ; the barbarous punching out of
eyes goes back to a still remoter antiquity. 1 The wakening of
Summer is like the wakening of Ssalde.

In some places, when the fight is over, and Winter put to flight,
they sing :

So treiben wir den Winter aus

durch unsre stadt zum'thor hinaus (out at the gate) ;

here and there the whole action is compressed into the shout :
' Sommer 'rein (come in), Winter 'naus (go out) ! '

As we come back through the Odenwald toward inner Fran-
conia, the Spessart and the Bhon Mts, the words begin to change,
and run as follows :

Stab aus, stab aus,

stecht dem Tod (death) die augen aus I



1 The MHG. songs keep pace : ' der Meie hat stnen schaft uf den Winter ver-
stoohen,' dug his shaft into, MsH. 3, 195 b . 'Mai hat den W. enlagen\ slain,
Hatzl. 131, 68. * vehten wil der W. kalt gegen dem lieben Burner,' MsH. 8, 428*.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



EXPULSION OF DEATH. 767

Then : Wir haben den Tod hinausgetrieben (driven out),
den lieben Sommer bringen wir wieder (again),
den Sommer nnd den Meien
mit bliimlein mancherleien (of many a sort).

So Death has stept into Winter's place ; we might say, becanse
in winter nature slumbers and seems dead} bnt it may also be,
that at an early time some heathenish name for Winter had to
give place to the christian conception of Death.

When we get to the heart of Franconia, e.g. Niirnberg, the
songs drop all mention of Summer, and dwell the more em-
phatically on the expulsion of Death. 1 There country lasses of
seventeen or eighteen, arrayed in all their finery, parade the
streets of the whole town and suburbs; on or under their left
arm they carry a little open coffin, with a shroud hanging over
the sides, and a puppet lying under that. Poor children carry
nothing bnt an open box, in which lies a green bough of beech
with a stalk sticking up, on which an apple is fixed instead of
the head. Their monotone song begins : ' To-day is Midlent,
we bear Death mto the water, and that is well/ Amongst other
things :

Wir tragen den Tod in* 8 wasser,

tragen ihn 'nein, und wieder } rau8 2 (in, and out again),



1 Seb. Frank's Weltbuch 61* thus describes the Shrovetide custom in Fran-
conia : * Four of them hold a sheet by his 4 corners, whereon is laid a straw
puppet in hose, jerkin and mask, like a dead man, the which they toes up by the
4 corners, and catch him again in the sheet. This they do the whole town through.
At Midlent they make in some places a straw man or imp, arrayed as a death, him
the assembled youth bear into the nigh lying villages. And by some they be well
received, eased and fed with dried pears, milk and peas ; by others, which hold it
a presage of coming death, evil entreated and driven from their homesteads with
foul words and oftentimes with buffets. 1

2 This seems to indicate, that the deity of Death is not to be annihilated by
the ducking, but only made sensible of the people's dissatisfaction. Gruel Death
has during the year snatched many a victim, and men wish, as it were, to be
revenged on him. This is of a piece with the idea brought out on p. 20 : when
a god has not answered your expectations, you bully him, you plunge his image
into water. So by the Franoonians, on a failure of the wine-crop, St. Urban's
image, who had neglected to procure them wine (Fisohart's Garg. 11) was flung into
the brook, or the mud (Seb. Frank 51 b ), or the water-trough, even in the mere antioi-

gation of a poor vintage (Agrioola's Sprichw. 498. Grater's Idunna 1812, p. 87).
o the Bavarians, during St. Leonhard's solemn procession, would occasionally
drop him in the river (Schm. 2, 478). We know how the Naples people to this day
go to work with their San Gennaro, how seamen in a storm ill-use St. James's
image, not to speak of other instances.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



768 SUMMER AND WINTER.

tragen ihn vor des biedermanns haus (up to the goodman's
house).

Wollt ihr ana kein achmalz nicht geben (won't give us no
lard),

lassen wir each den Tod nicht sehen (won't let yon see D.).

Der Tod der hat ein panzer cm (wears a coat of mail).
Similar customs and songs prevailed all over Franconia, and in
Thuringia, Meissen, Vogtland, Lausitz and Silesia. The begin-
ning of the apng varies :

Nun treiben wir den Tod aus 1 (drive D. out),

den alten weibern in das haus (into the old women's house).
Or : hinter's alte hirtenhaus 8 (behind the old shepherd's house).
Further on :

hatten wir den Tod nicht ausgetrieben (not driven D. out),

war er das jahr noch inne geblieben 8 (he'd have staid all the
year).

Usually a puppet, a figure of straw or wood, was carried about,
and thrown into water, into a bog, or else burnt ; if the figure
was female, it was carried by a boy, if male, by a girl. They
disputed as to where it should be made and tied together ; what-
ever house it was brought out of, there nobody died that year.
Those who had thrown Death away, fled in haste, lest he should
start up and give them chase ; if they met cattle on their way
home, they beat them with staves, believing that that would
make them fruitful. In Silesia they often dragged about a bare
fir-tree with chains of straw, as though it were a prisoner. Here
and there a strong man, in the midst of children, carried a may*



1 Lather parodied this song in his Driving of the Pope out, Journ. von a. fur
D. 1787. 2, 192-3.

* * Dem alten Juden in seinen bauch, etc.\ into the old Jew's belly, on to the
voting Jew's back, the worse for him ; over hill and dale, so he may never come
back ; over the heath, to spite the shepherds ; we went through the greenwood,
there sang birds young and old. Finn Magnusen (Edda 2, 135) would have us take
the old * Juden * for a iotunn.

• J. F. Herri, on certain antiquities found in the Erfurt country 1787, p. 28,
has the line : ' wir tragen den Krodo in's wasser,' but confesses afterwards (Journ.
v. u. f. D. 1787. 483-4) that he dragged the dubious name into the text on pure con-
jecture. The more suspicious becomes the following strophe in Hellbaoh's Suppl.
to the Archiv v. u. f . Schwarzburg, Hildburgh. 1789. p. 52 : • wir tragen den alten
thor (fool) hinaus, hinter's alte hirtenhaus, wir haben nun den sommer gewonnen.
und Erodes maoht ist weggekommen, 1 K'.s power is at an end. The expressions
in the last line smack of reoeot invention. fc



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SUMMER FESTIVAL. 769

pole. 1 In the Altmark, the Wendish villages about Salzwedel,
especially Seeben (where we saw Hennil still in use, p. 749),
have preserved the following custom: at Whitsuntide men-
servants and maids tie fir-branches, straw and hay into a large
figure, giving it as much as possible a human shape. Profusely
garlanded with field-flowers, the image is fastened, sitting up-
right, on the brindled cow (of which more hereafter), and lastly
a pipe cut out of alder wood stuck in its mouth. So they conduct
it into the village, where all the houses are barred and bolted,
and every one chases the cow out of his yard, till the figure falls
off, or goes to pieces (Ad. Kutin's Mark, sagen, p. 816-7).

From Switzerland, Tobler 425-6 gives us a popular play in
rhymes, which betray a Swabian origin, and contain a song of
battle between Summer and Winter. Summer is acted by a man
in his bare shirt, holding in one hand a tree decorated with
ribbons and fruit, in the other a cudgel with the end much split.
Winter is warmly clad, but has a similar cudgel ; they lay on to
one another's shoulders with loud thwacks, each renowniug him-
self and running down his neighbour. At length Winter falls
back, and owns himself beaten. Schm. 3, 248 tells of the like
combat in Bavaria : Winter is wrapt in fur, Summer carries a
green bough in his hand, and the strife ends with Summer
thrusting Winter out of doors. I do not find the custom reported
of Austria proper ; it seems to be known in Styria and the
adjoining mountains of Carinthia : the young fellows divide into
two bands, one equipt with winter clothes and snowballs, the
other with green summer hats, forks and scythes. After fighting
a while in front of the houses, they end with singing jointly the
praises of victorious Summer. 2 It takes place in March or at
St. Mary's Candlemas (see Suppl.).

Some of the districts named have within the last hundred years
discontinued this old festival of announcing Summer by the
defeat of Winter, others retain it to this day. Bygone centuries
may well have seen it in other German regions, where it has
not left even a historical trace; there may however be some

1 At Leipzig in the 17th cent, the festival had become so discredited, that they
had the straw puppet carried about and immersed by women of ill fame.

' Barton's Neueste Beise d. Oestr., Vienna 1811. 2, 848. The Styrian battle-
song is printed in Biisching's Woch. nachr. 1, 226-8.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



770 SUMMER AND WINTER.

accounts that have escaped my notice. In S. Germany, Swabia,
Switzerland, Bavaria, Austria, Styria, the ditties are longer and
more formal, bat the ceremony itself not so artless and racy. In
Lower Hesse, Lower Saxony, Westphalia, Friesland, and the
Netherlands, that is to say, where Easter-fires remained in vogue,
I can hardly anywhere detect this annunciation of Summer;
in lieu of it we shall find in N. Germany a far more imposing
development of May-riding and the Maigraf feast. Whether the
announcing of Summer extended beyond the Palatinate into
Treves, Lorraine, and so into France, I cannot say for certain. 1
Clearly it was not Protestant or Catholic religion that deter-
mined the longer duration or speedier extinction of the custom.
It is rather striking that it should be rifest just in Middle
Germany, and lean on Slav countries behind, which likewise do it
homage ; but that is no reason for concluding that it is of Slav
origin, or that Slavs could have imported it up to and beyond the
Rhine. We must first consider more closely these Slav customs.
In Bohemia, children march, with a straw man representing
Death, to the end of the village, and there burn him while they
sing:

Giz nesem Smrt ze wsy, Now bear we D. from the village,

nowe Leto do wsy ; new Summer to the village ;

witey Leto lib&zne, welcome Summer sweet,

obiljcko zelene 1 little grain so green.

1 G. H. Schmid has indeed drawn np (Journ. v. n. f. D. 1790, 314-5) a list of
the lands and spots where Winter or Death is carried out, and it includes parts of
L. Saxony, Meoklenburg, even Friesland. But no authorities are given ; and other
customs, similar, but without any of the distinctive features of the subject in hand,
are mixed up with it. Aug. Pfeiffer (b. Lauenstein 1640, d. Lubeck '98) in Evang.
Erquickungstunden, Leipz. 1698 mentions a * battle of Sum. and Win. 1 , but names
no places, and he had lived long in Silesia and Leipzig. H. Lubbert (preacher at
Bohlendorf by Lubeck, b. 1640, d. 1703) in his Fastnachtsteufel p. 6 describes a
March (not May) procession, but does not sufficiently bring out the essential fea-
tures. I extract the passage (from J. P. Schmidt's Fastelab. p. 132), because it
illustrates the far from ineffectual zeal of the clergy against popular amusements,
almost as strikingly as the diatribe, 660 years older, quoted on pp. 269 seq. : ' The
last year, on Dominica Quinquag. f4 weeks bef . Laetare), I again publicly prayed
every man to put away, once for all, these pagan doings. Alas, I was doomed to
see the wicked worldlings do it worse than before. Not alone did children carrying
long sticks wrapt in green leaves go about within doors, and sing all manner of lewd
jests, but specially the men-servants, one of them having a green petticoat tied about
him, went in two parties through the village from house to house with a bag-pipe,
singing, swilling, rioting like madmen in the houses ; afterward they joined together,
drank, danced, and kept such pother several nights through, that one scarce could
sleep for it. At the said ungodly night-dances were even some lightminded maids,
that took part in the accursed business.'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



EXPULSION OP DEATH. 7J1

Elsewhere: .

Srrvrt plyne po wode, D. floats down the water,

no we Leto k n&m gede. 1 new Summer to ns rides.

Or:

8mrt gsme w&m zanesly, D. weVe from you taken,

nowe Leto prinesly. new Summer to you brought.

In Moravia :

Nesem, nesem Marenu. We bear, we bear Marena.

Other Slavs :

Wyneseme, wyneseme Jlfa-

muriendu. Remove we Mamurienda.

Or:

wynesli sme Murienu se wsi, we've taken Muriena out, and

prinesli sme May nowy do wsi. 2 brought new May to the town.

At Bielsk in Podlachia, on Dead Sunday they carry an idol of
plaited hemp or straw through the town, then drown it in a marsh
or pond outside, singing to a mournful strain :

Smierc wieie sie po plotu, D. blows through the wattle,
szukaiac klopotu. seeking the whirlpool.

They run home as fast as they can : if any one falls down, he dies
within the year. 8 The Sorbs in Upper Lausitz make the figure
of straw and rags ; she who had the last corpse must supply the
shirt, and the latest bride the veil and all the rags ; 4 the scare-
crow is stuck on a long pole, and carried away by the biggest
strongest lass at the top of her speed, while the rest sing :

Lecz hore, lecz hore ! Fly high, fly high,

jatabate woko, twist thyself round,

pan dele, pan dele I fall down, fall down.



1 Celakowsky's Slowanske narodni pisne, Prague 1822. p. 209. He quotes other
rhymes as well.

8 J. Kollar's Zpiewanky 1, 4. 400.

• Hanusch Slay. myth. 418. Jungmann sub ▼. Marana, who puts the Polish
rhyme into Bohem. thus : Smrt wgge po plotu, sukagjc klopotu. Gonf. a Moray,
song (Kulda in d'Ely 107-8-9).

4 Indicul. superst. 27-8 : * de simulacris de parmis factis, quae per oampos por-
tant.' The Esthonians on New year's day make an idol of straw in the shape of a
man, to which they concede the name of metziko and the power of protecting their
cattle from wild beasts and defending their frontier. All the people of the village
accompany, and set him on the nearest tree, Thorn. Hiarn, p. 40.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



772 SUMMER AND WINTER.

They all throw sticks and stones at it : whoever hits Death will
not die that year. So the figure is borne oat of the village to a
piece of water, and drowned in it. Bat they often carry Death
to the boundary of the next village, and pitch him over it ; each
picks for himself a green twig, and carries it homeward in high
glee, bat on arriving at his village throws it away again. Some-
times the youth of the village within whose bounds they have
broaght Death will run after them, and throw him back, for no
one likes to keep him; and they easily come to words and
blows about it. 1 At other places in Lausitz women alone take
part in this Driving-out of Death, and suffer no men to meddle.
They all go in black veils that day, and having tied up a puppet
of straw, put a white shirt on it, and give it a broom in one hand,
and a scythe in the other. This puppet they carry singing, and
pursued by boys throwing stones, to the border of the next town,
where they tear it up. Then they hew down a handsome tree in
the wood, hang the shirt upon it, and carry it home with songs. 8
This tree is undoubtedly a symbol of Summer introduced in the
place of Death driven out. Such decorated trees are also carried
about the village by boys collecting gifts, after they have rid
themselves of Death. In other cases they demand the contribu-
tions while taking the puppet round. Here and there they make
the straw man peep into people's windows (as Berhta looks in at
the window, p. 274) : in that case Death will carry off some one
in the house that year, but by paying a money ransom in time, you
can avert the omen. At Konigshain by Gorlitz the whole village,
young and old, wended their way with torches of straw to a
neighbouring height called the Todtenstein, where formerly a
god's image is said to have stood ; they lit their torches on the
top, and turned home singing, with constant repetition of the
words : ' we have driven out Death, we bring back Summer/ 8

So it is not everywhere that the banished idol represented
Winter or Death in the abstract ; in some cases it is still the
heathen divinity giving way to Christianity, whom the people
thrust out half in sorrow, and uttering songs of sadness.

1 Lausitz. Mag. for 1770, p. 84-5, from a MS. of Abraham Frencel.

* Ghr. Arnold's Append, to Alex. Bossen's Unterschiedn. gottesdienst, Heidelb.
1674. p. 185.

* Anton's first Versnoh fiber die alien Slaven, p. 73-4.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



EXPULSION OF GODS. 773

Dlugosz, 1 and others after him, report that by order of king
Miecislaus all the idols in the land were broken np and burnt ;
in remembrance of which the people in some parts of Poland, once
a year, singing mournful songs, conduct in solemn procession
images of Marzana and Ziewonia, fixed on poles or drawn on
drags, to a marsh or river, and there drown them ; * paying
them so to speak, their last homage. Dlagosz's explanation of
Marzana as 'harvest-goddess' seems erroneous; Frencel's and
Schaffarik's ' death-goddess ' is more acceptable : I derive the
name from the Pol. marznarf, Boh. mrznauti, Buss, merznut', to
freeze, and in opposition to her as winter-goddess I set the sum-
mer-goddess Wiosna, Boh. Wema. The Konigenhof MS. p. 72
has a remarkable declaration : ' i iedinu druiu n&m imi6t' po puti
z Wesny po iforanu/ one wife (only) may we have on our way
from Wesna to Morana, from spring to winter, i.e. ever. Yet
the throwing or dipping of the divine image in a stream need not
have been done by the Christians in mere contempt, it may have
formed a part of the pagan rite itself ; for an antithesis between
summer and winter, and an exalting of the former, necessarily
implied a lowering of the latter. 8

The day for carrying Death out was the quarta dominica quad-
ragesimae, i.e. Laetare Sunday or Midlent, on which very day
it also falls in Poland (w nieziele £rodopostna), Bohemia, Silesia
and Lausitz. The Bohemians call it smrtedlna, samrtntf, nedele,
the Sorbs smerdnitsa, death Sunday ; coming three weeks before
Easter, it will almost always occur in March. Some have it a
week earlier, on Oculi Sunday, others (espec. in Bohemia) a
week later, on Judica Sunday ; one Boh. song even brings in
' Mag nowy/ new May. But in the Rhine and Main country, as



1 Hist. Polon. lib. 2, ad a. 965. Matth. de Mechovia chron. Polon. ii. 1, 22.
Mart. Cromer lib. 3, ad a. 965. Mart. Hanke de Silesior. nominibus, p. 122-3.

* So the Bussian Vladimir, after his conversion, orders the image of Perun to
be tied to a horse's tail, beaten, and thrown into the Dnieper. Afterwards, when
the Novgorod Pernn was in like manner thrown into the Volkhov, he set np, while
in the river, a lond lament over the people's ingratitude.

* The Indian Kail, on the 7th day after the March new-moon, was solemnly
carried about, and then thrown into the Ganges ; on May 13 the Boman vestals
bore puppet* plaited of rushes to the Pons Subkeius, and dropt them in the Tiber,
Ov. Fast. 5,620:

Turn qnoqne prisoornm virgo simulacra virorum
mittere roboreo soirpea ponte solet.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



774 SUMMER AND WINTER.

in most places, Laetare is the festive day, and is there called
Summerday.

There is no getting over this unanimity as to the time of the
festival. To the ancient Slavs, whose new year began in March,
it marked the commencement of the year, and likewise of the
summer half-year, i.e. of their ISto; to Germans the arrival of
summer or spring, for in March their stork and swallow come
home, and the first violet blows. But then the impersonal ' leto '
of the Slavs fights no battle with their Smrt : this departing
driven-out god has the play nearly all to himself. To our an-
cestors the contest between the two giants was the essential
thing in the festival; vanquished Winter has indeed his parallel
in Smrt, but with victorious Summer there is no living personality
to compare. And, beside this considerable difference between
the Slav ceremony and our own, as performed on the Rhine or
Neckar, it is also difficult to conceive how a native Slav custom
should have pushed itself all the way to the Odenwald and the
Palatinate beyond Rhine, accountable as it might be on the upper
Main, in the Fulda country, Meissen or Thuringia. What is still
more decisive, we observe that the custom is known, not to all
the Slavs, but just to those in Silesia, Lausitz, Bohemia and,
with a marked difference, in Poland ; not to the South Slavs at
all, nor apparently to those settled in Pomerania, Mecklenburg
and Liineburg. Like our Bavarians and Tyrolese, the Carniolans,
Styrians and Slovaks have it not ; neither have the Pomeranians
and Low Saxons. 1 Only a central belt of territory has preserved
it, alike among Slavs and Germans, and doubtless from a like
cause. I do not deny that in very early times it may have been
common to all Slav and all Teutonic races, indeed for Germany
I consider it scarcely doubtful, because for one thing the old
songs of Nithart and others are sufficient proof for Austria, and
secondly because in Scandinavia, England, and here and there
in N. Germany, appears the custom of May-riding, which is quite
the same thing as the Bhenish ( summer-day ' in March.

Olaus Magnus 15, 4 says: 'The Swedes and Goths have a
custom, that on the first day of May the magistrates in every

1 The Holstein custom of going round (omgaan) with the fox, p. 764, took
place in summer (says Schiitze 3, 165), therefore not on Laetare ; and the words
they sing have no explicit reference to summer and winter.



Digitized by



Google



MAY-BIDING. 775

city make two troops of horse, of tall youths and men, to as-
semble, as tho' they would go forth to a mighty battle. One
troop hath a captain, that under the name of Winter is arrayed
in much fur and wadded garments, and is armed with a winter-
spear : he rideth arrogantly to and fro, showering snowballs and
icefiakes, as he would fain prolong the cold, and much he vauntetb
him in speech. The other troop hath contrariwise a captain, that
is named the Blumengrave, he is clad in green boughs, leaves and
flowers, and other summer raiment, and not right fencible ; he
rides into town the same time with the winter-captain, yet each
in his several place and order, then hold a public tilting and
tourney, wherein Summer hath the mastery, bearing Winter to
the ground. Winter and his company scatter ashes and sparks
about them, the other fend them with birchen boughs and young
lime-twigs; finally, by the multitude around, the victory is
awarded to Summer/

Here Death is not once alluded to ; in true Teutonic fashion,
the whole business is made to lie between Summer and Winter;
only, the simple procession of our peasant-folk has turned more
into a chivalry pageant of opulent town-life. At the same time
this induction of May into the city ('hisset kommer Sivard
Snarensvend [p. 372a.], han forer os sommer, 9 or ( och bar oss
sommer i by, DV. 1, 14. Sv. forns. 1, 44. 'bara maj i by, 9
Dybeck runa 2, 67; in Schonen l fore somma i by ') cuts a neater
statelier figure than the miserable array of mendicant children,
and is in truth a highly poetic and impressive spectacle. These
Mayday sports are mentioned more than once in old Swedish
and Danish chronicles, town regulations and records. Lords
# and kings not seldom took a part in them, they were a great
and general national entertainment. Crowned with flowers, the
majgrefve fared with a powerful escort over highway and thorp ;
banquet and round-dance followed. In Denmark the jaunting
began on Walburgis day (May 1), and was called ' at ride Som-
mer i bye, 3 riding S. into the land : the young men ride in front,
then the May-grave (floriger) with two garlands, one on each
shoulder, the rest with only one ; songs are sung in the town,
all the maidens make a ring round the may -grave, who picks out
one of them to be his majinde, by dropping a wreath on her
head. Winter and his conflict with May are no longer mentioned
vol. ix. z

Digitized by VjOOQIC



776 SUMMER AND WINTER.

in the Schonish and Danish festival. Many towns had regularly
organized majgreve glide} Bat as the May-fire in Denmark
was called ' gadeild/ gate (street) fire, so was the leader of the
May-feast a gadebasse (gate bear), and his maiden partner
gadelam (gate lamb) or gadinde; gadebasse and gadinde there-
Sore mean the same as maigreve and maigrevinde. 8 There is a
remarkable description in Mnndel strap's Spec, gentilismi etiam-
nnm superstitis, Hafn. 1684 : f Qui ex jnnioribns rnsticis contum
stipulis accensis flammatum efficacius versus sidera tollere
potuerit, praeses (gadebasse) incondito omnium clamore de-
clarator, nee non eodem tempore sua cuique ex rusticis puellis,
quae tunc temporis vernacula appellantur gadelam, distributor,
et quae praesidi adjicitur titulum hunc gadinde merebitur. 3
Hinc excipiunt convivia per universum illud temporis, quod inter
arationem et f oenisecium intercedit, quavis die dominica celebrari
sueta, gadelams-gilder dicta, in quibus proceriorem circum ar-
borem in antecessum humo immissam variisque corollis ac signis
ornatam, corybantum more ad tympanorum stridentes sonitus
bene poti saliunt/

Now this May-riding, these May-graves, were an old tradition
of Lower Germany also ; and that apparently is the very reason
why the Mid-German custom of welcoming summer at Laetare
was not in vogue there. How could spring, which does not
reappear in the North till the beginning of May, have been
celebrated there in March ? Besides, this May-festival may in
early times have been more general in Germany ; or does the
distinction reach back to the rivalry between March and May as
the month of the f olkmote ? 4 The maigreve at Greifswald, May
1, 1528, is incidentally mentioned by Sastro w in his Lebensbeschr. «
1, 65-6; a license to the scholars at Pasewalk to hold a maigraf

1 Ihre sab v. majgrefve. Skr&ordning for Knutsgillet i Land an. 1586, 5 128-7
in Bring's Monum. se&nensia, p. 207-10 ; the same for Malxn5, p. 211. Er. Tegel's
Hist. Gustavi i. 1, 119. Nyerup's Danske digtek. 1, 246. 2 t 136. 143. Thiele 1,
145-58; oonf. 200. For the Zealand custom see Molbeoh's Hist, tidskrift 1840.
1, 203. The maigreves in Bibe are mentioned by Terpager in Bipae cimbrioae,
p. 723 ; the Aalborg maigreve in Wilda's Gildewesen p. 285, from a statute of
the 15th century ; oonf. Molb. dial. lex. p. 538.

8 Molb. dial. lex. pp. 150-1-2, where doubt is thrown on the derivation of
gade from ON. gata (gate, road). He has also a midsommen-lam, p. 359.

* The italics here are mine. Each man has a gadelam, but only the leader
a gadinde, — Trans.

4 Oonf. BA. 821-6 on the time of asBizes.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



MAY-RIDING. 777

jaunt, in a Church- visitation ordinance of 1563 (Baltische studien
6, 137) ; and more precise information has lately been collected
on the survival of May-riding at Hildesheim, where the beautiful
custom only died out in the 18th century. 1 Towards Whitsun-
tide the maigreve was elected, and the forest commoners in the
Use had to hew timber from seven villages to build the May-
waggon; all loppings must be loaded thereon, and only four
horses allowed to draw it in the forest. A grand expedition from
the town fetches away the waggon, the burgomaster and council
receive a May-wreath from the commoners, and hand it over
to the maigreve. The waggon holds 60 or 70 bundles of may
(birch), which are delivered to the maigreve to be further dis-
tributed. Monasteries and churches get large bundles, every
steeple is adorned with it, and the floor of the church strown
with clippings of boxwood and field-flowers*. The maigreve
entertains the commoners, and is strictly bound to serve up a
dish of crabs. But in all this we have only a fetching-in of
the May-waggon from the wood under formal escort of the May-
grave ; not a word now about the battle he had to fight with
winter. Is it conceivable that earlier ages should have done
without this battle f Assuredly they had it, and it was only by
degrees that custom left it out. By and by it became content with
even less. In some parishes of Holstein they keep the commence-
ment of May by crowning a young fellow and a girl with leaves
and flowers, conducting them with music to a tavern, and there
drinking and dancing ; the pair are called maigrev and maigron, i.e.
maigrafin (Schiitze 3, 72). The Schleswig maygrave-feast (festum
frondicomans) is described in Ulr. Petersen's treatise already
quoted (p. 694 n.) .* In Swabia the children at sunrise go into the
wood, the boys carrying silk handkerchiefs on staves, the girls
ribbons on boughs ; their leader, the May-king, has a right to
choose his queen. In (relders they used on Mayday-eve to set up
trees decorated and hung with tapers like a Christmas-tree ; then
came a song and ring-dance. 8 All over Germany, to this day,

1 KokenandLnntzel's Mittheilungen 2, 45-61.

9 He says : * the memory of this ancient bat useless May-feast finally passed
by inheritance to the town-cattle, which, even since 1670, had every Mayday a gar-
land of beech-leaves thrown about the neck, and so bedizened were driven home ;
for which service the cowherd could count upon his fee.'

* Geldersche Volksalmanak voor 1885, pp. 10-28. The song is given in Hoffm.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



778 SUMMER AND WINTER.

we have may-bushes brought into our houses at Whitsuntide : we
do not fetch them in ourselves, nor go out to meet them. 1

England too had May -games or Mayings down to the 16-1 7th
century. On Mayday morning the lads and lasses set out soon
after midnight, with horns and other music, to a neighbouring
wood, broke boughs off the trees, and decked them out with
wreaths and posies ; then turned homeward, and at sunrise set
these May-bushes in the doors and windows of their houses.
Above all, they brought with them a tall birch tree which had
been cut down ; it was named maiepole, maipoll, and was drawn
by 20 to 40 yoke of oxen, each with a nosegay betwixt his horns ;
this tree was set up in the village, and the people danced round
it. The whole festival was presided over by a lord of the May
elected for the purpose, and with him. was associated a lady of
the May? In England also a fight between Summer and Winter
was exhibited (Hone's Daybook 1, 359) ; the Maypole exactly
answers to the May- waggon of L. Saxony, and the lord of the
May to the May-grave. 8 And here and there a district in Prance
too has undoubtedly similar May-sports. Champollion (Rech.
sur les patois, p. 183) reports of the Is&re Dept. : ' mate, f6fce que
les enfans c61dbrent aux premiers jours du mois de mai, en
parant un d'entre eux et lui donnant le titre de roi.' A lawsuit
on the 'jus eundi prima die mensis maji ad majum colligendum in
nemora* is preserved in a record of 1262, Gu6rard cart, de N.D.
2, 117 (see Suppl.). In narrative poems of the Mid. Ages, both
French and German, the grand occasions on which kings hold
their court are Whitsuntide and the blooming Maytime, Rein. 41
seq. Iw. 33 seq.,and Wolfram calls King Arthur € der meienbare
man/ Parz. 281, 16 ; conf. ' pfingestlicher (pentecostal) kuniges
name/ MS. 2, 128 a .

On the whole then, there are four different ways of welcoming



Horae belg. 2, 178-180. Conf. « io wil den mei gaen honwen voor mijns liefs vein-
sterkyn,' go hew before my love's window, Uhland's Volkgl. 178.

1 Has the May-drink still made in the Lower Rhine and Westphalia, of wine
and certain (sacred?) herbs, any connexion with an old sacrificial rite? On no
account must woodroof (asperula) be omitted in preparing it.

* Fnller descript. in J. Strntt, ed. Lond. 1830, p. 851-6. Haupt's Zeitschr. 5,
477.

8 The AS. poems have no passage turning on the battle of S. and W. In Beow.
2266 ' H wees winter scaoen ' only means winter was past, * el ibierno es ezido,' Cid
1627.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



RECEPTION OF STJMMEB. 779

Summer, that we have learnt to know. In Sweden and Gothland
a battle of Winter and Summer, a triumphal entry of the latter.
In Schonen, Denmark, L. Saxony and England simply May-
liding, or fetching of the May- waggon. On the Rhine merely a
battle of Winter and Summer, without immersion, 1 without the
pomp of an entry. In Franconia, Thuringia, Meissen, Silesia and
Bohemia only the % cavrying-out of wintry Death ; no battle, no
formal introduction of Summer. 2 Of these festivals the first and
second fall in May, the third and fourth in March. In the first
two, the whole population takes part with unabated enthusiasm ; ^
in the last two, only the lower poorer class. It is however
the first and third modes that have retained the full idea of the
performance, the struggle between the two powers of the year,
whilst in the second and fourth the antithesis is wanting. The
May-riding has no Winter in it, the farewell to Death no Sum-
mer ; one is all joy, the other all sadness. But in all the first
three modes, the higher being to whom honour is done is repre-
sented by living persons, in the fourth by a puppet, yet both the
one and the other are fantastically dressed up.

Now we can take a look in one or two other directions.

On the battle between Vetr and Sumar ON. tradition is silent, 8
as on much else, that nevertheless lived on among the people.
The oldest vestige known to me of a duel between the seasons
amongst us is that ' Conflictus hiemis et veris* over the cuckoo
(p. 675-6). The idea of a Summer-god marchirtg in, bringing
blessings, putting new life into everything, is quite in the spirit
of our earliest ages : it is just how Nerthus comes into the land
(p. 251) ; also Freyr (p. 213), Isis (p. 258), Hulda (p. 268), Berhta

1 It was a different thing therefore when in olden times the Frankfort boys and
girls, every year at Candlemas (Febr. 2), threw a stuffed garment into the Main, and
sang : * Beaker Uder sohlag sein matter, sohlag ihr arm and bein entzwei, dass sie
mordio sohrei,' Lersner's Chron. p. 492. I leave the song unexplained.

* Tet Summer as a contrast does occasionally come oat plainly in songs or
customs of Bohemia and Lausitz.

* Finn Magnusen, always prone to see some natural phenomenon underlying a
myth, finds the contrast of summer and winter lurking in more than one place in the
Edda: in Fiollsvinnsmal and Harbardsliod (th. 2, 135. 3, 44 of his Edda), in Saxo's
Oiler and Othin saga (th. 1, 196. Lex. 765), in that of Thiassi (Lex. 887), because
Oftinn sets the eye of the slain giant in the sky (p. ), and Winter is also to
have his eyes punched out (p. 765) ; to me Uhland (Ueber Thor p. 117. 120) seems
more profound, in regarding Thiassi as the storm-eagle, and kidnapped ISunn as
the green of summer (ingriin, so to speak) ; but the nature of this goddess remains a
secret to us.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



780 SUMMER AND WINTER.

(p. 273), Fricg (p. 304), and other deities besides, whose car or
ship an exulting people goes forth to meet, as they do the waggon
of May, who, over and above mere personification, has from of old
his ere and stoaze (p. 670 n.) : in heathen times he mast have had
an actual worship of his own. All these gods and goddesses
appeared at their appointed times in the year, bestowing their
several boons ; deified Summer or May can fairly claim identity
with one of the highest divinities to whom the gift of fertility
belonged, with Fro, Wuotan, Nerthus. But if we admit goddesses,
then, in addition to Nerthus, Ostara has the strongest claim to
consideration. To what was said on p. 290 I can add some signi-
ficant facts. The heathen Easter had much in common with the
May-feast and the reception of spring, particularly in the matter
of bonfires. Then, through long ages there seem to have lingered
among the people Easter-games so-called, which the church itself
had to tolerate : I allude especially to the custom of Easter eggs,
and to the Easter tale which preachers told from the pulpit for
the people's amusement, connecting it with Christian reminis-
cences. In the MHG. poets, 'mines herzen osterspil, ostertac*
my heart's Easter play or day, is a complimentary phrase for lady
love, expressing the height of bliss (MS. 2, 52 b . 87 b . Iw. 8120.
Frib. Trist. 804) ; Conr. Troj. 19802 makes the ' 6sterlichen tac
mit lebender wunne spiln ' out of the fair one's eye. Later still,
there were dramatic shows named osterspile, Wackern. lb. 1014,
30. One of the strongest proofs is the summer and dance song
of lord Goeli, MS. 2, 57* (Haupt's Neidh. xxv) : at the season
when ea and eyot are grown green, Fridebolt and his companions
enter with long swords, and offer to play the osterspil, which
seems to have been a sword-dance for twelve performers, one
of whom apparently was leader, and represented Summer beating
Winter out of the land :

Fridebolt setze uf den huot F., put on thy hat,

wolgefriunt, und gang ez vor, well backed, and go before,

bint daz ostersahs zer linken slten bind o. to thy left side,

bis dur Kiinzen hochgemuot, be for K/s sake merry,

leite uns viir daz Tinkuftor, lead us outside the T. gate,

Id den tanz al uf den wasen riten ! let dance on turf be rid.

This binding on of the ' Easter seax/ or sword-knife, leads us to

Digitized by VjOOQIC



8 AWING THE OLD WIFE. 781

infer that a sword of peculiar antique shape was retained; as
the Easter scones, osterstuopha (RA. 298) and moonshaped oster-
mdne (Brem. wtb.) indicate pastry of heathenish form. The
sword may have been brandished in honour of Ostara, as it was
for Fricka (p. 804). Or is 6stersahs to be understood like
Beiersahs (Haupt's Neidh. xxv. 17, note) ?

May we then identify Ostara with the Slav goddess of spring
Vesna, the Lith. vascvra (aestas), Lett, vassara, and with ver and
cap in the forms ascribed to them on p. 754 ? True, there is no
counterpart, no goddess answering to Marzana; but with our
ancestors the notion of a conflict between two male antagonists,
the giants Summer and Winter, must have carried the day at a
very early time [to the exclusion of the goddesses] .

The subject was no stranger to the Greeks and Romans : in
one of Aesop's fables (Cor. 422. Fur. 880) yeiuwv *&& * a P ^ ave
a quarrel. 1 The Roman ver began on Feb. 7, the first swallow
came in about Feb. 26, though she does not reach us till near
the end of March, nor Sweden till the beginning of May (Tiede-
mann's Zool. 8, 624). The Florealia were kept from Apr. 28 till
May 1 : there were songs, dances and games, they wore flowers
and garlands on their heads, but the contrast, Winter, seems not
to have been represented. I am not informed what spring
customs have lasted to this day in Italy. Polydore Vergil, of
Urbino in Umbria, tells us (de invent, rer. 5, 2) : ( Est consuetu-
dinis, ut juventus promiscui sexus laetabunda Cal. Maji exeat in
agros, et cantitans inde virides reportet arborum ramos, eosque
ante domorum fores ponat, et denique unusquisque eo die aliquid
viridis ramusculi vel herbae ferat ; quod non fecisse poena est,
praesertim apud Italos, ut madefiat/ Here then is a ducking
too; this May-feast cannot have meant there a fetching-in of
spring, for that comes earlier, in March (see Suppl.).

Much more remarkable is the Italian and Spanish custom of
tying together at Mid Lent, on that very Dominica Lsetare, a
puppet to represent the oldest woman in the village, which is
carried out by the people, especially children, and sawn through
Vie middle. This is called segare la vecchia. At Barcelona the
boys on that day, in thirties and forties, run through all the

1 Creuzer's Symb. 2, 429. 494, following Hermann's interpret, of names, makes
of the giant Briareus & fighting winter-demon.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



782 SUMMER AND WINTER.

streets, some with saws, some with billets of wood, and some
with napkins in which people deposit their gifts. They declare
in a song, that they are looking for the very oldest woman in the
town, to saw her through the body ; at last they pretend they
have fonnd her, and begin sawing something, and afterwards
burn it. 1 Bnt the same custom is also found among the South
Slavs. In Lent time the Croats tell their children, that at the
hour of noon an old woman is sawn in pieces outside the gates ; 2
in Carniola it is at Mid Lent again that the old wife is led out of
the village and sawn through the middle. 3 The North Slavs call
it bdbu re'zati, sawing old granny, i.e. keeping Mid Lent (Jungm.
1, 56). Now this sawing up and burning of the old wife (as of
the devil, p. 606) seems identical with the carrying out and
drowning of Death, and if this represented Winter, a giant, may
not the Romance and South Slav nations have pictured their
hiems, their zima, as a goddess or old woman (SI. b£ba) ? 4 Add
to this, that in villages even of Meissen and Silesia the straw
figure that is borne out is sometimes in the shape of an old woman
(p. 768), which may perhaps have meant Marzana (p. 773) ? I
should not be surprised if some districts of Bavaria, Tyrol and
Switzerland were yet to reveal a similar sawing of the old wife. 6
The Scotch Highlanders throw the auld wife into the fire at
Christmas (Stewart's Pop. superst p. 236 seq.).

But Lower Germany itself presents an approximation no less
worthy of attention. On p. 190 we mentioned that it was the
custom at Hildesheim, on the Saturday after Laetare, to set forth
the triumph of Christianity over the heathen gods by knocking
down logs of wood. The agreement in point of time would of
itself invite a comparison of this solemnity with that Old-Polish
one, and further with the carrying-out of Death ; one need not
even connect the expulsion of the old gods with the banishment

1 Alex. Laborde's Itineraire de l'Espagne 1, 57-8; conf. Doblados briep.
Hone's Dayb. 1, 369.

3 Acton's Versuch fiber die Slaven 2, 66.

3 Linhart's Geschichte von Krain 2, 274.

4 The Ital. inverno, Span, invierno, is however maso.

6 In Swabia and Switz., frdnfasten (Lord's fast -> Ember days, Scheffer's
Haltans p. 63) has been corrupted into a frau Faste, as if it were the fast-time
personified (Staid. 1, 394. Hebel sub v.). Can cutting Mid Lent in two have sig-
nified a break in the fast ? I think not. What means the phrase and the act of
1 breaking the neck of the fast, 1 in an essay on Cath. superst. in the 16th cent. ? see
Fdrstemann's Becords of Augsburg Diet, Halle 1833, d. 101 (see SuppL).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



LOG-FELLING. GOSSAMER. 783

of Winter at all. In Geo. Torquatus's (unpublished) Annal.
Magdeb. et Halberst. part 8 lib. 1 cap. 9 we are told that at
Halberstadt (as at Hildesheim above) they used once a year to
set up a log in the marketplace, and throw at it till its head came
off. The log has not a name of its own, like Jupiter at Hildes-
heim ; it is not unlikely that the same, practice prevailed at other
places in the direction of these two cities. At Halberstadt it
lasted till markgraf Johan Albrecht's time ; the oldest account
of it is by the so-called ' monk of Pirna/ Joh. Lindner (Tiiianus,
d. ab. 1530) in his Onomasticon: 'In the stead of the idol's
temple pulled in pieces at Halberstadt, there was a dome-church
(cathedral) edified in honour of God and St. Stephen ; in memory
thereof the dome-lords (dean and chapter) young and old shall
on Letare Monday every year set up a wooden skittle in the idol's
stead, and throw thereat, every one ; moreover the dome-provost
shall in public procession and lordly state let lead a bear (barz, L
baren) beside him, else shall his [customary dues be denied him;
likewise a boy beareth after him a sheathed sword under his arm/
Leading a bear about and delivering a bear's loaf was a custom
prevalent in the Mid. Ages, e.g. at Mainz (Weisth. 1, 533) and
Strassburg (Schilter's Gloss. 102).

This Low Saxon rejection, and that Polish dismissal, of the
ancient gods has therefore no necessary connexion with a bring-
ing in of summer, however apt the comparison of the new religion
to summer's genial warmth. In the Polish custom at all events
I find no such connexion hinted at. At the same time, the
notion of bringing summer in was not unknown to the Poles.
A Cracow legend speaks of Lei and Po-Ul (after-lel), two divine
beings of heathen times, chasing each other round the field, and
bringing Summer; they are the cause of 'flying summer/ i.e.
gossamer. 1 Until we know the whole tradition more exactly,
we cannot assign it its right place. Lei and Polel are usually
likened to Castor and Pollux (Linde i. 2, 1250 b ), to whom they
bear at least this resemblance, that their names, even in old folk-
songs, make a simple interjection, * as the Romans used the twin

1 Hall. allg. lz. 1807. no. 256, p. 807.

3 Pol. lelum, polelnm ; Serv. lele, leljo,lelja (Vuk sub v.) ; Walach. lerum (conf.
liromlarum, verba eflfutitia). It seems to me hazardous to suppose them sons of
Lada as C. and P. were of Leda. Conf. supra p. 366.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



784 SUMMER AND WINTEB.

demigods to swear by. Fliegender sovvmer, flugsommer, sommer*
flug, graswebe, are our names for the white threads that cover the
fields at the beginning of spring, and still more of autumn ; the
spring tissue is also called maidensummer, Mary's yarn, Mary's
thread (p. 471), that of autumn aftersummer, autumn yarn, old-
wives' summer ; but generally both kinds are covered by the one
name or the other. Nethl. slammetje (draggletail ? Brem. wtb. 4,
799) ; Engl, gossamer (God's train, trailing garment), also samar,
simar (train) ; Swed. dvargsndt (dwarf's net), p. 471. Boh. wlacka
(harrow, because the threads rake the ground ?) ; Pol. lato swieto
iruurcinskie, Mary's holy summer. Here again the Yirgin's name
seems to have been chosen as a substitute or antidote for heathen
notions : the ancient Slavs might easily believe the gauzy web
to have been spread over the earth by one of their gods. But
the autumn gossamer has another Slavic name : Pol. babie lato,
old wives' summer, Boh. babske Veto, or simply babj, which puts
us in mind once more of that antithesis between summer and
the old wife (p. 782). She rules in winter, and the god in sum-
mer (see Suppl.) • Can the words of the Wendiah ditty, quoted
p. 771, be possibly interpreted of the film as it floats in the air ?

I hope I have proved the antiquity and significance of the
conceptions of Summer and Winter ; but there is one point I
wish to dwell upon more minutely. The dressing-up of the two
champions in foliage and flowers, in straw and moss, the dialogue
that probably passed between them, the accompanying chorus
of spectators, all exhibit the first rude shifts of dramatic art,
and a history of the German stage ought to begin with such
performances. The wrappage of leaves represents the stage-dress
and masks of a later time. Once before (p. 594), in the solemn
procession for rain, we saw such leafy garb. Popular custom
exhibits a number of variations, having preserved one fragment
here, and another there, of the original whole. Near Willings-
hausen, county Ziegenhain, Lower Hesse, a boy is covered over
and over with leaves, green branches are fastened to his body :
other boys lead him by a rope, and make him dance as a bear,
for doing which a present is bestowed ; the girls carry a hoop
decked out with flowers and ribbons. Take note, that at the
knocking down of logs at Halberstadt (p. 783), there was also

Digitized by VjOOQIC



DRESSING UP IN GBEEN. 785

a bear and a boy with a sword (conf. supra p. 304 n.) in the pro-
cession ; that Vildifer, a hero disguised in a bearskin, is led about
by a musician, and dances to the harp. l Doubtless a dramatic
performance of ancient date, which we could have judged better,
had the M. Nethl. poem of bere Wislau * been preserved ; but
the name Vildifer seems to be founded on an OS. Wild-efor,
which originated in a misapprehension of the OHG. Wildpero
('pero* ursus being confounded with r p6r' aper), as only a
dancing bear can be meant here, not a boar. Now this bear
fits well with the gadebasse of the Danish May feast (p. 776).
Schmid's Schwab, wtb. 518 b mentions the Augsburg waterbird :
at Whitsuntide a lad lorapt from head to foot in reeds is led
through the town by two others holding birch-boughs in their
hands : once more a festival in May, not March. The name of
this 'waterfowl* shews he is meant to be ducked in the brook or
river ; but whether Summer here is a mistake for Winter, whether
the boy in reeds represents Winter, while perhaps another boy
in leaves played Summer, or the mummery was a device to bring
on rain, I leave undetermined. Thuringian customs also point
to Whitsuntide : the villagers there on Whit-Tuesday choose their
green man or lettuce-king ; a young peasant is escorted into the
woods, is there enveloped in green bushes and boughs, set on
a horse, and conducted home in triumph. In the village the
community stands assembled : the bailiff is allowed three guesses
to find who is hidden in the green disguise ; if he fails, he must
pay ransom in beer. 8 In other places it is on Whit-Sunday
itself that the man who was the last to drive his cattle to pasture,
is wrapt in fir and birch boughs, and whipt through the village
amidst loud cries of € WlUtsun-sleeper ! ' At night comes beer-
drinking and dancing. In the Erzgebirge the shepherd who
drives out earliest on Whit-Sunday may crack his whip, the last
comer is laughed at and saluted Whitsun-looby : so with the
latest riser in every house. The sleeping away of sacred festive

1 Vilk. saga, cap. 120-1 ; mark, that the minstrel gives him the name of Vitrleo
(wise lion), which should of course have been Vitrbi&rn ; for a bear has the sense of
12 men (Reinh. p. 445). The people's ' king of beasts ' has been confounded with
that of scholars.

2 Horae belg. 1, 51. Mone's Niederl. volkslit. p. 35-6. Conf. Wenezlan, Altd
bl. 1, 383. Wislau is the Slay. Weslav, Waslav (Wenceslaus).

a Beichsanz. 1796. no. 90, p. 947. The herdsman that drives earliest to the
Alpine pastures on May 1, earns a privilege for the whole year.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



786 SUMMEB AND WINTER.

hoars (conf. p. 590 n.), aD< ^ ^ e penalty attached to it, of acting
the butze and being ducked, I look upon as mere accessories,
kept alive long after the substance of the festival had perished
(see SuppL).

Kuhn (pp. 314-29) has lately furnished us with accurate ac-
counts of Whitsun customs in the Marks. In the Mittelmark
the houses are decorated with ' mai/ in the Altmark the farm-
servants, horse-keepers and ox-boys go round the farms, and
carry May-crowns made of flowers and birch twigs to the farmers,
who used to hang them up on their houses, and leave them hang-
ing till the next year. On Whitsun morning the cows and horses
are driven for the first time to the fellow pasture, and it is a great
thing to be the first there. The animal that arrives first has a
bunch of ' mai ' tied to its tail, which bunch is called dau-sleipe
(dew-sweep), 1 while the last comer is dressed up in fir-twigs,
all sorts of green stuff and field flowers, and called the motley
cow or motley horsey and the boy belonging to it the pingst-kaam
or pingst-kddrel. At Havelberg the cow that came home first
at night used to be adorned with the crown of flowers, and the
last got the thau-schleife ; now this latter practice is alone kept
up. 8 In some of the Altmark villages, the lad whose horse gets
to the pasture first is named thau-schlepper, and he who drives
the hindmost is made motley boy, viz. they clothe him from head
to foot in wild flowers, and at noon lead him from farm to farm,
the dew-sweeper pronouncing the rhymes. In other places a pole
decked with flowers and ribbons is carried round, and called the
bammel (dangle) or pings-Mam, though, as a rule, this last name
is reserved for the boy shrouded in leaves and flowers, who
accompanies. He is sometimes led by two others called hunde-
brosel. In some parts of the Mittelmark the muffled boy is called
the kaudernest. On the Dromling the boys go round with the
pingst-kaam, and the girls with the may-bride, collecting gifts.
Some villages south of the Dromling have a more elaborate



1 So named, because it has to touch the dewy grass: which confirms my
interpretation of the Alamannic tau-dragil (R.A. 94, 630]), supra p. 387 note.

a In some places a winniug horse has a stick cleft in three fixed on his head
and richly encircled with the finest flowers ; the boy who rides him, beside many
garlands, receives a cap woven of rushes, and must preserve a serious countenance
while the procession slowly advances: if he can be provoked to laughter, he loses,
Kuhn, p. 328.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



DRESSING UP IN GBEEN. 787

ceremonial. On s White Sunday/ a fortnight before Easter, the
herdboys march to the pasture with white sticks (supra p. 766),
and with these they mark off a spot, to which no one may drive
his cattle till Whitsuntide. 1 This being done, the smaller boys
name th&ir brides * to the bigger ones, and no one must reveal
the name till Whitsunday, when the railed-off pasture is thrown
open, and any one may tell the brides' names. On Whitmonday
one of the boys is disguised by having two petticoats put on him,
and one of them pulled over his head and tied up; then they
swathe him in may, hang flower-wreaths about his neck, and
set a flower-crown on his head. They call him the filstge mai
(well-appointed, armed), and lead him round to all the houses;
at the same time the girls go round with their may-bride, who is
completely covered with ribbons, her bridal band hanging to the
ground behind ; she wears a large nosegay on her head, and keeps
on singing her ditties till some gift is handed to her.

Other villages have horse-races on Whitmonday for a wreath
which is hung out. ' Whoever snatches it down both times is
crowned, and led in triumph to the village as May-king.

A work composed in the 13th cent, by Aegidius aureae vallis
religiosus reports the Netherland custom of electing a Whitsun
queen in the time of bp.' Albero of Luttich (d. 1155) : 'Sacer-
dotes ceteraeque ecclesiasticae personae cum universo populo, in
solemnitatibus paschae et pentecostes, aliquam ex sacerdotum
concubinis, purpuratam ac diademate renitentem in eminentiori
solio constitutam et cortinis velatam, reginam creabant, et coram
ea assistentes in ohoreis tympanis et aliis musicalibus instrumentis
tota die psallebant, et quasi idolatrae effecti ipsam tanquam
idolum colebant/ Chapeaville 2, 98. To this day poor women
in Holland at Whitsuntide carry about a girl sitting m a little

1 While this fallow pasture is being railed off, the new lads (those who are tend-
ing for the first time) have to procure bones to cover the branches of a fir-tree which
is erected. The tree is called the gibbet of bones, and its top adorned with a horse's
skull (Eohn 323-4): plainly a relic of some heathen sacrificial rite, conf. the
elevation of animals on trees, pp. 68, 75, esp. of horses' heads, p. 47 ; the good
Lnbbe's hill of bones is also in point, p. 526.

8 This naming of brides resembles the crying of fief s on Walburgis eve in
Hesse, on the L. Rhine, the Ahr and the Eifel, Zeitschr. f. Hess, gesch. 2, 272-7.
Dieffenbaoh's Wetterau p. 234. Ernst Weyden's Ahrthal, Bonn 1839, p. 216.
And who can help remembering the ON. heit strengja at Yule-tide? when the
heroes likewise chose their loved ones, e.g. in 8®m. 146* : * HeSinn strengdi heit til
Svavo.'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



788 SUMMER AND WINTER.

carriage, and beg for money. This girl, decked with flowers and
ribbons, and named pinxterbhem, reminds us of the ancient god-
dess on her travels. The same pinzterbloem is a name for the
iris pseudacorus, which blossoms at that very season; and the
sword-lily is named after other deities beside Iris (perunika, p.
183-4). On the Zaterdag before Pentecost, the boys go ont early
in the morning, and with great shouting and din awake the lazy
sleepers, and tie a handle of nettles at their door. Both the
day and the late sleeper are called luilap or luilak (sluggard).
Summer also had to be wakened, p. 765.

Everything goes to prove, that the approach of summer was
to our forefathers a holy tide, welcomed by sacrifice, feast and
dance, and largely governing and brightening the people's life.
Of Easter fires, so closely connected with May fires, an account
has been given; the festive gatherings of May-day night will
be described more minutely in the Chap, on Witches. At this
season brides were chosen and proclaimed, servants changed,
and houses taken possession of by new tenants.

With this I conclude my treatment of Summer and Winter;
i.e. of the mythic meanings mixed up with the two halves of
the year. An examination of the twelve solar and thirteen lunar
months x is more than I can undertake here, for want of space ;
I promise to make good the deficiency elsewhere. This much
I will say, that a fair proportion of our names of months also
is referable to heathen gods, as we now see by the identifi-
cation of May with summer, and have already seen in the case
of Erede (March) and Eastre (April), p. 289. Phol, who had
his Phol-day (p. 614) , seems also to have ruled over a Pkol-manot
(May and Sept.), conf. Diut. i. 409, 432, and Scheffer's Haltaus
36. The days of our week may have been arranged and named
on the model of the Roman (p. 127) ; the names of the three
months aforesaid are independent of any Latin influence. 8 A
remarkable feature among Slavs and Germans is the using of one
name for two successive months, as when the Anglo-Saxons



1 That there were lunar years is indicated by the moon's being given ' at artali,'
for year's tale, p. 710.

8 Martins rests on Mars, Aprilis mnst contain a spring-goddess answering to
Ostara, Majns belongs to Maja, a mother of gods. The same three consecutive
months are linked in the Latin calendar, as in oars, with divinities.



Digitized by VjOOQlC



MONTHS. 789

speak of an serra and eeftera Geola, »rra and eeftera Lt$a, and
we of a great and little Horn (Jan. and Feb.), nay, Oagest is
followed up by an Ougstin, the god by a goddess ; I even see
a mythical substratum in popular saws on certain months, thus
of February they say: 'the Sporkelsin has seven smocks on,
of different lengths every one, and them she shakes/ i.e. raises
wind with them. ' Sporkel/ we know, is traced to the Roman
8purcalia.



Digitized by



Google



CHAPTER XXV.
TIME AND WORLD.

In the last chapter we examined myths paving reference to the
alternation of seasons, to phenomena of the year. Oar language
affords several instances of transition from the notion of time to
that of spaee.

Ulphilas translates 'xpovo^, tccupSs, &pa alternately by mel,
hveila, peihs, yet so that *m61* usually stands for xpovos or
fcaipos, rarely for &pa } and € hveila ' mostly for &pa, seldomer for
*Xpovo<; and /caipos; the former expressing rather the longer
section of time, and the latter the shorter. Mel, OHG. mal, AS.
mad, ON. mal, lit. mark or measure, is applied to measured
speech or writing as well as to a portion of time ; on the contrary,
hveila, OHG. huila, MHG. wile, AS. hml (p. 702), denotes rest,
and is purely a notion of time, whereas m&l was transferred from
space to time. We come across peihs (neut. gen. ]>eihsis) only
twice, viz. Rom. 13, 11 : 'vitandans )>ata }?eihs, ]>atei m61 ist/
6*Sot€9 rov tcaipbv, on &pa, and 1 Thess. 5, 1 : ' bi )>6 ]>eihsa jah
mela/ Trepl r&v ypovtov icai r&v tcaip&v. Each passage contains
both ]>eihs and mel, but the choice of the former for xpoi/o? and
the latter for /caipo? shews that ]>eihs is even better adapted than
m§l for the larger fuller notion, and the most complete arrange-
ment would be : )>eihs xpovo^, niSl teat, p 6$, hveila &pa. I derive
fieihs from )>eihan (crescere, proficere, succedere), as veihs gen.
veihsis (propugnaculum) from veihan (pugnare) ; so that it ex-
presses profectus, successus, the forward movement of time, and
is near of kin to OHG. dthsmo, d£hsmo (profectus), probably also
to dihsila (temo), our deichsel, AS. jrtsl, thill, for which we may
assume a Goth. ]>eihslo, ]>eihsla, the apparatus by which the
waggon is moved on. Schmeller 4, 294 cleverly connects tdmo
itself with tempus : the celestial waggon-thill (p. 724) marks the
movement of nocturnal time (Varro 7, 72-5), and ^eihsla becomes
a measure like the more general J>eihs. Even if the connexion of
the two Latin words be as yet doubtful, that of the two Gothic



790



Digitized by



Google



TIME. 791

ones can hardly be bo. But now, as the Goth. J>eihs has no
representative in the other Teutonic tongues, and in return the
OHG. zity AS. tid, ON. t%9 seems foreign to Gothic, it is natural,
considering the identity of meaning, to suppose that the latter
form arose from mixing up )>eihan (crescere) with teihan (nun-
tiare), and therefore that the AS. ttd stands for }>td, and OHG.
> zlt for dit ; besides, the OHG. zit is mostly neut., like )>eihs,
whereas the fern, zit, tld would have demanded a Goth. )>eiha)?s.
Of course a Goth. )>eihs ought to have produced an OHG. dihs or
dlh (as veihs did wih) ; but, that derivation here branched in two
or three directions is plain from the ON. timi, AS. time (tempus,
hora), which I refer to the OHG. dlhsmo 1 above, and a Goth.
Jreihsma, with both of which the Lat. tempus (and tfimo?) would
perfectly agree (see SuppL).

Like hveila, the OHG. stulla, and stunt, stunta, AS. ON. stund
(moment, hour), contain the notion of rest, and are conn, with
stilli (quietus), standan (stare), while conversely the Lat. mo-
mentum (movi-mentum) is borrowed from motion. 8 We express
the briefest interval of time by augeribliek, eye-glance; TTlph.
renders Luke 4, 5 iv crvyprj ypovov ' in stika mfilis/ in a prick
of time, in ictu temporis; 1 Cor. 15, 52 iv fairy 6<f>0dk/j,ov, 'in
brahva angina/ brahv being glance, flash, micatus, AS. twincel,
and traceable to bralhvan (micare, luoere), OHG. prehan, MHG.
brehen ; 8 AS. ' on beorhtm-hwiU ' from bearhtm ictus oculi, ' on
eagan beorhtm/ Beda 2, 13 ; ON. '1 augabragfi,' conf. S»m. ll b .
14*. 19 b . OHG. 'in slago dero brawo,' N. ps. 2, 12, in a movement
of the eyelid (conf. slegiprdwa palpebra, Graff 3, 316); 'ante-

1 In dfhan, dlhsmo the d remained, in zlt it degenerated. Just bo the Goth.
Jxvahan first became regularly OHG. duahan, then irregularly tuahan, now zwagen ;
the OS. thningan first OHG. duingan, then toingan, now zwingen. Less anomal-
ous by one degree are OHG. zi for Goth, da (to), and our zwerg for ON. dvergr
(dwarf), MHG. twere.

8 Numeral adverbs of repetition oar language forms with $tunt as well as mdl y
but also by some words borrowed from space, Gramm. 3, 230.

• Beside the inf. brUhen (MS. 1, 47*. 186». Gudr. 1856, 2) we are only sore of
the pres. part. : ougo-brehender kle, MS. 1, 3 b . brehender sehtn 2, 281* ; for the
pret. brack, MS. 2, 62*. Bon. 48. 68, could be referred to breohen, conf. ' break of
day,' p. 747, yet the two verbs themselves may be congeners. In OHG. the perf.
part, appears in prghan-oug\ (lippus), a compound formed like zoran-ougi, Gramm.
2, 698. The Goth, brahv assures us of the princ. parts in full, braikva, brahv,
brehvum (like saihva, sahv, sehvum). But instead of an adj. braihts (bright), even
the Gothic has only a transposed form bairhts, OHG. peraht, AS. beorht, ON.
biartr ; yet our Perahta is afterwards also called Prehta, Brehte (pp. 277-9), and other
proper names waver between the two forms, as Albreoht Albert, Bupreoht Robert.

VOL. II. A A



Digitized by



Google



792 TIME AND WORLD.

quam supercilium superius inferiori jangi possit/ Caesar, heisterb.
12, 5. 'minre wtlen (in less time) dan ein oucbra zuo der an-
dern muge geslahen/ Grieshaber p. 274. *als ein oucbrft mac
Af und zuo gegfin/ can open and shut, Berth. 239. ' 6 ich die
hant nmbkGrte, oder zuo gesliiege die (or better, diu) br&/ Er.
5172. 'alsd schier s6 (as fast as) ein brawe den andern slahen
mac/ Fundgr. 1, 199 (see Suppl.). 1 *

A great length of time is also expressed by several different
words: Goth, aivs (m.), OHG. ewa {(.), Gr. aldv, Lat. aevum
shading off into the sense of seculum, 0. Fr. ae (p. 678) ; the
OS. eo (m.) means only statatum, lex, as the Goth, mfel was
scriptnra as well as tempns. Then Goth, alps (f.), by turns alwv
(Eph. 2, 2. 1 Tim. 1, 17. 2 Tim. 4, 10), and /S/o* or ya/ed;
ON. old; OHG. with suffix altar (aevum, aetas), though the
simple word also survives in the compound weralt (assimil.
worolt), MHG. werlt, our welt, AS. werold, Engl, world, Pris.
urrald, ON. v'erald, verold, Swed. werld, Dan. verd : constant use
accounts for the numerous distortions of the word. 2 Its Gothic
form, wanting in Ulph., would have been vair-alps or 'vaire
aljra/ virorum (hominum) aetas, aetas (lifetime) passing into the
local sense of mundus (world), just as seculum, si&cle, has come
to mean mundus, monde. We saw on p. 575 that Greek myth-
ology supposes four ages of the world, golden, silver, brazen
and iron : a fancy that has travelled far, 3 and was apparently
no stranger in Scandinavia itself. Snorri 15 gives the name of

1 Can brawe, OHG. prawa, ON. bra, be derived from brehen ? Perhaps the
set phrases in the text reveal the reason for it. In that case the OHG. prawa must
be for praha, and we might expect a Goth, brehva ? Then the San&kr. bhru, Gr.
ty/w's, would be left without the vivid meaning of the Teut. word.

s Its true meaning was so obscured, that other explanations were tried.
Maerlant at the beginn. of his Sp. Hist. : ' die de werelt erst werrelt hiet, nine was
al in dole niet. Adam die werelt al verwerrede.'' This deriv. from werren (impedire,
intricare) was, if I mistake not, also hit upon by MHG. poets, e.g. Benner 2293.
Equally wrong are those from wern to last, and werlen to whirl. It is quite possi-
ble, that werd alt (virorum aetas) was intended as an antithesis to a risdnd alt
(gigantum aetas) which preceded it.

3 In our Mid. Ages the World was personified, like Death, and the various ages
were combined in a statue with a head of gold, arms of silver, a breast of brass and
iron, and feet of earth, MS. 2, 175* ; another representation gave the figure a
golden head, silver breast and arms, brazen belly, steel thighs, iron legs, earthen
feet, MS. 2, 225* ; a third, a golden head, silver arms, brazen breaBt, copper belly,
steel thighs, earthen feet, Amgb. 27 b . This medley, though borrowed from Daniel
2, 31-43, reminds us of ancient idols formed out of various metals, and also of
Hrungnir with the stone heart, and Mdckrkalfi who was made of loam, and had a
mare's heart put into him, Sn. 109. Hugo in his Benner 13754 speaks of a steel,
diamond, copper, wood, and straw world.



Digitized by



Google



WORLD. 793

gull-aldr to the period when the gods had all their utensils made
of gold, which was only cut short by the coming of giantesses
out of Iotunheim. Had he merely borrowed this golden age
from the classics, he would have taken the trouble to discover
the other metals too in Norse legend. 1 But in the Voiuspft
(Ssem. 8 a ) we see that other ages are spoken of, skegg-old (see p.
421), slcalm-old, vind-dld and vcvrg-dld, which are to precede the
destruction of the world.

To translate /coo-fio?, Ulph. takes by turns, and often one im-
mediately after the other, the two words fairhvus and manaseps;
both must have been in common use among the Goths. Mana-
ae}>8 2 means virorum satus (seed of men), and is used at. once for
Xoo? and for /coo-pos, thus fully conciding with the above developed
sense of weralt. Fmrhvus I take to be near of kin to OHG.
ferah, AS. feorh, MHG. verch, so that it expressed lifetime again,
like aevum ; it is also connected with OHG. firahi (homines), and
would mean first 'coetus hominum viventium/ then the space
in which they live. It has* nothing to do with fairguni, earth,
mountain (see Suppl.).

As tcoafio? properly means the ordered, symmetrical (world),
mundu8 the clean, well-trimmed, bright, and as the Frisian laws
126, 26 speak of ' thi skene wrald ' ; so the Slavic sviet, svet, swiat
is, first of all, light and brightness, then world A the open, public, 8
all that the sun illumines, whatsoever is ' under the sun/ 4 So
the Wallach. lume, the Hung, vilag, signify both light and world.
The Lith. swietas, 0. Pruss. switai, world, is borowed from Slavic.
Like mundus, the Slav, sviet passes into the time-sense of
seculum, vidk (Dobrowsky's Inst. 149). The older Slavs called
the world mir and ves'mir, Dobr. 24. 149 ; mir is also the word
for peace, quietness, and seems akin to mira or m&ra, measure
(order?). The Finnic for world is maa* ilma, the Esth. ma Urn
(from ilma, the expanse of air, and maa, earth), the Lapp, ilbme.

1 We may connect the golden age with Frdtti, whose mill ground gold and
peace. The Finns say, in Ukko's time gold was ground in the mills, honey trickled
from the oaks, and milk flowed in the rivers (conf. p. 697), Ganander 99.

3 Always with single n, as in mana-maar)>rja, mana-riggvs, manage (many),
manauli, and as in OHG. mana-honpit, mana-luomi, manao, conf. MHG. sune-
wende, p. 617 n. The reason of this peculiarity grammar must determine.

8 To bring to light, impart to the world, is in Serv. • na sviet izdati.»

4 The Lett, word pasaule seems to have been modelled on this * sub sole ' in
Eccles. 1, 3. 2, 22. So * unter disem wolken,' Bol. 9, 31.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



794 TIME AND WORLD.

The ON. heimr is mundus, domus, and akin to himinn, himil
(p. 698), as mundos also is applied both to world and sky;
heimskringla, orbis terranim. Ulphilas renders ol/covfihrq, Lake
2, 1. 4, 5. Rom. 10, 18, by midjungards ; to this correspond the
AS. middangeard, C®dm. 9, 3. 177, 29. Beow. 150. 1496; the
OHG. mittingart, Is. 340. 385-6. 408. Fragm. theot. 17, 6.
mittigart, i>*m. th. 17, 3. 20, 20. 25, 9. mittiligart, Gl. Jun.
216. T. 16, l\ndttilgart, T. 155, 1. 178, 2. 179, 1; the OS.
middilgard; theOSswifgardr, Seem. l b . 45 b . 77 b . 90\ 114 b . 115 b .
Sn. 9. 10. 13. 45. 6T^nd even a Swed. folksong 1, 140 has
retained medjeg&rd. O. Intel- middilerd, medileeurth, like the Gr.
peaoyaCa. Fischart's Garg/ 1 ^* has mittelhreist, mid-circle. We
saw (p 560) that miftgardr wasJW to the Norse way of thinking,
created out of Ymir's eyebrows, wad appointed to men for their
habitation. The whole compound, dcJu^jtless yery ancient, is of
prime importance, because it is native toNmr oldest memorials,
and at the same time strictly Eddie. Nor is chpt all : in similar
harmony, the world is called in ON. OegisJieimr, Stem. 124 b . 125*,
and in MHG. mergarte, Annolied 444. Rol. 106, Pi- Kaiserchr.
501. 6633. Karl. 38 b ; i.e. the sea-girt world,\onf. Goto,
marisfiivs (ocean), and OHG. mertherti (aetherium), 1 Dfe*« 1* 250.
Lastly, OHG. woroltring, O. iu 2, 13. iii. 26, 37. iv. 7, J 1 - v - l >
33.19,1. erdriny, O. i. 11, 47. MHG. erdnnc, Mar. 19^ orbis
terrarum, Graff 4, 1163. \ Jf

According to the Edda, a huge serpent, the mi&garfo orrnr^i^
coiled round the earth's circumference, 'umgiorS allra 1?
evidently the ocean. When Alexander in the legend was
up in the air by griffins, the sea appeared to him to twine
make round the earth. But that ' world-serpent/ hateful
the gods (su er go* fla, S®m. 55*) was the child of Lokj
brother to the Fenris-ulfr and Hel ; he was called Iormun
(Sn. 32), the great, the godlike (conf. p. 351), and like H^
opens wide his jaws, Sn. 63 (see Suppl.).

Everything shews that the notions of time, age, world, gld
earth, light, air and water ran very much into one another ; i?
c earth-ring/ ring indicates the globular Bhape of the earth anc



1 The Finnic Utna f Festus sayu mundus meant coeltun as well as terra, mare,
aer. *


Digitized by VjOOQIC



WORLD. 795

its planetary revolution. Manaseps, fairhvm, and weralt point to
spaces and periods filled by men. 1

So far as l world ' contains the notion of seculum and life, it is
significantly called, even by the OS. poet, a dream : liudio drom,
Hel. 17, 17. 104, 7. 109, 20. mwnno drom 23, 7. 103, 4. AS.
gumdredm, Beow. 4933 ; ' la vida es sueno/ Its perishableness
and painf ulness have suggested yet other designations : ' diz
ellende wvofial (weep-dale)/ Tod. gehugde 983, as we say ( this
vale of tears, house of sorrow' (see Suppl.).

From its enormous superficial extent is borrowed the phrase
'thius bride werold,' Hel. 50, 1. 131,21; MHG. 'diu breite
werlt/ Mar. 161 ; our weite breite welt Also : ' thiz lant breita,*
O. ii. 2, 18. daz breite gevilde, Mar. 34. Wigal. 2269. diu breite
erde, Roth. 4857. Wh. 60, 29. Geo. 4770, eipeia x°w- Tti s
reminds one of the name of Balder' s dwelling spoken of on
p. 222-3, breiSa blik, which seems to include the two notions
of breadth and brightness. An expression used by miners is
remarkable in this connexion: ' blickgold, blicksilber' is said of
the clear molten metal gleaming on the fining-hearth, and ' der
breite blick ' when there is a plentiful yield of it. 2 The beautiful
bright world is, as it were, a wide glance.

When ' world ' or ' heimr ' is merely used in the general sense
of dwelling place, we can think of several worlds. The VoluspA,
Saem. 1*, supposes nine worlds and nine firmaments (ivrSir), conf.
S»m. 36 b . 49% just as Sn. 222* speaks of nine lieavens (see
Suppl.).*

Of these worlds, not abodes of the living human race, those
that demand a close investigation are : the Flame- world, the
Dead- world, and Paradise; but all are connected more or less



1 As we often use ' world ' and * earth ' indifferently, so did the MHG. poets.
The beginning of time is expressed at option either thus : ' yon anegenges zlt, daz
sich diu werlt erhuop (up-hove), and muoter ir kint getruoo (bore),* Eol. 285, 12.
* sit (since) diu werlt erste wart,* Ulr. Trial 3699 ; or thus : ' sit disiu erde geleget
wart,* BoL 187, 7. ' sit diu erde alrerst begunde bern (to bear),* Earl 70 b .

•In Matthesias*8 Sermons 84': *Now this Cyras hath a silver kingdom,
wherein the word of God, as silver refined in the fire, is preached zu breitem
plick.' 91* : 'He hath sent his apostles into all the world, that they may preach the
gospel zu breitem plick, as ye mining folk say.* 101* : • Elsewhere lead ap-
peareth in blocks, as at Goslar, where the Ramelsberg is zu breitem plick almost all
lead.'

* Nine choirs of angels, Fondgr. 1, 101. Pass. S39. 341. ' niu fylkingar engla,'
Fornald. sog. 3, 663; conf. the nine punishments of hell, Wackernagel's Basel
MSB. 24 b [Buddhist books describe 18 hells, some hot, some cold] .



Digitized by



Google



796 TIME AND WORLD.

with the upper world, that inhabited by man, and passages exist
from the one to the other.

The ON. system supposes a world-tree, ashr Yggdrasils, which
links heaven, earth and hell together, of all trees the greatest
and holiest. It is an ash (askr), whose branches shoot through
all the world, and reach beyond heaven. Three roots spread out
in three directions, one striking toward the ases into heaven,
another to the hrfmjmrses, the third to the under world. From
under each root gushes a miraculous spring, namely, by the
heaven root Urdwrbrunnr (p. 407), by the giants' root Mimis-
brunnr, by the hell root Hvergelmir, i.e. the roaring (or the old)
cauldron, olla stridens (p. 563). All these wellsprings are holy :
at the UrSar-well the ases and norns hold their council, the
giants' well is watched by a wise man Mtmir (p. 379), I know
not whether a sage old giant himself or a hero, anyhow a semi-
divine being, or nearly so. Every day the norns draw water
from their well, to water the boughs of the ash : bo holy is this
water, that it imparts to anything that gets into the well the
colour of the white of an egg 9 , from the tree there trickles a
bee-nourishing dew, named hundngsfall (fall of honey). On
its boughs, at its roots, animals sit or dart about: an eagle,
a squirrel, four stags, and some snakes; and all have proper
names. Those of the stags are elsewhere names of dwarfs,
notably Bdinn and Dvalinn. The snake NiShoggr (male pun-
gens, caedens) lies below, by Hvergelmir, gnawing at the root.
The squirrel Ratatoskr l runs up and down, trying to sow discord
between the snake and the eagle who is perched aloft. The
eagle's name is not given, he is a bird of great knowledge and
sagacity; betwixt his eyes sits a hawk Ve&rfolnir?

The whole conception bears a primitive stamp, but seems
very imperfectly unfolded to us. We get some inkling of a feud
between snake and eagle, which is kept alive by Ratatoskr ; not
a word as to the purpose and functions of hawk or stags.
Attempts at explaining Yggdrasil I have nothing to do with ; at

1 The word contains rata (elabi, permeare), Goth, vraton, and perh. ta&ka, pi.
toskur, pera : peram permeans 7 Wolfram in Parz. 651, 13 has ' wcnken als ein
eiclwrn, 1 dodging like a squirrel. The squirrel is still an essential feature in the
popular notion of a forest, oonf. BA. 497 and the catching of squirrels at Easter
(supra p. 616), perhaps for old heathen uses.

3 The eagle's friend, for haukr % horni (hawk in the corner) means a hidden
counsellor.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



WORLD-TEBB. 797

present, before giving my own opinion, I must point out two
coincidences very unlike each other. This tree of the Edda has
suggested to others before me the tree of the Cross, which in
the Mid. Ages gave birth to many speculations and legends. Well,
a song in the € Wartburg War/ MsH. 3, 181 Bets the following
riddle :

Ein edel bourn gewahsen ist

in eime garten, der ist gemacht mit h6her list;

8Vt% wurzel Jean der hells grunt erlangen,

sin tolde (for ' zol der ') rueret an den tron

da der stieze Got bescheidet vriunde 16n,

sin este breit hdnt al die werlt bevangen :

der boam an ganzer zierde slat and ist geloubet Boh&ne,

dar ufe sitzent vogeUn

suezes sanges wise nach ir stimme fin,

nach maniger kunst s6 haltents ir gedoane.

(A noble tree in a garden grows, and high the skill its making
shews ; its roots the floor of hell are grasping, its summit to
the throne extends where bounteous God requiteth friends,
its branches broad the wide world clasping: thereon sit birds
that know sweet song, etc.) This is very aptly interpreted of
the Cross and the descent into hell. Before this, 0. v. 1, 19 had
already written :

Thes Jeruzes horn thar obana zeigSt ufin himila,
thie arma joh thio henti tbie zeigdnt woroU-enii,
tber selbo mittilo bowm, tber scow6t tbesan woroU-floum,

theiz vnnan erdu stentit,

mit thin ist tbar bizeinit, tbeiz imo ist al gimeinit
in erdu joh im himile inti in abgnmte ouh biar nidare.

(The cross's top points to heaven, the arms and hands to the
world's ends, the stem looks to this earthly plain, . . . stands
in the ground, thereby is signified, that for it is designed all in
earth and heaven and the abyss beneath.) It matters little if
the parallel passage quoted by Schilter from cap. 18 de divinis
officiis comes not from Alcuin, but some later author : Otfried
may have picked up his notion from it all the same. 1 It says :
' Nam ipsa crux magnum in se mysterium continet, cujus positio

1 I do not know if Lafontaine had Virgil's verses in bis mind, or followed his
own prompting, when he says of an oak :

Celui, de qui la tfcte an ciel etait voisine,

et dont les pieds toachaient a Tempire des morts.



Digitized by



Google



798 TIME AND WORLD.

talis est, ut superior pars coelos petat, inferior terrae inkaereat,
fixa mfernorum ima contingat, latitudo autem ejus partes mundi
appetat.' I can never believe that the myth of Yggdrasil in its
complete and richer form sprang out of this christian conception
of the Cross ; it were a far likelier theory, that floating heathen
traditions of the world-tree, soon after the conversion in Germany,
France or England, attached themselves to an object of christian
faith, just as heathen temples and holy places were converted
into christian ones. The theory would break down, if the same
exposition of the several pieces of the cross could be found in
any early Father, African or Oriental ; but this I doubt. As for
the birds with which the 13th cent, poem provides the tree, and
which correspond to the Norse eagle and squirrel, I will lay no
stress on them. But one thing is rather surprising : it is pre-
cisely to the ash that Virgil ascribes as high an elevation in the
air as its depth of root in the ground, Georg. 2, 291 :

Aesculus in primis, quae quantum vartice ad auras
aetherias, tantum radice in tartar a tendit ;

upon which Pliny 16, 81 (56) remarks: 'si Virgilio credimus,
esculus quantum corpore eminet tantum radice descendit.' 1 So
that the Norse fable is deeply grounded in nature; conf. what
was said, p. 696, of the bees on this ash-tree.

Another and still more singular coincidence carries us to
Oriental traditions. In the Arabian € Galila and Dimna ' the
human race is compared to a man who, chased by an elephant,
takes refuge in a deep well : with his hand he holds on to the
branch of a shrub over his head, and his feet he plants on a
narrow piece of turf below. In this uneasy posture he sees two
mice, a black and a white one, gnawing the root of the shrub ;
far beneath his feet a horrible dragon with its jaws wide open ;
the elephant still waiting on the brink above, and four worms'
heads projecting Irom the side of the well, undermining the turf
he stands on; at the same time there trickles liquid honey from a
branch of the bush, and this he eagerly catches in his mouth. 3

1 Perhaps Hrabanus Manrus's Carmen in laudem aanctae cruris, which I have
not at hand now, contains the same kind of thing.

s Galila et Dimna, ed. Silvestre de Sacy. Mem. hist p. 28-9, ed. Enatchbnll,
p. 80-1 ; conf. the somewhat different version in the Exempeln der alten weisen,
p.m. 22.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



WOBLD-TBEE. 799

Hereupon is founded a rebuke of man's levity, who in the ut-
most stress of danger cannot withstand the temptation of a small
enjoyment. Well, this fable not only was early and extensively
circulated by Hebrew, Latin and Greek translations of the entire
book, 1 but also found its way into other channels. John
Damascenus (oiro. 740) inserted it in his BapXda/j, real y Iad<r<uf>*
which soon became universally known through a Latin repro-
duction. 3 On the model of it our Rudolf composed his Barlaam
and Josaphat, where the illustration is to be found, p. 116-7;
in a detached form, Strieker (Ls. 1, 253). No doubt a parable
so popular might also reach Scandinavia very early in the Mid.
Ages, if only the similarity itself were stronger, so as to justify
the inference of an immediate connexion between the two myths.
To me the faint resemblance of the two seems just the main
point ; a dose one has never existed. The ON. fable is far more
significant and profound; that from the. East is a fragment,
probably distorted, of a whole now lost to us. Even the main
idea of the world-tree is all but wanting to it ; the only startling
thing is the agreement in sundry accessories, the trickling honey
(conf. p. 793 n.), the gnawed root, the four species of animals.

But if there be any truth in these concords of the Eddie myth
with old Eastern tenets, as well as with the way the Christians
tried to add portions of their heathen faith to the doctrine of the
Cross; then I take a farther step. It seems to me that the
notion, so deeply rooted in Teutonic antiquity, of the Irminsvl,
that < altissima, universalis eolumna, quasi sustinens omnia' (p.
115-7), is likewise nearly allied to the world- tree Yggdrasil. As
this extended its roots and boughs in three directions (standa &
)>ria vega), so did three or four great highways branch out from
the Irminsul (pp. 356. 361) ; and the farther we explore, the
richer in results will the connexion of these heathen ideas prove.
The pillars of Hercules (p. 364), of Bavo in Hainault, and the
Tbor and Roland pillars (p. 394) may have had no other purpose
than to mark out from them as centre the celestial and terrestrial
direction of the regions of the world ; and the sacred Yggdrasil

1 Also in the East, conf. Jelaleddin's Divan in Hammer's Perg. redek. p. 183.

* First publ. in Boissonade's Anecd. Graeca, torn. 4, Paris 1832, pp. 1—366.

* Hist, duorum Christi militum (Opera, Basil. 1575. pp. 815—902) ; also printed
separately, Antv. s.a. (the illustration at p. 107) ; another version in tturius 7, 858
seq., the parable at p. 889.



Digitized by VjOOQIC .



800 TIME AND WORLD.

subserved a very similar partition of the world. The thing might
even have to do with ancient land-surveying, and answer to the
Roman cardo, intersected at right angles by the decumanus. To
the ashtree we must also concede some connexion with Asciburg
(p. 850) and the tribal progenitor Askr (p. 571-2), Another
legend of an ashtree is reserved for chap. XXXII (see Suppl.) .

Niflheimr, where Ni&hoggr and other serpents (named in Ssem.
44 b . Sn. 22) have their haunt round the spring Hvergelmir, is
the dread dwelling-place of the death-goddess He! (p. 312), Goth.
Halja ('or heljo/ Seem. 94% c l heljV 49. 50. 51, is clearly
spoken of a place, not a person), it is gloomy and black, like her;
hence a Nebelhevm, cold land of shadows, abode of the departed, 1
but not a place of torment or punishment as in the christian 7iew,
and even that was only developed gradually (p. 313). When Ul-
philas uses halja, it is always for S&79 (Matt. 11, 23. Luke 10, 15.
16, 23. 1 Cor. 15, 55), the mfernus of the Vulg. ; whenever the
text has yeevva, Vulg. gehenna, it remains gaiainna in Gothic
(Matt. 5, 29. 30. 10, 28),it was an idea for which the Gothic had
no word. The OHG. translator T. renders € infernus ' by hella
(Matt. 11, 23), 'gehenna' 2 by hellafiur (5, 29. 30) or hellamzi
(-torment 10, 28), and only 'filium gehennae' by hella sun (23,
15), where the older version recently discovered is more exact:
qudlu sunn, son of torment. When the Greed says that Christ
' nrSar steig zi helliu * (descendit ad inferna), it never meant the
abode of souls in torment. In the Heliand 72, 4 a sick man is
said to be 'ffrsid an helsid', near dying, equipped for his journey
to Hades, without any by-thought of pain or punishment. That
AS. poetry still remembered the original (personal) conception of
Eel, was proved on p. 814, but I will add one more passage from
Beow. 357: 'Helle gemundon, MetoB ne cuSon/ Helam venera-
bantur, Deum verum ignorabant (pagani). So then, from the
4th cent, to the 10th, halja, hella was simply Hades or the death-
kingdom, the notion of torment being expressed by another word
or at any rate a compound ; and with this agrees the probability

1 A dead man is called nifl-farinn % Seem. 249*. The progenitor of the Nibelungs
was prob. Nebel (Fornald. flog. 2, 9. 11, Nsfill for Neflll) : a raoe of heroes doomed
to Hades and early death. ' Nibelonge: spirits of the death-kingdom,' Laohmann
on Nib. 342.

8 From gehenna comes, we know, the Pr. gehene, gene, i.e. supplioe, though in
a very mitigated sense now.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



HELL. NIFL-HEIM. 801

that as late as Widekind of Corvei (I, 23) Saxon poets, chanting
a victory of Saxons over Franks, used this very word hella for
the dwelling-place of the dead : € nt a mimis declamaretur, nbi
tantus ille infernvs esset, qui tantam multitudinem caesoram capere
posset ? ' x A Latin poem on Bp. Heriger of Mentz, of perhaps
the 10th cent., 8 describes how one that had been spirited away
to the underworld declared 'totum esse mfernum accinctum densis
ndique silvis/ meaning evidently the abode of the dead, not the
place of punishment. Even in a poem of the 12th cent. (Dint. 8,
104) Jacob says : ' so muoz ich iemer cholen, unze ich s6 vare ze
der helle/ until I fare to hell, i.e. die. The 13th cent, saw the
present meaning of helle already established, the abode of the
damned ; e.g. in Iw. 1472 : ( God bar thee out of helle ! ' take
thee to heaven, not guard thee from death, for the words are
addressed to a dead man (see Suppl.).

Hell is represented as a lodging, an inn, as Valholl, where those
who die put up the same evening (p. 145) : ' ver skulum a Valholl
gista i qveld,' Fornald. sog. 1, 106 ; ' vr8 munum i aptan O&in
gista' 1, 423; singularly Abbo 1,555 (Pertz 2, 789), 'plebs
inimica Deo pransura Plutonis in wrna' No doubt, people used
to say : ' we shall put up at Nobis-haus to-night ! ' The Saviour's
words, cnjpepov fier ifiov $<rji iv r& irapaSelatp, Luke 23, 43 have
( this day/ but not 'to-night' (see Suppl.).

Here and there in country districts, among the common people,
helle has retained its old meaning. In Westphalia there are
still plenty of common carriage-roads that go by the name of
hellweg, now meaning highway, but originally death-way, the
broad road travelled by the corpse. My oldest example I draw
from a Record of 890, Ritz 1, 19 : ' helvius sive strata publica.'
Later instances occur in Weisth. 3, 87. 106, in Tross's Rec. of
the feme p. 61, and in John of Soest (Fichard's Arch. 1, 89) . 8

1 Trad. Corbeiens. pp. 465. 604 makes a regular hexameter of it : ' tantus nbi
infernos, oaesos qui devoret omnes f ' This overcrowding of Hades with the dead
reminds one of Calderon's fanatio fear, lest heaven stand empty, with all the world
running to the other house after Luther :

Que vive Dios, que ha de tener en eielo
poeos que apqsentar, si oonsidero
que estan ya aposentado eon Lutero.

{Sitio de Breda, jorn. primera).
' Lat. gediohte des X. XL jh. p. 835, eonf . 344.

* Also in Lower Hesse : hellweg by Wettesingen and Oberlistingen (Woohenbl.
for 1833, 952. 984. 1023. 1188), mieweg by Calden (951. 982. 1022), h&llepfad by
Nothfelden (923).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



802 TIME AND WOELD.

In the plains of Up. Germany we sometimes find it called todten-
weg (Mone's Anz. 1838. pp. 225. 316). The ON. poetry makes
the dead ride or drive to the underworld, 'fwra til heljar ' or f til
Heljar/ to the death-goddess : Brynhildr, after she is burnt,
travels to Hei in an ornamental car, ' 6k meS rerSinni & helveg/
and the poem bears the title Helrei9 y Ssem. 227. In our Freidank
105, 9. 151, 12 it is the christian notion that is expressed by
' zer helle vara ' and ' dri str&ze zer helle g&nt/ For the rest, a
hellweg would necessarily bring with it a hellwagen (p. 314), just
as we meet with a Wddan's way and waggon both (p. 151).
Nay, the Great Bear is not only called himelwagen and herren-
wagen, but in the Netherlands hellewagen (Wolfs Wodana i. iii.
iv.) ; see a ' Wolframus dictus hellewagen/ MB. 25, 123 a.d. 1314
(see Suppl.).

The 0. Saxons at first, while their own hellia still sounded too
heathenish, preferred to take from the Latin Bible irtfern, gen.
inf ernes, e.g. Hel. 44, 21, and even shortened it down to fern,
Hel. 27, 7. 103, 16. 104, 15. 164, 12; so that the poet cited by
Widekind may actually have said infem instead of hellia. 1

The heathen hellia lay low down toward the North; when
Hermd'Sr was sent after Baldr, he rode for nine nights through
valleys dark and deep (dokva dala ok diupa), the regions peopled
by the dark elves (p. 445) ; he arrived at the river Qioll (strepens),
over which goes a bridge covered with shining gold ; a maiden
named Md$gu$r guards the bridge, and she told him that five
fylki of dead men 3 had come over it the day before, and that
from this bridge the ' hellway ' ran ever lower and north warder :
' nr8r ok norJSr liggr helvegr.' This I understand of the proper
hall and residence of the goddess, where she is to be met with,
for all the country he had been crossing was part of her kingdom.
This palace is surrounded by lofty railings (hel-grindr), Sn. 33.
67. The hall is named Eliudhir (al. ElvtSnir), the threshold
fallwiida farad (al. the palisade is fallanda forad, the threshold
J?olmo$nir), the curtain blihjcmdi bol, Sn. 33. It is probably a
door of this underworld (not of Yalholl, which has 540 huge



1 A place InferniH (Erhard p. 140, a.d. 1113) ; Gael, t/rtim, Ir. if earn, Wei.
yfern, uffern.

3 A fylki contains 50 (BA. 207), so that Baldr rode down with an escort of 250,
though one MS. doubles the number : * reft Baldr her me$ 500 manna.'



Digitized by



Google



NIFL-HEL. 803

gates) that is meant in Saem. 226* and Fornald. sog. 1, 204,
where Brynhildr wishes to follow SigurS in death, lest the door
fall upon his heel : a formula often used on entering a closed
cavern. 1 But Hel's kingdom bears the name of Niflkeimr or Nifl-
hel, mist- world, mist-hell, 2 it is the ninth world (as to position),
and was created many ages before the earth (p. 558) ; in the
middle, of it is that fountain Hvergelmir, out of which twelve
rivers flow, Oioll being the one that comes nearest the dwelling
of the goddess, Sn. 4. Prom this follows plainly what I have
said : if Hvergelmir forms the centre of Niflheimr, if Gioll and
the other streams pertain exclusively to hell, the goddess HePs
dominion cannot begin at the ( hel-grindr/ but must extend to
those ' dank dales and deep/ the ' dense forests ' of the Latin
poem. Yet I have nothing to say against putting it in this way :
that the dark valleys, like the murky Erebos of the Greeks, are
an intermediate tract, which one must cross to reach the abode .
of Aides, of Halja. Out of our Halja the goddess, as out of the
personal Hades, the Roman Orcus (orig. uragus, urgus, and in
the Mid. Ages still regarded as a monster and alive, pp. 314,
486) there was gradually evolved the local notion of a dwelling-
place of the dead. The departed were first imagined living with
her, and afterwards in her (it). In the approaches dwelt or
hovered the dark elves (see Suppl.).

Nifllieirrvr then, the mist- world, was a cold underground region
covered with eternal night, traversed by twelve roaring waters,
and feebly lighted here and there by shining gold, i.e. fire. The
rivers, especially Gioll, remind us of Lethe, and of Styx, whose
holy water gods and men swore by. With Hvergelmir we may

1 The O. Fr. poem on the 'quatre fils Aimon' (Cod. 7183 fol. 126 b ) makes
Riohart, when about to be hong, offer a prayer, in which we are told that the
Saviour brought back all the souls out of hell except one woman, who would stop
at the door to give hell a piece of her mind, and is therefore doomed to stay there
till the Judgment-day : all were released,

Ne mes que une dame, qui dist une raison :

* hai enfer ' dist ele, * con vos remanez solz,

noirs, hisdoz et obscurs, et laiz et tenebrox ! '

a Ventrer de la porte, si con lisant trovon.

jusquau terme i sera, que jugerois le mont.
The source of this strange legend is unknown to me.

1 * Diu inre heUc, wo nebel und finster.' The Lucidarius gives ten names of
hell : stagnum ignis, terra tenebrosa, terra oblivionis, swarziu ginunge, etc. Mone's
Anz. for 1834, 313 ; conf. expressions in the OS. poet : hSt endi thiustri, suart
rittnahH, Hel. 65, 12 ; an dalon thiu8tron y an themo alloro ferrosten feme 65, 9 ;
under/erndafa 33, 16 ; diap dddes dalu 157, 22.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



804 TIME AND WORLD.

connect Helleborne in Brabant, the BOtirce of Hellebeke ; several
places are named Helleput (Wolfs Wodana 1, v. and 35). Hel-
voetsluis was cited, p. 315 note; the name Helle-voet (-foot) is,
we are told, still to be seen on signboards (aithangborden) in the
Netherlands (see Suppl.).

Gloomy and joyless as we mnst imagine Niflheimr, 1 there is no
mention anywhere of its denizens being punished and tormented ;
neither is it the wicked especially that are transported thither at
the end of their life, but all and sundry, even the noblest and
worthiest, as the examples of Brynhildr and Baldr may shew. 2
The only exceptions seem to be the heroes that fall in battle,
whom OSinn takes to himself into Yalholl.

In contradiction with this view stands another and, I think,
a later one, that presented in Sn. 4 : AUfather the highest god
has given to all men an immortal soul, though their body rot in
the ground or burn to ashes ; all good men (r£tt srSa'Sir) go to
him in Gimill or Yingolf, all the wicked (vaudir) to Niflheimr or
hell (conf. Sn. 21 and 75, of which more hereafter). This is
already the christian idea, or one extremely like it.

For the old heathen hell, pale and dim, the Christian substi-
tuted a pool filled with flames and pitch, in which the souls of
the damned burn for ever, at once pitch-black and illumined
with a glow. Gehenna is interpreted hellafiuri, MHG. hellefiwer
Parz. 116. 18; the poet of the Heliand, when he wants to picture
vividly this black and burning hell, turns the old fern, form into
a masc. : ' an thene hetan hel ' 76, 22. ' an thene suartan hel '
103, 9. Brebi fornaz, Walther 867. Nay, 0. and other OHG.
writers make the simple beh (pix) stand for hell 8 : 'in dem beche,'



1 Cffidmon still pictures the wftehus (honse of torment) as • deop, dreama leas,
sinnihte beseald.' Striking images occur in a doo. of the 11th cent. (Zeitschr. f.
d. a. 3 445) : swevilstank, genibele, tides scategruobe, wallente stredema, etc.

8 So all the Greek heroes sink into Hades 1 house under the earth. But it is
hard to distinguish from it Tartarus, which lies lower down the abyss, and where
the subjugated giants sit imprisoned. This denoted therefore, at least in the later
times, a part of the underworld where the wicked dwelt for their punishment, which
answers to the christian hell. But that the * roots of earth and sea from above
grow down ' into Tartarus (Hes. Theog. 728) suggests our Norse ashtree, whose
root reaches down to Niflheim. Conf. also Ovid's description of the underworld
(Met. 4, 432 seq.), where * Styx nebulas exhalat iners' fits in with the conception
of Niflheim.

* Quotations in my ed. of the Hymns p. 51. Add Muspilli 5, on which Schm.
quotes a line from Walafrid : ' At secum infelix piceo spatiatur avernoS Eugenius
in Dracont. p. m. 30 : * Ut possim picei poenam vitare barathri. 1



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HELL. 805

Warnung 547 and Wernher v. Niederrh. 4.0, 10; 'die pechwelle/
Anegenge 28, 19. It is a fancy widely scattered over Europe ;
the Mod. Greeks still say irtaaa for hell, as in a proverb of Alex.
Negri : %%ei trUraav koX TrapdBeurov, putting hell and heaven side
by side. This pitchy hell the Greeks seem to have borrowed
from the Slavs, the 0. SI. peklo meant both pitch and hell (Dobr.
instit. 294), so the Boh. peklo, hell, Pol. pielelo, Serv. paTeao,
Sloven, pekel, some masc, some neuter; Lith. pekla (fern.), 0.
Pruss. pickullis (pickullien in the Catechism p. 10 is Ace), the
devil himself is in Lith. pyculas, O. Pruss. pickuls, conf. Rausch
p. 484. The Hungarians took their pokol, hell, from the Slavic,
as our ancestors did 'gaiamna' and 'infern' from Greek and
Latin. And the smela, hell, of the Liineburg Wends seems
allied to the Boh. smola, smula, resin or pitch. With the heat
of boiling pitch was also combined an intolerable stench; Reineke
5918: 'it stank d&r alse dat helsche pek.' Conf. generally En.
2845. 3130 (see Suppl.).

Since the conversion to Christianity therefore, there has clung
to the notion of hell the additional one of punishment and pain :
kvollheimr, mundus supplicii, in SSlarl. 53 (Ssem. 127 a ) is unmis-
takably the christian idea. The OHG. hellaivizi, OS. hellvwiti,
Hel. 44, 17, AS. hellemte, expresses supplicium inferni, conf.
Graff 1, 1117 on wizi, MHG. uAze, MsH. 2, 105 b ; upon it are
modelled the Icel. helviti, Swed. helvete, Dan. helvede, which
mean simply our hell; from the Swedes the converted Finns
received their helwetti (orcus), the Lapps their helvete, and from
the Bavarians the Slov&ns in Carniola and Styria got their vize
(purgatorium), for the Church had distinguished between two
fires, the one punitive, the other purgative, and hanging midway
betwixt hell and heaven. 1

But the christians did not alter the position of hell, it still was
down in the depths of tlie earth, with the human world spread out
above it. It is therefore called abysms (Ducange sub v.), and
forms the counterpart to heaven: 'a coelo usque in abyssum.'
From aby 88H8, Span, abismo, Fr. abime, is to be explained the
MHG. dbis (Altd. bl. 1, 295; in ftbisses grunde, MsH. 3, 167),
later obis, nobis (en &bis, en obis, in abyssum). OS. helligrund,

1 Of one in purgatory the Esthonians say: ta on kahha ilma wahhel, he is be-
ticeen two worlds.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



806 TIME AND WORLD.

Hel. 44, 22 ; in afgrunde g&n, Both. 2334 ; ir verdienet daz af-
grunde, 1970 ; ' varen ter helle in den donhren Jcelre/ dark cellar,
Floris 1257. 1 AS. se neowla grand (imus abyssns), Cedm. 267, 1 .
270, 16; J789t neowle genip (profunda oaligo) 271, 7. 275, 81.
This neowel, niwel (profundus) may explain an expression in the
Frisian Asega-bok (Richth. 130, 10), 'thiu niuent hille/ where a
M. Nethl. text has s de grandiose helle/ bottomless hell. Hell
sinking downwards is contrasted with heaven mounting upwards:
• der himel allez uf g£t, diu helle siget allez ze tal/ Warnung
3375-81 (see SuppL).

It appears that men imagined, as lying at the bottom of our
earth, like a ceiling or grating of the underworld, a stone, called
in MHG. poems dille-stein (fr. dille, diele, deal = tabula, pluteus,
OHG. dil, dili, ON. Jril, Jrili): 'gruebe ioh uf den dille-stein/ if
I dug down to the d., Schmiede (smithy, forge) 33 ; ' des hoehe
viir der himele dach und durch der helie bodem vert,' its height
passes over heaven's roof and through hell's floor, ibid. 1252 ;
' viir der himele dach du blickest, u. durch der helle dillestein [is
not this floor rather than ceiling?]/ MS. 2, 199 b ; 'wan ez kumt
des tiuvels schrei, d& von wir sin erschrecket : der dillestein der
ist enzwei (in-two, burst), die tdten sint uf gewecket/ Dietr.
drachenk. cod. pal. 226*. This makes me think of the ofjufraXk
at Delphi, a conical stone wrapt in net (Gerhard's Metroon p. 29) ,
Btill more of the lapis manalis (Festus sub v.) which closed the
mouth of the EtruBcan rrmndus, and was lifted off on three holy
days every year, so that the souls could mount into the upper
world (Festus sub v, mundus) Not only this pit in the earth,
but heaven also was called mundus, 8 just as Niflheimr is still
a heimr, i.e. a world. And that hell-door (p. 802) is paralleled
by the ' descensus Averni,' the ( fauces grave olentis Averni/ the
r atri janua Ditis' in Virgil's description, Aen. 6, 126. 201 (conf.
helle infart/ Veldeck's En. 2878. 2907); fiiirytales of the Slavs
too speak of an entrance to the lower world by a deep pit,
Hanusch p. 412 (see SuppL).

The mouth or jaws of hell were spoken of, p. 314 ; Hel yawns

1 Does * eggrant ' stand for eck-grunt ? « Das rawer sele komen uzer eggrundej
Cod. pal. 349, 19*.

* Conf. O. MuUer's Etrusker 2, 96-7. The Finn, manala is ' locus subterraneus,
ubi versantur mortui,' sepulorum, oreus, bat derived from maa (terra, mundus),
and only accidentally resembling * manalis. 1



Digitized by VjOOQIC



DILLE-STEIN. MUSPILLI. 807

like her brother Fenrir, and every abyss gapes: 1 os gehermae
in Beda 363, 17 is the name of a fire-spouting well (puteus); 2
in an AS. gloss (Mone 887) muff (os) means orcus. The same
Coll. of glosses 742 puts down se&9 (puteus, barathrum) for hell,
and 2180 ctais for tartarus, 1284 curia-hush, where undoubtedly
we must read cwis-susle. To cwi* I can find no clue but the ON.
qvis calumnia [quiz, tease ? queror, questus ?] ; susl is apparently
tormentum, supplicium, the dictionaries having no ground for
giving it the sense of sulphur (AS. swefel) ; 'susle ge-innod/
Cffidm. 3, 28, 1 take to be supplicio clausum. The notion of the
well agrees remarkably with the fable in the Heinhart, where
the hero having fallen into a well wheedles the wolf into the
bucket ; he pretends he is sitting in parodis down there, only
there is no getting to it but by taking f einen tuk (plunge) in die
helle.' The well easily leads to the notion of bathing : ' ze helle
baden,' MsH. 2, 254* ; for you can bathe in fire and brimstone
too (see Suppl.).

Christian and heathen notions on the punishments of the lost
are found mixed in the SdlarlioS of the Edda, Sram. 128-9.
Snakes, adders, dragons dwell in the christian hell (Caadm.
270-1), as at the Hvergelmir root (p. 796). It is striking how
the poem of Oswald (Haupt's Zeitschr. 2, 125) represents a
dead heathen woman as a she-wolf, with the devils pouring pitch
and brimstone down her throat. Dante in his Purgatorio and
Inferno mixes up what he finds handed down by the Mid. Ages
and classical literature. Bead also the conclusion of Cradmon
(Fundgr. 202); and in the Barlaam 310, Rudolfs brief but
poetic picture of hell 8 (see Suppl.).

That the heathen Mist-world lying far to the north was not
filled with fire, comes out most clearly from its opposite, a Flame-
world in the south (p. 558), which the Edda calls Muspell or
Muspells-heimr. This is bright and hot, glowing and burning,*

1 Wallach. tad (hiatus), iadul hell.
8 As evening is the * mouth of night.'

3 Here we may sum up what living men have reached Hades and come back: of
the Greeks, Orpheus in search of Eurydice; Odysseus; Aeneas. Of Norsemen, Her-
mdflr when dispatched after Baldr, and Hadding (Saxo Gram. p. 16). Medieval
Legends of Brandanus and Tundalus ; that of Tanhauser and others like it shall
come in the next chap. Monkish dreams, visions of princes who* see their ancestors
in hell, are coll. in D.3. nos. 461. 527. 580. 554 ; of the same kind is the vision of
the vacant chair in the Annolied 724, conf. Tundalus 65, 7.

4 Muspellsheimr is not heaven, nor are the sons of Muspell the same as the
light elva that live in heaven (p. 445) ; when Surtr has burnt up heaven and earth,

VOL. II. B B



Digitized by



Google



TIME AND WORLD.

natives alone can exist in it, hence human beings from our world
never pass into it, as into the cold one of the north. It is guarded
by a god (?) named Surtr, bearer of the blazing sword.

In the word Muspell we find another striking proof of the
prevalence of ON. conceptions all over Teutondom. Not only
has the Saxon Heliand a miidspelli 79, 24, mutepelli 133, 4, but
a High German poem, probably composed in Bavaria, has at line
62 muspilli (dat. muspille). Besides, what a welcome support
to the age and real basis of the Edda, coming from Saxon and
Bavarian manuscripts of the 9th cent, and the 8th I Every-
where else the term is extinct: neither Icelanders nor other
Scandinavians understand it, in Anglo-Saxon writings it has
never shewn itself yet, and later specimens of German, High
and Low, have lost all knowledge o£ it. Assuredly a primitive,
a heathenish word. 1

On its general meaning I have already pronounced, p. 601 :
it can scarcely be other than fire, flame. The Heliand passages
tell us : € mudspelles megin obar man ferid/ the force of fire
fareth over men ; ' rrmtspelli cumit an thiustrea naht, al sd thiof
ferid darno mid is dadiun/ fire cometh in dark night, as thief
fareth secret and sudden with his deeds (Matth. 24, 43. 2 Pet.
3, 10) ; and the OHG. poet says : ' dar ni mac denne mak an-
dremo helfan vora demo rntwpille, denna daz preitft wasal (Graff
1, 1063) allaz varprennit, 3 enti viur enti luft allaz arfurpit/ then
no friend can help another for the fire, when the broad shower
of glowing embers (?) burns up all, and fire and air purge
(furbish) everything.

It must be a compound, whose latter half spilli, spelli, spell
we might connect with the ON. spioll (corruptio), spilla (corrum-
pere), AS. spillan (perdere), Engl, spill, OHG. spildan, OS.
spildian (perdere) ; 8 ON. mannspioll is clades hominum, lraspioll
(Nialss. c. 158) perhaps bellum. But we are left to guess what

there lies above this heaven a second, named Andldngr, and above that a third
named Vi&bl&inn, and there it is that light elves alone live now, says Snorri 22.

1 In Nemnich, among the many names given for the bittern (OHG. horotumbil,
onocrotalus, ardea stellaris), there is also muspel, which probably has to do with
moss and moor, not with our word.

2 So I read (trans.) for ' varprinnit ' (intrans.), as * wasal ' cannot otherwise be
explained.

8 OHG. M=ON. II ; conf. « wildi, kold • with « villr, gull.' But then why is it
not muspildi in the OHG. and OS. poems ?



Digitized by VjOOQIC



MUSPEQLI. 809

mud, mu (mu ?) can be, whether earth, land, or else wood, tree.
In the latter case, mudspelli is a descriptive epithet of fire, an
element aptly named ttjp wood-destroying, tree-consuming, as
elsewhere in the Edda it is bani viSar (percussor, inimicus ligni),
grand vi<Tar (perditio ligni), Sn. 126 ; the Lex Alam. 96, 1 has
medela, medula in the sense of lancwitu, lancwit (Gramm. 3, 455),
the Lex Bothar. 305 modula, apparently for qnercus, robur (Graff
2, 707), and the ON. meiffr. (perh. for meySr, as seiSr for sey$r)
is arbor, Lith. medis [Mongol, modd] arbor, lignum. The other
supposition would make it land-destroying, world-wasting ; but
still less do I know of any Teutonic word for land or earth that
is anything like mud or mu. We may fairly regard it as a much
obscured and distorted form; Finn, maa is terra, solum (see
Suppl.). 1

Surtr (gen. Surtar, dat. Surti, S&m. 9*) is the swart, swarthy,
browned by heat, conn, with svartr (niger), yet distinct from it ; s
it occurs elsewhere too as a proper name, Fornald. sog. 2, 114.
Islend. sog. 1, 66. 88. 106. 151.206; and curiously € Surtr enn
hviti,' ibid. 1, 212. But there must have been another form
Surti, gen. Surta, for in both Eddas we meet with the compound
Surtalogi, Sasm. 37 b . Sn. 22. 76. 90. A certain resinous
charred earth is in the North still called Surtarbrcmdr (Surti
titio, Biorn sub v., F. Magn. lex. 730), a mode of naming indica-
tive of a superior being, as when plants are named after gods.
Volcanic rock-caves in Iceland are called Surtarhellir (F. Magn.
lex. 729) ; the Landn&mab6k 3, 10 (Isl. sog. 1, 151) tells how
one Thdrvaldr brought to the cave of the iotunn Surtr a song
composed about him : ' jA for hann upp til hellisins Surts, oc
foBrSi J?ar dr&pu jA, er hann hafSi ort um iotuninn t hellinum ' ;
and Sn. 209 b 210* includes Surtr and Svartr among the names
of giants. Nowhere in the two Eddas does Surtr appear as a

1 Should any one reject these explanations, and take e.g. OS. mudspelli for
* muth-spelhy oris eloquium, or ' mut-sp.,' mutationis nuntius (as I proposed in
Gramm. 2, 525), he is at once met by the objection, that the Bay. poet writes
neither * mund-sp.' nor * muz-sp.,' any more than the OK. has munn-spiall ' or
1 mut-sp.' ; and then how are these meanings to be reconciled with that of ' heimr ' ?
let alone the fact that there is no later (christian) term for the world's end or the
judgment-day pointing at all that way.

3 Surtr might stand related to svartr, as the Goth, name Svartus to the adj.
svarts. Procopius de bello Goth. 2, 15. 4, 25 has a Herulian name Zovoprwas,
Svartva ? The AS. geneaL of Deira has Swearta and Swerting, oonf . Beow. 2406,
and ' sweart racu ' below.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



810 TIME AND WORLD.

god, but always, like other giants, as an enemy and assailant of
the gods. In Voluspfi, 48 (Saem. 8») fire is called ' Surta sefi/
Surti amicus ; and in 52 (Seem. 8 b ) we r^ad :

Surtr fer sunnan me? sviga leifi,
sktn af sverSi sol valtiva,

i.e. Surtus tendit ab austro cum vimine gigas, splendet e gladio
(ejus) sol deorum : f leifi ' is plainly another word for giant, Sn.
209*; 'valtiva' can only be a gen. pi. (conf. S»m. 10* 52*) and
dependent on sol, not gen. sing, of valtivi (which never occurs,
p. 194) dep. on sverSi ; what eta be the meaning here of ' svigi*
(usually twisted band, wisp ?) I cannot say, one would think it
also referred to the brandished sword. Surtr then is expressly
called a giant, not a god. Sn. 5 says : f s& er Surtr nefndr, er
J?ar sitr & landzenda til landvarnar, hann hefir Uganda sver9'>
Surtus vocatur, qui sedet in fine regionis (i.e. Muspellsheims) ad
earn tnendam, ensemque gestat ardentem (see Suppl.).

The authors of the Heliand and the OHG. poem, both christian,
but still somewhat versed in heathen poetry, alike introduce
muspilli at the end of the world, at the approach of the Judgment-
day, when the earth and all it contains will be consumed by fire.
And that is exactly how the Edda describes the same event :
Surtr arises with the sons of muspell, makes war upon all the
gods and overcomes them, the whole world perishes by his fire,
Sn. 5. 73. When he with his blazing brand comes on from the
South, the rocks in the mountains reel, the giantesses flee, men
go the way of the dead, heaven cracks asunder, S»m. 8 b ; the
Ases do battle with Surtr and his host on a holm called
Oskopnir (supra p. 144), they are all slain, and the world comes
to an end (see Suppl.).

It is only the Edda that brings in the name of Surtr; but our
OHG. poetry seems to have interwoven features of him into the
church doctrine about Antichrist, OHG. Antichristo (p. 173-4),
which, originally founded on the 11th chap, of Revelation, was
afterwards worked out further on Jewish-christian lines of
thought. The name occurs in two epistles (1 John 2, 18. 4, 3.
2 John 7), not in the Apocalypse, where he is meant by the
many-headed beast. In his time two prophetic witnesses are to be
sent from heaven to earth, but to be conquered and slain by him.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



MUSPILLI. 811

Their names are not given either ; that they are Enoch and Elias
follows from the power given them to shut heaven that it rain
not, and is expressly acknowledged by the Fathers. 1 Their
bodies lie unburied in the street : after this victory the power of
Antichrist attains its greatest height, until he gets upon the
Mount of Olives, to ascend into heaven ; then the angel Michael
appears, and cleaves his skull. 8

With this narrative our 0. Bavarian poet had become acquainted
through learned men (weroltrehtwisfi), but still the old heathen
pictures of the world's destruction come floating before him as
'maspilli' draws nigh: he makes much of the flames, he sees
the mountains set on fire by the blood of the mortally wounded
Elias dropping on the earth; no such circumstance is found in
any christian tradition. The shy swelters in a blaze (suilizot
lougiil), the earth hums (prinnit mittilagart), and his already
quoted c dar ni mac denne m&k andremo helfan vora demo mus-
pille', supported as it may be by Mark 13, 12. Luke 21, 16,
sounds very like the Eddie

broefcr muno berjaz ok at bonom verSa,

muno systrftngar sifjum spilla,

man ecki ma$r oSrutn }>yrma (S»m. 7 b 8*).

He has € mano fallit/ as Saemund has € sol tekr sortna, hverfa
af himni hetSar stiornur.' Again Sn. 71 : ' J?ft drepaz brcffSr fyrir
&girni sakar, oc engi J^yrmir foftr e$a syn i manndr&pum oc
siQasliti/ 8 So even a MHGk poet of the 12th cent. (Fundgr.
194) : € s6 ist danneniht triuwe diu frowe der diuwe (maid), noch
der man dem wibe ; si lebent alle mit ntde ; s6 hazzet der vater
den sun/ etc. One would like to know what heathen figure



1 Justin Martyr's Dial, cum Tryph. ed. Sylb. p. 208 ; Tertull. de anima cap. 50,
de resurr. carnis cap. 68 ; Hippolytus in A6yos repl rfjs avrreXcias rod k6c^ov kwL rcpl
rod dvrixplaTov ; Dorotheas Tyr. de vita prophet, cap. 18 ; Ambrose on Apocal. cap.
11 ; Aug. de civ. Dei 20, 29 ; Greg. Magn. in moral. 15, 18. And see authors
quoted in Hoffm. Fundgr. 2, 102 seq. and Kausler's Anl. denktn. 1, 486. For later
times, conf. N. ps. 68, 7. 73, 10 ; Burcard. Wormat. 20, 93-7 ; Otto Frising. 8, 1-8;
Discip. de tempore, serm. 10.

1 12-13th cent, accounts of Antichrist in the Hortus delioi. of Herrat of Lands-
berg (Engelhard p. 48) ; in Cod. vind. 653, 121-2 ; Fundgr. 1, 195-6. 2, 106—134 ;
Martina 191 seq.; Wackernag. Basle MSS. 22»; and conf. Introd. to Freidank
bud. lzxii.

8 No stronger argument do I know for the theory that V51usp& is an echo of
our Scriptures, than the agreement of the Edda and the Bible in this particular ; if
only the rest would correspond !



Digitized by VjOOQIC



812 TIME AND WORLD.

Antichristo took the place of to Bavarians and Alamanns, it mast
have been one similar to the Norse Surtr. Antichristo plays the
fiendish hypocrite, Surtr is painted as the adversary of the Ases,
as a giant, and his fire consumes the world. The muspells-synir
are all drawn up in squadrons of light, they and Surtr by their
fighting bring about a higher order of things, while Antichrist is
but transiently victorious, and is finally overthrown by a mightier
power (see Suppl.).

What adds new weight to the whole comparison is the affinity
between Donar and Elias, which was made out on p. 178-4 and
is clear on other grounds. To the 8th cent. Elias might well seem
something more than the Hebrew prophet, viz. a divine hero,
a divinity. The Edda makes all the Ases, Odinn, Thorr, Freyr,
and Tyr, unite their powers to do battle with the sons of fire
and their confederates, yet they are beaten like Enoch and Elias :
Elias bears a marked resemblance to Th&rr (or Donar), Michael
to the queller of Garmr or Fenris-ulfr ; I do not say that Enoch
is equally to be identified with any particular god, but he might.
Surtr with the flaming sword may remind us of the angel that
guards Paradise, but he also finds his counterpart in the story of
Enoch and Elias, for these two, at least in the legend of Brandan
(in Bruns p. 187), have an angel with a fiery sward standing by

their side. 1 An AS. homily De temporibus Antichristi quoted

by Wheloc on Beda p. 495 (supra p. 161n.) contains remarkable
statements. Arrogant Antecrist, it says, not only strives against
God and his servants, but sets himself up above all heathen gods :
' He fchefS hine silfne ofer ealle J?ft J?e hae^ene men cwaadon }>aet
godas beon sceoldon, on hea^ene wisan. Swylc swft w»s Erculus
se ent, and Apollinis, J?e hi maerne god leton, l)hor edc and Eowden,
J?e h&pene men heria$ swifte. Ofer ealle J?»s he hine asnne up
&hef$, forSam he l»t pcet he ana si strengra ponne hi ealle? Why
does the preacher say all this ? Had Saxon songs also identified
the advent of Antichrist with heathen traditions, and recognised
his victory, like that of Surtr, over Wdden and Thunor ? The
un-Saxon forms EowSen and Dh6r indicate Norse or Danish

influence. But a decisive connexion is established by the

AS. Salomon and Saturn (Kemble p. 148) : in the great battle

1 M. Nethl. poems in Blommaert 1, 105». 2, 12 a have simply an * oat man ' in
Enoch's place, but they mention the cherubin med enen swerde vierin.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



MUSPILLI. RAGNA-ROK. 813

between God and Antichrist, we are told, Thunder was threshing
with his fiery axe, f se Thunor hit Jnysce'Smid J?rere Jyrenan cecze,'
by which is unmistakably meant Th&r's Midlnir, the torrida
chalybs (p. 180), and the confluence of heathen beliefs with
those about Antichrist is placed beyond the reach of doubt. The
devil too is called malleus, hammer, chap. XXXIII.

Whoever is inclined to refer the characteristics of our antiquity
as a whole to Roman and christian tradition, could easily take
advantage of this harmony between the two pictures of the world's
destruction, to maintain that the Eddie doctrine itself sprang out
of those traditions of Antichrist. This I should consider a gross
perversion. The Norse narrative is simple, and of one piece with
all the rest of the Edda ; the myth of Antichrist is a jumble, nay
artificially pieced together. The two leading personages, Surtr
and Antichrist, have totally different characters. How should
the Scandinavians have foisted-in a number of significant acces-
sories, notably this of muspell, and again a H. German poet
unconnected in time and place have tacked on the very same ?

What the Edda tells of Surtr and his combat with the Ases is
the winding-up of a fuller representation of the end of the world, 1
whose advent is named aldar rok (S®m. 36 a ), aldar lag, aldar rof
(37 b . 167*),* but more commonly ragna rok (7\ 38 b . 96\ 166 b ) or
ragna rokr (65*. Sn. 30. 36. 70. 88. 165), i.e. twilight, darkening,
of time and the sovran gods (supra p. 26). Rok and rokr both
mean darkness, rok rokra in Seem. 113* is an intensified expres-
sion for utter darkness ; Biorn renders rockur (neut.) crepus-
culum, rockva vesperascere. It is akin to the Goth, riqis o-koto?,
riqtzeine <r/coT€iv6$, riqizjan a/cor^eo-dai, only that is increased
by a suffix -is, and has its radical vowel alien from the Norse o,
which must be a modified a, so that rok stands for raku. This
is confirmed by the Jutish rag nebula, still more by the AS.
racu : € ]?onne sweart racu stigan onginnefc/ Caedm. 81, 34 must
be rendered ' cum atra caligo surgere incipit.' Rbkstolar (S»m.
l b , conf. supra p. 136) are the chairs of mist whereon the gods sit
np in the clouds. To this rok, racu I refer the expression quoted



1 It ia worth noting, that it is proclaimed by prophetesses, Vala, Hyndla ; and
later, Thiota (p. 96) announced consnmmationis seculi diem.

8 Rof ruptura ; as they said * regin riufazj dii rumpuntur, the world is going
to pieces.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



814 TIME AND WORLD.

on p. 753, ' die finstre ragende nacht/ whicli can hardly be ex-
plained from our ragen (rigere) stick out. 1 Ragnarok then is
the night of the gods, which comes over all beings, even the
highest, p. 316 (see Suppl.).

Then the evil beings, long held in check and nnder spell, break
loose and war against the gods: a wolf swallows the snn, another
the moon (p. 705*6), the stars fall from heaven, the earth quakes,
the monstrous world-snake Iormangandr, seized with giant fury
(idtunm&Sr, p. 530), rises out of the waters on to the land,
Fenrisulfr is set free (p. 244), and Naglfar afloat, a ship con-
structed out of dead men's nails. 2 Loki brings up the hrlmthurses
and the retinue of Hel (Heljar sinnar), all the hellish, wolfish kin-
dred have mustered together. But it is from the flame- world
that the gods have most danger to dread : Surtr and his glitter-
ing host come riding over Bifrost the rainbow (p. 732) in such
strength that they break it down. The single combatants are
disposed thus : OSinn fights with Fenrisulfr, Th&rr with Iormun-
gandr, Freyr with Surtr, T^r with Garmr, 8 Heimdall with Loki ;
in every case the old gods go down, though Garmr and Loki fall
too, and Fenrisulfr is slain by VftSar. 4 That Loki and all his kin
should come out as allies to the sons of flame, follows from his



* Pers. rache is said to mean vapour ; may the Sanskr. rajanl (nox) be also
brought in ? The Slay, rok tempus, annus, terminus, fatum, Lith. rakus, is worth
considering ; its abstract meaning may have sprung out of a material one, and fits
in perfectly with the notions of time and world developed on p. 790 [rok, fate, is
from reku, I speak] . Neither rok, rokr, nor riqis has anything to do with our
ranch, reek, ON. reykr. It is not correct for Danish writers to use the form ragna-
rok; ON. rdk must in their dialect be rag (as sdk is sag) ; the OHQ. form of ragna-
rok would be regino-rahha, or -rah, -rahhu, according as it were fern, or neuter.
In Swed. and Dan. the term is extinct, but they both have a word for crepusculum,
Swed. thyam&rker, Dan. tusmorke, which may be from >uss, [>urs, implying an ON.
Jwrtmyrkr, giant's murk, and that would tally with the giant nature qf Surtr.

3 This is intended to express the enormous distance and tardy arrival of the
world's end : before such a vessel can be built of the tiny nail-parings of dead bodies
a longish time must elapse, which is still further protracted by the wholesome pre-
cept, always to pare the nails of the dead before burying or burning them ; oonf. F.
Magnusen's Lex. 520. 820. Not unlike is the image of the mountain of eternity, to
which a bird adds one grain of sand every hundred years.

8 Garmr, the hugest of all hounds (Saem. 46*), no doubt, like Kdppcpos, only
a metamorphosed giant, seems like him also to be a native of the under-world ;
when Oftinn journeys to Niflhel, * moetti hann hvelpi J>eim er or heljo kom,' met he
the whelp that came out of hell (94*) ; he barks long, he lies chained and barks 'for
Gnfoahellir ' (7*. 8*). The hell-hound of christian legend comes nearer the Norse*
wolf (see next note).

4 Vftar's victory over the wolf, in whose jaws he plants a foot mythioally shod
{Sn. 73), resembles the description in christian traditions of how the hell-hound was
assailed ; cent Fundgr. 1, 178-9.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



END OF THE WOBLD. 815

very nature, he being a god of fire (p. 241). After tLe world-
conflagration or Surtahgi, a new and happier earth rises out
of the sea, with gods made young again, but still called Aesir,
Saam. 10 : a finale bearing an indisputable likeness to the Last
Judgment 1 and New Jerusalem of the christians. Strophe 65 of
the Voluspfc, which expressly mentions the regindomr, has been
pronounced an interpolation, because it is wanting in some MSS.;
but interpolation is not a thing to be gauged by the contents
alone, it must be incontrovertibly established by explicit proofs.
Even if it did take place, neither the heathen character of the
myth nor the age of the poem as a whole is thereby brought
under suspicion. For, as the heathen faith among early converted
races was not demolished at a blow, 8 so here and there a chris-
tian dogma may also have penetrated even to nations that were
still heathen; conversely some heathen ways of thinking lingered
on among christians. Consider how the author of the Heliand
(131-2-3), while following the Gospels in describing the approach
of the Last Day, yet admits such rank heathenisms as r Gebanes
strom ' and ' Mudspelli.' In the very personifying of the Judg-
ment day ( ( verit stuatago in lant/ like ' muspelli kumit ') there is
a flavour of heathenism.

There seem to have existed some other traditions about the
world's destruction, which have not come down to us in their
fulness. Among these 1 reckon the folk-tale mentioned on p. 429,
of the ring which the swan will drop from his mouth : it sounds
altogether antique, and possibly harks back to the notion of the
world-ring, p. 794.

To the destruction of the world by fire, which heathens and
christians 3 look forward to as future, stands opposed that by
water, which the histories of both represent as past. The Burn-
ing, like the Deluge (pp. 576 — 81), is not to destroy for ever, but
to purify, and bring in its wake a new and better order of things
(see Snppl.).

1 OHG. antitago, suonotac, tuonotago, tuomutac, tuomtac, stuatago (Goth,
stauadags ?) ; MHG. endetac, stienetac, tuomtac; OS. * the lazto dag,' domdag, domtt-
dag, AS. domdag, Engl, dooms-day, ON. domdagr.

8 In Leyden's Complaynt p. 98 is actually mentioned a story, * the tayl of the
wolfe and the warldis end,' which was current in Scotland and elsewhere (supra
p. 245) as late as the 16th cent. Worth reading is an Ioel. free adaptation of the
Yaticinium Merlini, said to have been composed towards the end of the 12th cent.,
in which are mixed ON. ideas of the world's end, F. Magn. lex. 658-9.

8 2 Pet. 8, 12 ; conf . Freidank 179, 4.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



816 TIME AND WORLD.

The church tradition of the Mid. Ages (based on Matth. 24,
Mark 13, Luke 21) accepts fifteen signs as premonitions of the
Judgment-day ; x these do not include the unearthly winter, fim-
bulvetr, that wind-age (vindold, p. 793, Haupt's Zeitschr. . 7,
309), which according to both Bddas (Sawn. 36 b . Sn. 71) pre-
cedes the ragnarokr, and is doubtless a truly Teutonic fancy ; s
but we have a darkening of the sun and moon described (p. 244),
and an earthquake, which equally precedes the twilight of the
gods : ' griotbiorg gnat a, himinn klofnar, gnyr allr Iotunheimr/
Seam. 8 b ; the ordinary term in ON. is land-skialfti, Sn. 50, or
'iord skalf;' 'landit sk&lf, sem & JnraSi 16ki/ Fornald. sog. 1,
424. 503. 8 For cmoyxo? Ulphilas gives the fem. reiro, he says
<alr}>a reirdida;' OS. 'ertha bivoda,' Hel. 168, 23; OHG. 'erda
bibinotaf 0. iv. 34, 1, and the subst. erdpipa, erdbibunga, erd-
giruornessi. Beinardus 1, 780 puts in juxtaposition : 'nee tremor
est terras, judiciive dies ;' and Servian songs : ' ili grmi, il se
zemlia trese ? ' does it thunder, or does the earth shake ? (Vuk 2,
1. 105). But the earth's quaking, like the Deluge, is oftener
represented as a past event, and is ascribed to various causes.
The Greek fable accounts for it by imprisoned cyclops or titans
(Ov. Met. 12, 521) ; the Norse by the struggles of chained Loki
when drops of poison fall upon his face (Saem. 69. Sn. 70), or by
F&fnir's journey to the water (Fornald. sog. 1, 159. 160). The
earth also quakes at the death of certain heroes, as Heimir (For-
nald. sog. 1, 232), and of the giant (Yilk. saga cap. 176). At
Roland's death there is lightning, thunder and earthquake, Rol.
240, 22. To the Indians the earth quakes every time one of the
eight elephants supporting the globe is tired of his burden, and
gives his head a shake. 4 The Japanese say of an earthquake :
' there is another whale crept away from under our country ;' the



1 Thorn. Aquinas (d. 1274) in Librum 4 sentential. Petri Lomb. dist. 48. qn. 1.
art. 4 (Thomae opp. Venet. 13, 442). Asegabdk (Richth. 130-1). Haupt's Zeitschr.
1, 117. 3, 523. Hoffm. Fundgr. 1, 196-7. 2, 127. Amgb. 39. Wackemagers Basle
MSS. 22b. Massm. denkm. 6. Beroeo (d. 1268) de los signos que aparoeran ante
del Juicio, in Sanchez ooleccion 2, 273. Thomas, Asegabdk and Beroeo all refer to
Jerome, but no such enumeration of the 15 signs is to be found in his works. Rol.
289-90 and Earl 89 s haye similar signs at Roland's death (see Suppl.).

1 Notice Sfflm. 119* : ' NSan koma sniofar ok snarir vindar, 1 and the poeiio de-
scriptions of winter in AS. writers: Andr. 1256-63. Beow. 2268.

8 « Lbnd 611 skulfu,' Sn. 66 ; * fold fdr skialfandi,' 148.

4 Schlegel's Ind. bibl. no. 2.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



EARTHQUAKES. WALAHALLA. 817

Tahitians: 'God Bhakes the earth;' 1 the Lettons: 'Drebkuls beats
the earth, and makes her tremble/ just as the Greeks call their
Poseidon (Neptune) 'Evvoaiycuos, % Evvo<rlhas (see Suppl.).

Our forefathers thought of the sky not only as a roof to the
earth (p. 698), but as a heavenly kingdom, the dwelling-place of
gods and of blessed men whom they had taken up. The bridge
of the heavenly bow leads into it (p. 732), so does the milky way
(p. 356).

We must first suppose all that to have happened which was
told in chap. XIX about the creation of the world according to
ON. views. After the gods had set in order heaven and earth,
created Ask and Embla, and appointed MrSgarS to be the
habitation of man, they fitted up for themselves in the centre
of the world a dwelling-place named Asgarffr, in whose vast ex-
tent however a number of particular spots are specified.

None of these separate mansions is more celebrated than the
Odinic Valholl (OHG. Walahalla?), whose name has an obvious
reference to the god's own appellation of Valfo&r and to the
valhyrs (p. 417).* Into this abode, sometimes known as OSins
salir (Seem. 148 b ), the war-maidens have conducted to him all
the heroes that from the beginning of the world have fallen in
valvy on the battle-field (the v&pn-bitnir, weapon-bitten, Yngl.
saga c. 10) ; these he adopts as children, they are oskasynir, sons
by wishing, ad-option, 8 and likewise sons of the god Wish (p.
143). Their usual name is einherjcur, egregii, divi, as OSinn him-
self is called Herjan and Herjafodr, and fieri means the fighting
hero (p. 342-3). It must not be overlooked, that Th6rr himself
is called an einheri, Saem. 68% as if a partaker of Valholl. From
the existence of a proper name Einheri in OHG. (e.g. Meichelbeck
no. 241. 476. Schannat 137), I argue the former prevalence of
the mythical term amongst us also ; yet not with certainty, as it
may be a contracted form of Eginheri, Aganheri, like Einhart for
Eginhart, Beinhart for Beginhart. Valholl is covered with shields

1 Zimmerm. Tasohenb. f. reisen, jahrg. 9 abth. 2. Adelung's Mithrid. 1, 684.

9 Prob. also to Valaski&lf, the hall covered with silver, Sam. 41 » . Sn. 21 ; conf .
Hliffskidlf, p. 135. Skidlf expresses the quivering motion of the airy mansion,
like bif in Bifrost. Oar OHG. * walaeht des ewigen ltbes,' Is. 73, 4 seems not
merely possessio vita aeternee, bnt an emphatic term purposely chosen.

8 * Got setzet si in sine schOz,' in hid bosom, Ls. 3, 92.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



818 TIME AND WORLD.

(Sn. 2) and numbers 540 doors, each affording passage to 800
einheries at once, or 432,000 in all, Seem. 43*. In the midst of
it stands a mighty tree Ljeraffr, LcerdSr, whose foliage is cropt by
the she-goat HeiSr&n; the goat's udder yields (as Amalthea's
horn did nectar) a barrel ful of mead a day, enough to nourish all
the einheries. The stag Eikfryrnir gnaws the branches of the
tree, and out of his horns water trickles down into Hvergelmir
continually, to feed the rivers of the underworld (pp. 558. 561).

This mansion of bliss all valiant men aspired to, and attained
after death ; to the evildoer, the coward, it was closed l : € mun
sa ma$r braut rekinn ur Valkollu, ok J?ar aldrei koma/ Nialss.
cap. 89. To wage a life-and-death conflict with a hero was
called shewing him to Walhaila (visa til Valhallar), Fornald.
sog. 1, 424. Sagas and panegyric poems paint the reception of
departed heroes in Walhaila : when Helgi arrives, OSinn offers
to let him reign with him, Sram. 166 b ; the moment Helgi has
acquired the joint sovereignty, he exercises it by imposing menial
service on Hundingr, whom he had slain. Thus the distinctions
of rank were supposed to be perpetuated in the future life. On
the approach of Eyrtkr, OSinn has the benches arranged, the
goblets prepared, and wine brought up (Fragm. of song, Sn. 97) ;
Sigmund and Sinfiotli are sent to meet him (Mulleins Sagabibl.
2, 375). The Hakonarmal is a celebrated poem on Hakon's wel-
come in Valholl. Bnt even the hall of a king on earth, where
heroes carouse as in the heavenly one, bears the same name
Yalhbll (Saem. 244*. 246 a anent Atli). The abodes and pleasures
of the gods and those of men are necessarily mirrored in each
other; conf. pp. 336. 393 (see Suppl.).

Indian mythology has a heaven for heroes, and that of Greece
assigns them an elysium in the far West, on the happy isles of
Okeanos ; we may with perfect confidence assert, that a belief in
Walhaila was not confined to our North, bnt was common to all
Teutonic nations. A 'vita Idae* in Pertz 2, 571 uses the ex-
pression 'coelorum palatinae sedes/ implying that a court is
maintained like the king's palatium, where the departed dwell.
Still more to the point is the AS. poet's calling heaven a shield-

1 A 18th cent, poem, to be presently quoted, has already an unmistakable refer-
ence to our tale of the $pielmann or spielhansel (Jack player), who is turned out of
heaven, because he has led a bad life, and performed no deeds.



Digitized by



Google



WALAHALLA. 819

burg, which, like Valholl, was covered with golden shields (p. 700).
In the 'vita Wulframi' there is shewn to the Frisian king Radbot
a house glittering with gold, prepared for him when he dies (D.S.
no. 447. V. d. Bergh's Overlev. 93) ; like that described in MS.
2, 229b :

In himelrich ein hus st&t,

ein guldin wee darin g&t,

die siule die sint mermelin,

die zieret nnser trehttn

mit edelem gesteine.

A poem of the 18th cent. (Warming 2706 — 98) declares that
the kingdom of heaven is to be won by heroes only, who have
fought and bear upon them scars from stress of war (n&ch ur-
liuges not), not by a useless fiddler :

Die herren vermezzen

ze gemache sint gesezzen,

unt ruowent immer m6re

n&ch verendetem s6re.

Versperret ist ir burctor,

beltben miiezen d& vor

die den strit niht en-v&hten

unt der fllihte ged&hten. —

Swft so helde suln beliben

ir herren ir muezet vehten,

welt ir mit guoten knehten

den selben gmach niezen (see Suppl.).

(There men high-mettled to repose are settled, they rest ever-
more from ended sore. Barred is their borough-gate ; and they
without must wait who the fight ne'er fought, but of flight took
thought, etc.)

But another thing must have been inseparable from the heathen
conception, viz. that in Walhalla the goblet goes round, and the
joyous carouse of heroes lasts for ever. 1 Several expressions may

1 The same thought ia strongly expressed in a well-known epitaph :

Wiek, diivel, wiek ! wiek wit van mi (get away from me) !

ik soher mi nig (I care not) en har am di,

ik ben en meklenbnrgsch edelman :

wat geit di diivel min supen an (to do with my quaffing) ?



Digitized by



Google



820 TIME AND WORLD.

be accepted as proofs of this. Glafo-heimr is the name of the
spot on which Yalholl is reared, Seem. 41*; in Gla&sheim stands
the high seat of Allfather, Sn. 14. A house by the side of it,
built for goddesses, bears the name of Vin-golf, but it seems also
to be used synonymously with Yalholl, as one poet sings : ' vildac
gla'Sr i Vingolf fylgja ok me"8 einherjum 61 drecka.' Vingfilf is
literally arnica aula, and it is by the almost identical words win-
burg, win8ele, as well as goldburg, goldsele, that AS. poets name
the place where a king and his heroes drink (Pre?, to Andr. and
El. xxxvii.-viii.). GlaJSsheimr or glaftheimr may mean either
glad, or bright, home ; even now it is common to call heaven a
hall of joy, vale of joy, in contrast to this vale of tears (p. 795),
I do not know if the ancient term mons gaudii, mendelberc (p.
170 n.) had any reference to heaven ; but much later on, a joyful
blissful abode was entitled sseldenbero (Diut. 2, 35), wonnenberg,
freudenberg : ' to ride to the freudenberg at night ' says a Rec.
of 1445 (Arnoldi's Misc. 102); 'thou my heart's freudensaJ,' is
addressed to one's lady love (Fundgr. 1, 335), like the more
usual ' thou my heaven ' ; and in thieves' slang freudenberg and
wonnenberg = doxy. Freuden-thal, -berg, -garten often occur as
names of places (see Suppl.). 1

Let us see how much of these heathen fancies has survived
among christian ones, or found its counterpart in them. The
name Valhdll, Walahalla, seems to have been avoided; winsele
may indeed have been said of heaven, but I can only find it used
of earthly dwellings, C»dm. 270, 21. Beow. 1383. 1536. 1907.
On the other hand our later and even religious poets continue
without scruple to use the term freudensal for heaven, for heavenly

ik sup mit min herr Jesu Christ,

wenn da, diivel, ewig ddrsten miist,

an drink mit en fort koUe sehal,

wenn da sittst in de hdllequal.
This ifl not mere railing, bat the sober earnest of heroes who mean to drink and
hont with Waotan ; conf. Lisoh's Mekl. jahrb. 9, 447.

i Such a land of bliss is part of Celtic legend too, the fay Morgan (p. 412 n.)
conducts to it ; I read in Parz. 56, 18 : den fuort ein feie, hiez Morgan, in Ter de la
schoye (joie; see Suppl.). Remember also the Norse glerhiminn (coelum vitreum),
a paradise to which old heroes ride (Iarlmagus saga p.m. 320-2) ; legends and lavs
have glass-bergs and glass-burgs as abodes of heroes and wise women, e.g. Biynild's
smooth unscalable glarbjerg (Dan. V. 1, 132), and the four gUusbergs in Wolfdiet.
(Cod. Dreed. 289), conf. the Lith. and Pol. glass-mountain of the underworld,
p. 836 n. A glass-house in the air (chateau en Pair) occurs as early as Tristan,
ed. Michel 2, 103, conf. 1, 222



Digitized by VjOOQIC



PARADISE. 821

joy is christian too. Also : { stigen ze himel <if der scelden berc,'
climb tlie mount of bliss, Wackern. Basle MSS. p. 5. The
christian faith tells of two places of bliss, a past and a future.
One is where the departed dwell with God ; the other, forfeited
by oar first parents' sin, is represented as a garden, Eden. Both
are translated Trapaheiao? in the LXX, whence paradisus in the
Vulg.; this is said to be a Persian word, originally denoting
garden or park, which is confirmed by the Armenian bardez
(hortns). The only passage we have the advantage of consulting
in Ulph., 2 Cor. 12, 4, has vaggs, the OHG. wane (campus amoe-
nus, hortus) . Our OHG. translators either retain paradisi, Fragm.
theot. 41, 21, or use wunnigarto, Gl. Jun. 189. 217. Hymn 21,
6. wunnogarto, N. ps. 37, 5 ; conf. * thaz wun?iisama fold/ 0. ii.
6, 11. 'after paradisea,ttnmnen/ Diut. 3, 51. MHG. 'der wunne
garte/ Fuozesbr. 126, 27. ' der wolluste garte/ MsH. 3, 463\
OHG. zartgarto, N. ps. 95, 10. The name wunnigarto may be
substantially the same as vingolf, winsele, as wunna for wunia,
Goth, vinja, lies close to wini (amicus). A strange expression is
the AS. neorxena-wong, neorxnawong, Caddm. 11, 6. 13, 26. 14,
12. 115, 23, of which I have treated in Gramm. 1, 268. 2, 267.

3, 726 ; it is apparently field of rest, 1 and therefore of bliss, and
may be compared to Goth, vaggs, OS. heben-wang, Hel. 28, 21.
176, 1 ; the 'norns' are out of the question, especially as heaven
is never called norna-vangr in ON. poems. Beside hebenwang,
the OS. poet uses odas-hem 96, 20 and 4p-6das-hem 28, 20.
85, 21, domus beatitudinis, the ' hSm ' reminding us of heimr in
gl&Ssheimr, as the ' garto ' in wunnigarto does of asgarftr. Up-
6dash6m is formed like uphimil, and equally heathen. All the
Slavs call paradise rai, Serv. raj, Pol. ray, Boh. rag, to which
add Lith. rojus, sometimes called rojaus sodas (garden of par.),
or simply darzas (garden). Bai as a contraction of paradise
(Span, parayso) is almost too violent ; Anton (Essay on Slavs 1,
35) says the Arabic arai means paradise. 3

Like Valholl, the Greek Elysium too, rjXvaiov irehCov (Plutarch

4, 1156. Lucian de luctu 7) was not a general abode of all the



1 The fat<mi fiwrfi, Od. 4, 665.

9 To me the connexion of rai (and perh. of r&d glad, willing) with pais, #,
MftiOf (/tattio*) easy, and (ttla easily, seems obvious. Homer's gods are fata frbwrcs
living tn ease. — Tbans.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



822 TIME AND WORLD.

dead, but of picked heroes : the Greeks too made the highest
blessedness wait upon the warrior's valour. Neither were all
heroes even admitted there, Menelaos was as son-in-law of Zens,
Od. 4, 569; others even more renowned were housed with
Aides, in Hades. Achilles paces the flowery mead, the awfyoSeho?
\€ifui>v of the underworld, whither Hermes conducts the souls
of the slain suitors, Od. 11, 539. 24, 13. Lucian de luctu 5.
philops. 24.

This i ea* of the blest is no less known to our native song and
story. Children falling into wells pass through green meadows to
the house of friendly Holla. Flore 24, 22 : ' swer im selber den
tot tuot, den geriuwet diu vart, und ist im ouch yerspart diu wise,
dar du koraen wilt, an der Blancheflur spilt (plays) mit andern
genuogen (enow), die sich niht ersluogen;' who slays himself
will rue such journey, to him is eke denied that mead, etc. Ploris
1107: 'int ghebloide velt (flowery field), ten paradise/ 1248:
' waenstu dan comen int ghebloide velt, daer int paradis ? ' 1205 :
' ic sal varen int ghebloide velt, daer Blancefloeren siele jeghen die
mine gadert, ende leset bloemekine.' The French Flores in the
corresponding passages has camp flori (Altd. bl. 1, 373), 1 in
Bekker's ed. of Flore 786. 981. 1026. But our older poets, pro-
bably even those of heathen times, imagined heaven, like the
earth, as a green plain : * teglidid groni wang ' (the earth), Hel.
131, 1 ; 'himilriki, groni Oodes wang ' 94, 24. 'groni wang para-
dise geltc' 96, 15. 'the groneo wang 9 23, 4 is said of Egypt.
Csadm. 32, 29 : ' brade sind on worulde grene geardas.' Hako-
narmal 13 : ' rifta ver nu sculom groma heima go$a/ i.e. to heaven.
In many parts of Germany paradis and goldne aue are names of
places to this day. So viretum in Virgil has the sense of para-
dise, Aen. 6, 638 :

Devenere locos laetos et amoena vireta
fortunatorum nemorum sedesque beatas.

Paradise then is twofold, a lost one, and a future one of the
earth emerging newly green out of the wave: to I&avollr, in
whose grass the gods pick up plates of gold (for play), Saom. 9 b
10*, corresponds that older I&avollr where the ases founded As-

1 The M. NethL poem Beatrts 1037 plaoes the Last Judgment ' int toete ddi,
daer God die werelt doemen sal.'



Digitized by



Google



ELYSIUM. 823

gar?, to the renovated realm of the future a vanished golden age
that flowed with milk and honey (see Suppl.) . l

The younger heaven has in the Edda another name, one pecu-
liar to itself, and occurring only in the dative ' a girrdi/ Seem.
10. b Sn. 4, 75 [but 21 gimli as nom.?], for which I propose a
nom. gimill (not gimlir) standing for himill, a form otherwise
wanting in ON., and = OHG. OS. himil by the same consonant-
change as G^mir for Btymir ; and this is confirmed by the juxta-
position ' & gimli, a himni/ Sn. 75. Now this Qiwiill is clearly
distinct from the Odinio Valhdll : it does not make its appearance
till ragnarokr has set in and the Ases have fallen in fight with the
sons of muspell. Then it is that a portion of the ases appear to
revive or become young again. Baldr and Ho9r, who had gone
their way to the underworld long before the twilight of the gods,
Hoenir who had been given as a hostage to the Vanir, are named
in Voluspa (Seem. 10 b ), as gods emerging anew; they three were
not involved in the struggle with Surtr. Then again Sn. 76
gives ns Vidar and Vali, who nnhurt by Surtalogi revive the old
AsgarS on ESavdllr, and with them are associated Modi and Magni,
beside Baldr and Ho$r from the underworld; Hoenir is here
passed over in silence. VfSar and Vali are the two avengers, one
having avenged OSin's death on Fenrisulf, the other Baldr' s death
on HoSr (hefniass Baldrs d&lgr Ha*ar, Sn. 106). They two, and
Baldr the pure blameless god of light, are sons of OSinn, while
M6$i and Magni appear as sons of Th6rr by a g£gr, and from
that time they bear the emblem of his might, the all-crushing
Miolnir. Unquestionably this means, that OSinn and Th&rr, the
arch-gods of old AsgarS, come into sight no more, but are only
renewed in their sons. Baldr signifies the beginning of a mild
spring time, p. 614 (see Suppl.).

1 It is natural that this paradise, past or to come, should have gjven birth to
various tales of an earthly paradise, lying in regions far away, which has been
reached by here and there a traveller : thus Alexander in his Indian campaign is
said to have arrived at paradise. Not the Eddas themselves, but later Ioel. sagas
tell of Oddins-akr (immortalitatis ager) ; a land where no one sickens or dies, oonf.
diinn mortuus, morti obnoxius (p. 463) ; the Hervararsaga (Fornald. sog. 1, 411.
518) places it in the kingdom of a deified king Oodmundr (conf. GoSormr p. 161) ;
ace. to the Saga Ereks viBfbrla (Fornald. sog. 3, 519. 661-6. 670) it lay in the east,
not far from India. Can this * Erekr hinn vitJfbrli ' be the hero of the lost MHO.
poem Erek der wallsre (pilgrim)? The name OdAmsakr may however be an
adaptation of an older and heathen Otfinsakr-Vallholl, conf. the Odenslker in
Sweden, p. 158, last line.



VOL. II. C

Digitized by



Google



824 TIME AND WOBLD.

Again, as Valholl had only received men who died by weapons
(v&pn-datr$a vera), whilst other dead men were gathered in Folk-
vftngr with Freyja (p. 304), and virgins with Gefjon (Sn. 36) ;
from this time forward CHmill takes in without distinction all the
just, the good, and Hel all the bad, the criminal ; whereas the
former Hel, as a contrast to Valholl, used to harbour all the resi-
due of men who had not fallen in fight, without its being implied
that they were sinners deserving punishment.

The most difficult point to determine is, how matters exactly
stand with regard to Surtr, to whom I must now return. That
he is represented, not as a god, but as a giant of the fire-world,
has been Bhown, p. 809 ; nor is he named among the renovated
gods ' & gimli' in Seem. 10* or Sn. 76, which would have been
the place for it. In one MS. alone (Sn. 75, var. 3) is apparently
interpolated ' & Gimli meffr Surti ; y and it is mainly on this that
Finn Magnusen rests his hypothesis, that Surtr is an exalted god
of light, under whose rule, as opposed to that of OSinn, the new
and universal empire stands. He takes him to be that mightier
one from whose power in the first creation days the warmth
proceeded (p. 562), the strong (oflugr) or rich one revealed by the
vala, who shall direct all things (all er ollu raftr, S®m. 10 b ), like-
wise the mighty one foreseen by Hyndla, whose name she dare
not pronounce Q?& kemr annar enn m&ttkari, ]>6 j>ori ec eigi ]>ann
at nefna, Seem. 119*) ; conf. the strengra of the AS. homily (p.
812). But why should she have shrunk from naming Surtr, of
whom no secret is made in Seem. 8*- b . 9\ 33*, the last passage
positively contrasting him with the mild merciful gods (in sv&so
go$) ? The invasion of Surtr in company with the liberated Loki
must anyhow be understood as a hostile one (of giant's or devil's
kin) ; his very name of the swart one points that way.

The unuttered god may be likened to the Srfvoxrro^ Oeo? (Acts
17, 23), still more to the word that OSinn whispered in the ear
of his son Baldr's corpse, as it ascended the funeral pile : a secret
which is twice alluded to, in SsDm. 38* and Hervarars. p. 487 ; so
an Etruscan nymph speaks the name of the highest god in the
ear of a bull. 1 It has already been suggested (p. 815) that
presentiments of a mightier god to come may have floated before

■ 1 0. Muller'a Etr. 2, 83, with which mast be conn, the medieval legend of
Silvester (Conrad's poem, pref. p. xx).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SUKTR. 825

the heathen imagination, like the promise of the Messiah to the
Jews. 1

The world's destruction and its renewal succeed each other in
rotation; and the interpenetration of the notions of time and
space, world and creation, with which I started, has been proved.
Further, as the time-phenomena of the day and the year were
conceived of as persons, so were the space-phenomena of the
world and its end (Halja, Hades, Surtr).



1 Martin Hammerich om Bagnaroks-mythen, Oopenh. 1836, argues plausibly
that the twilight of the gods and the new kingdom of heaven are the expression of
a spiritual monotheism opposed, though as yet imperfectly, to the prevailing Odinio
paganism. But then there are renovated goda brought on the scene ' & gimli ' too,
though fewer than in AsgarS, and there is nothing to shew their subordination to
the mighty One. Still less do I think the author entitled to name this new god
finibuLtyr, a term that in the whole of the Edda occurs but once (Sam. 9 b ), and then
seems to refer to OSinn. Others have ventured to identify the word fimbul- (which
like the prefix irman-, heightens the meaning of a word, as in fimbulfambi, fimbul-
J>ulr, fimbulvetr, fimbulliotf, as well as fimbultyr) with the AS. ftfel (p. 239) ; to
tnis also I cannot assent, as ftfill itself occurs in ON., and is cited by Bidrn as
the name of a plant.



Digitized by



Google



CHAPTER XXVI.
SOULS.

Languages treat the living life-giving soul as a delicate feminine
essence : Goth, s&ivala, akin to saivs the sea, an undulating fluid
force, OHG. seola, sela, MHG. sele, NHG. seele, AS. sdwl, ON.
sal, Swed. Dan. sjal, and hence Finn, sielu; Gr. ^vxv> kat. Ital.
anima, Fr. dme, 0. Fr. sometimes arme, Span, alma; Buss. Serv.
dvsha, Slov. duzha, Boh. dude, Pol. dusza, Lith. duszia, Lett.
dwehsele. They all distinguish it from the masc. breath and
spirit, aveftos, which goes in and out more palpably ; often the
two names are next door to each other, as Lat. animus and
anima, Slav, chikh and dusha. 1

And this intimate connexion may be recognised in the myths
too. The soul freed from the fetters of the body is made to re-
semble those airy spirit forms of chap. XVII (conf. pp. 439.
630} . It hovers with the same buoyancy, appears and vanishes,
often it assumes some definite shape in which it is condemned
to linger for a time (see Suppl.).

It is a graceful fancy which makes the departing soul either
break into blossom as a flower, or fly up as a bird. Both these
notions are connected with metamorphosis into plants and animals
in general, and are founded on the doctrine of metempsychosis
so prevalent in early antiquity. Immortality was admitted in this
sense, that the soul still existed, but had to put up with a new
body.

Its passing into a flower I can only infer. A child carries
home a bud, which the angel had given him in the wood ; when
the rose blooms, the child is dead (Kinder-leg. no. 3). In Rhesas
dainos p. 307, a rosebud is the soul of the dead youth. The Lay
of Runzifal makes a blackthorn shoot up out of the bodies of slain
heathens, a white flower by the heads of fallen christians, Earl

1 Where soul stands for life, vitality, a neuter word is used, OHG. ferah, MHG.
verch, AS. feorh, ON. fidr ; but we saw (p. 793), how from vita and plot there arose
the sum total of all that lives, the world, Goth, fafrhvos.

888



Digitized by VjOOQIC



THE SOUL A FLOWER. 827

118 b . When the innocent are pat to death, white liiies grow ont
of their graves, three lilies on that.of a maiden (Uhland's Volksl.
241), which no one but her lover may pluck \ from the mounds
of buried lovers flowering shrubs spring up, whose branches
intertwine. In Swedish songs lilies and limes grow out of graves,
Sv. vis. 1, 101. 118. In the ballad of 'fair Margaret and sweet
William' :

Out of her brest there sprang a rose,

And out of his a briar ;

They grew till they grew unto the church-top,

And there they tyed in a true lovers knot. 1

In Tristan and Isote I believe it to be a later alteration, that the
rose and vine, which twine together over their graves, have first
to be planted. In a Servian folksong there grows out of the
youth's body a green fir (zel6n bor, m.), out of the maiden's a red
rose (rumena ruzhitsa, f.), Vuk 1, no. 137, so that the sex is kept
up even in the plants : * the rose twines round the fir, as the silk
round the nosegay. All these examples treat the flower as a
mere symbol, or as an after-product of the dead man's intrinsic
character : the rose coming up resembles the ascending spirit of
the child ; the body must first lie buried, before the earth sends
up a new growth as out of a seed, conf. chap. XXXVII. But
originally there might lie at the bottom of this the idea of an
immediate instantaneous passage of the soul into the shape of a
flower, for out of mere drops of blood, containing but a small
part of the life, a flower is made to spring : the soul has her seat
in the blood, and as that ebbs away, she escapes with it. Greek
fables tell us how the bodies of the persecuted and slain, espe-
cially women, assumed forthwith the figure of a flower, a bush, a
tree (p. 658), without leaving any matter behind to decay or be
burnt ; nay, life and even speech may last while the transforma-
tion is taking place. Thus Daphne and Syrinx, when they
cannot elude the pursuit of Apollo. or Pan, change themselves
into a laurel and a reed ; the nymph undergoing transformation
speaks on so long as the encrusting bark has not crept up to

1 Peroy 8, 123 ; variant in Bob. Jamieson 1, 88-4.

8 Therefore der rebe (vine) belongs to Tristan's grave, diu rfae to Isote's, as in
Eilhart and the chap-book ; Ulrich and Heinrich made the plants change places.



Digitized by *



loogle



828 souls.

her mouth. * Vintler tells us, the wege-ivcvrte (OHG. wegawartft,
wegapreiiA), piantago, was once a woman, who by the wayside
waited (wartete) for her lover; he suggests no reason for the
transformation, conf. Kinderm. no. 160 (see Suppl.).

In the same way popular imagination, childlike, pictures tbe
soul as a bird, which comes flying out of the dying person's
mouth. That is why old tombstones often have doves carved on
them, and these the christian faith brings into still closer prox-
imity to spirit. 1 A ship founders : the people on shore observe
the souls of those who have Bunk ascending from the wave to-
ward heaven in the shape of white doves. 9 The Romance legend
of the tortured Eulalia says: 'in figure de colomb volat a ciel/ As
a bird the little brother, when killed, flies out of the juniper-tree
(machandelbom, Kinderm. 47). To the enigma of the green tree
and the dry, each with a little bird sitting on it, the interpretation
is added : ' ir sele zen vogelen si gezalt ! ' their (the christians')
soul be numbered among birds, MS. 2, 248 b . In the underworld
there fly scorched birds who were souls (svi'Snir fuglar er s&lir
voro), like swarms of flies, Sffim. 127\ The heathen Bohemians
thought the soul came out of the dying lips as a bird, and hovered
among the trees, not knowing where to go till the body was
buried ; then it found rest. Finns and Lithuanians call the Milky-
way the path of birds (p. 35 7n.), i.e. of souls.

The Arabs till the time of Mahomet believed that the blood of
a murdered man turns into an accusing bird, that flits about the
grave till vengeance be taken for the dead.

According to a Polish folk-tale every member of the Herburt.
family turns into an eagle as soon as he dies. The first-born
daughters of the house of Pileck were changed into doves if they
died unmarried, but the married ones into owls, and to each
member of the family they foretold his death by their bite (Woy-
cicki's Klechdy 1, 16). When the robber Madej was confessing
under an appletree, and getting quit of his sins, apple after apple
flew up into the air, converted into a white dove : they were the
souls of those he had murdered. One apple still remained, the

1 Servati Lupi vita S. Wigberhti, cap. 11 : Verum hora exittts ejus . . .
circumstantibus fratribus, visa est avis quaedam specie pulcherrima supra ejus cor-
pusculum ter advolcuse, nusquamque postea comparoisse. Not so much the soul
itself, as a spirit who escorts it.

2 Maerlant 2, 217, from a Latin source.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



THE SOUL A BIRD. MEADOW. 829

soul of his father, whose murder he had suppressed; when at
length he owned that heinous crime, the last apple changed into
a gray dove, and flew after the rest (ibid. 1, 180). This agrees
with the unresting birds of the Boh. legend. In a Podolian folk-
song, on the grave-mound there shoots up a little oak, and on it
sits a snow-white dove (ibid. 1, 209) . l

Instances of transformation into birds were given above,
(pp. 673-6. 680), under woodpecker and cuckoo. Greek mythology
has plenty of others (see Suppl.).

The popular opinion of Greece also regarded the soul as a
winged being (^v^V irvevfia teal fav<f>t,ov irr t qv6v % says Hesy-
chius), not bird, but butterfly, which is even more apt, for the
insect is developed out of the chrysalis, as the soul is out of the
body; hence ^vxv i* also the word for butterfly. A Roman
epitaph found in Spain has the words : M. Porcius M. haeredibus
mando etiam cinere ut meo volitet ebrius papilio? In Basque,
'arima' is soul (conf. arme, alma, p. 826), and 'astoaren arima'
(ass's soul) butterfly. We shall come across these butterflies
again as will o' the wisps (ziebold, vezha), and in the Chap, on
Witches as elvish beings (see Suppl.).

When men are in a trance, or asleep, the soul runs out of them
in the shape of a snake,weasel or mouse (chap. XXXIV and Suppl.) .

Of will o* the wisps a subsequent chapter will treat ; synony-
mous with them I find wiesenkupfer, wiesenhiipferin, meadow-
hopper, e.g. in the Magdelob (printed 1688) p. 46; its explana-
tion, from their dancing on marshy meadows, is right enough,
but perhaps too limited. Hans Sachs is not thinking of ignes
fatui, when he more than once employs the set phrase : ' mit im
schirmen, dass die seel in dem gras umbkupfen,' fence with him
till their souls hop about in the grass iii. 3, 13*. iv. 3, 28*. ' und
schmitz ihn in ein flderling, dass sein seel muss im gras umbhupfeiu'
iv. 3, 51 b ; he simply means that the soul flies out of him, he
dies. Therefore the same superstition again, that the soul of
the dying flutters (as bird or butterfly) in the meadow, i.e. the

1 Na tej mogile wyr6et ci dabeczek,
na niej bieluchny siada gotatoozek.

3 \jmx*I 8* & trd/MTot (mf, flew out of the body, Batraoh. 207. rfrvxb & fUkto*
iitomi 211. ix peXiw Ovfibs wrdro, U. 28, 880.

3 First in Ambr. de Morales' s Antiguidades de las ciudades de Espana, Alcala
1575, fol. 81 b ; thence in Grater, and in Spoil's Miscell. erud. antiq. p. 8.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



'830 souls.

meadow of the underworld spoken of in p. 822. 1 Just so the
Bohemians make the soul fly about in trees, Koniginh. hs. p. 88.
106; hence both Souls and elves dance to and fro in the
meadows at night. Strange, that a minnesanger already makes
the soul of a drunken (as if entranced) man jump : € min sele Af
eime rippe st&t, w&fen ! diu yon dem wine darfif gehuppet h&t >
(MS. 2, 105 b ).* So the souls of the drowned keep jumping up
out of the jars, p. 496 (see Suppl.). Shooting stars are supposed
to be the souls of dying men (p. 722) ; not only heroes and
other men, but separate limbs of their bodies were fixed in the
sky as stars, chap. XX II.

These are the simplest (if you will, rudest) notions as to the
nature of the soul, and to them I ascribe a high antiquity.

More polished, more deeply rooted in ancient myths, is the
opinion of the soul's passage into the domain of the underworld
across a water which divides the realm of living men from that of
the dead.

The Norse narrative of the death of Baldr has the remarkable
incident, that the &ses placed his body on board a vessel, in which
they erected the funeral pile, set it on fire, and so committed it to
the sea at high water (Sn. 66) . 8 In the same way the corpse of
the deified hero Scild (p. 369) is adorned and carried into a ship,
which drifts away on the sea, nobody knows whither, Beow. 55 —
105, Sigmundr bears the body of his beloved son Sinfiotli to
the seashore, where a stranger waits with a skiff, and offers



1 Those who are neither saved nor damned come into the green meadow,
Heinse's Ardinghello 1, 96.

* Ooaf. Helbl. 1, 854 : * vrou SeU, tretet Of ein rippe, 9 Benart in his bucket
at the bottom of the well (p. 807), to humbug Ysengrin, pretends he is living in
paradise there, and that every soul, on parting from the body, has to sit on the
bucket-pole till it is penitent, then it may climb down, and leave all its ills behind,
Benart 6804-18.

* What deep root this custom had taken in the North, may be gathered from
the fact that bodies were also buried in a boat [on land] , doubtless so that on their
journey to the underworld, when they came to a water, they might have their ferrj*
at hand. ' H&kon konungr tok J>ar skip Ml et 6tt hOtfSo Eiriks synir, ok l§t draga
& land upp ; J>ar ldt H&kon leggja Egil Ullserk i ikip, oo mett h&nom alia >& menu
er af )>eirra lrSi hoftfo fallit, \fa beta f>ar at i&rti oc griot. H&kon konungr l£t oc
fieiri skip uppsetja, oc bera & valinn,' Saga H. gofla, cap. 27. ' Unnr var V6gS t
skip t hauginum,' Lazd. p. 16. ' Asmundr var heygffr ok t skip lag&r, J>r»U nana
lagtfr t annan stafn ekiptins? I&lend. s6g. 1, 66. * Geirmundr heygffr ok lagffr i skip
fair utf skdginn fra garui,' ibid. 1, 97. Probably the bodies of the great were first
laid in a coffin, and this put in the boat, which was then buried in the hill. Gudrnn
says : * kn'&r mun ek kaupa ok kisto steintta,' 8®m. 264 b . No boats have been
found, that I know of, in ancient barrows of Continental Germany.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CROSSING THE WATER. 831

a passage ; Sigmundr lays Hie dead in the boat, which has then
its fall freight, the unknown pushes off and sails away with the
corpse, Sam. 170-1. Fornald. sog. 1, 142. Frotho's Law p. 87
lays down distinctions of rank : ' Centurionis vel satrapae corpus
rogo propria nave constructs funerandum constituit ; dena autem
gubernatorum corpora unius puppis igne consumi praecepit;
ducem quempiam aut regem interfectum proprio injectum navigio
concremari.' The dead Iarlm&gus is conveyed in a ship by his
widow to a holy land, Iarlm. saga cap. 45. A Swedish folk-tale
(Afzelius* 1, 4) speaks of a golden ship lying sunk near the
schliisselberg at Bunemad; in that ship Odin is said to have
carried the slain from Bravalla to Valhall. In the 0. Pr. romance
of Lancelot du lac, ed. 1591, p. 147 the demoiselle d'Escalot
arranges what is to be done with her body : ' le pria, que son
corps fut mis en une nef richement equipp6e, que Von laisseroit
oiler an gre du vent sans conduite. } x And in the romance of
Gawan a swan tows a boat in which lies a dead knight (Keller's
Romvart 670). Was it believed that the corpse, abandoned to
the sacred sea and the winds, would of itself arrive at the land
of death that was not to be reached under human guidance ?

Here it is the corpse that is transported, in other legends
merely the soul when released from the body : it is over again
the distinction we noticed above, p. 827. In the Nialss. cap.
1 60, old Flosi, weary of life, is even said to have taken a battered
boat, and thrown himself on the mercy of the sea- waves : f bar &
skip ok 16t i haf, ok hefir til }>ess skips aldri sport sJSan/ never
heard of since.

The Greeks believed that Charon ferried the souls in a narrow
two- oared boat over the Styx, Acheron or Cocytus to the kingdom
of Hades. For this he charged a fare, ra iropOfiia, therefore
they placed an obolos (the danaka) in the mouth of the dead. 2
This custom of putting a small coin in the mouth of a corpse
occurs among Germans too, Superst. I, 207 where a modern and



1 Cento novelle„antiche 81 : La damigella di Soalot ; the ' navicella sanza Tela,
sanza remi e sanza neuno sopra sagliente * is carried down to Camalot, to the court
of Be Artti.

8 Diodor. 1, 90. Eurip. Ale 258. 441. Aen. 6, 298. At Hermione in Argolis,
snpposed to be no great distance from the underworld, no money was given to the.
dead, Strata 8, 378. These coins are often found in ancient tombs, K. Fr.
Hermann's Antiq. 198.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



832 souls.

mistaken reason is alleged for it [lest they come back to visit
buried hoards] : originally the money could be no other than that
same nanlum.

One stormy night a monkish figure wakes a boatman who lies
buried in sleep, puts passage-money in his hand, and demands to
be taken across the river. At first six monks step into the boat,
but no sooner is it fairly launched, than suddenly it is filled by
a throng of friars black and white, and the ferryman has scarcely
room left for himself. With difficulty he rows across, the
passengers alight, and a hurricane hurls the ferryboat back to
the place of starting, where another set of travellers wait and
take possession of the boat, the foremost of whom with fingers
cold as ice presses the fare-penny into the boatman's hand. The
return voyage is made in the same violent way as before. 1 The
like is told, but less completely, of monks crossing the Rhine at
Spire. 8 In neither story can we detect the purpose of the
voyage; they seem to be early heathen reminiscences, which,
not to perish entirely, had changed their form (see Suppl.).

Procopius de bello Goth. 4, 20 (ed. Bonn. 2, 567), speaking of
the island of Brittia, imparts a legend which he had often heard
from the lips of the inhabitants. They imagine that the souls
of the dead are transported to that island. On the coast of the
continent there dwell under Prankish sovereignty, but hitherto
exempt from all taxation, fishers and farmers, whose duty it is
to ferry the souls over? This duty they take in turn. Those to



1 Nene volksmarchen der Deutschen, Leipz. 1792. 3, 45-7.

2 D.S. do. 275 ; earliest auth. an account by Geo. Sabinus (b. 1508 d. 1560).
Melander's Joe. no. 664.

3 TA fter dXXa */k£t7«i» kot^kooi 6Vrcf, <j>4pov fiirroi dTaywyip obberurrart
irapaoxfacvoi, wpetfxdvov airroU iic vaXcuov rovbe rod Aglow, inrwpylas rtrbs, &s Qaatr,
frexa. X4yov<n 61 ra&rg Wpunroi £k veptrporift ivucei<r6ai r&s tG>¥ jfryxQr vapavo/Avb,s
<t4>Icl On this passage and one in Tzetzes, consult Welcker in Rhein. mus. 1, 238
seq. Conf. Plutarch de defeotu oracul. cap. 18 (ed. Keiske 7, 652) :'OW Arffi^rpiot
?<py r&v repl r^v Bperawlay trf)<ruy etvcu toXX&i ipfjfiovs <nropd&at, &* iwlas fatpoVur
Kal ijptlxjy bpofJuxfeaBcu, rXevaax be airrbs Urroplas Kal 64*s treica, ropirff tov /ScurtXtas, eh
rty iyyurra KeifUvqp ruv ifrf)fxuv, tya/wra* ov roKXobs hroucovvrat, Upobt be Kal doifXovs
voptcls i/rb rQv Bperayp&p 6Vra$. dfucofUrov 5* airrov rewrrl, vtiyxwi* fieydXijv repl
rbv dipa Kal Suxnjfxelas voXX&s ycvivdai, Kal Tvctfiara Karaftfiayrpcu. xal reaeir
Tprjcrfjpas. ircl 6° cXctyiprc, Xiyew rods prfciwras, &ri tup Kpetaffbma* riwbs ftrXet^tj
yeywev, &s yb.p \i%¥os &vairr6/xevoi <p$vat barb* o&ber *x«, afkwvtyievot be roXXtfs
Xvrrjpbs £<mv, oOtws al fieyaXat ^vxal rb.s pev &vakdpuft€is e&fureis Kal dXt/xow txovtrw,
al be o-pfoeis ainCov koX tpBopal roWdias /i£r, ws wwL, rrev/xara xal ftiXat rperowri 9
roXXaKis be XoLfuicoU radeffi* &4pa tpap/xdrTowtp. 4kci fUrroi pdar eZrat wipoy, iv jj rbv
KpSvov KareipxBai <ppovpovpL€vor (nrb rod BpuLptta KaBevborra. beapubv yap a&rif rbar
ihrvor pLepqxavyffBai, roXXods be repl aifrbv etrcu balpwas drabote xal Beparorras, This



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CROSSING THE WATER. 833

whom it falls on any night, go to bed at dusk; at midnight they
hear a knocking at their door, and muffled voices calling. Im-
mediately they rise, go to the shore, and there see empty boats,
not their own but strange ones, they go on board and seize the
oars. When the boat is under way, they perceive that she is laden
choke-full, with her gunwales hardly a finger's breadth abovo
water. Yet they see no one, and in an hour's time they touch
land, which one of their own craft would take a day and a night
to do. Arrived at Brittia, the boat speedily unloads, and be-
comes so light that she only dips her keel in the wave. Neither
on the voyage nor at landing do they see any one, but they hear
a voice loudly asking each one his name and country. Women
that have crossed give their husbands' names.

Procopius's Brittia lies no farther than 200 stadia (25 miles)
from the mainland, between Britannia and Thule, opposite the
Rhine mouth, and three nations live in it, Angles, Frisians and
Britons. By Britannia he means the NW. coast of Gaul, one
end of which is still called Bretagne, but in the 0th century
the name included the subsequent Norman and Flemish- Frisian
country up to the mouths of Scheldt and Rhine ; his Brittia is
Great Britain, his Thule Scandinavia.

Whereabouts the passage was made, whether along the whole
of the Gallic coast, I leave undetermined. Yillemarqu^ (Barzas
breiz 1, 136) places it near Raz, at the farthest point <3f Armorica,
where we find a bay of souls (baie des &mes, bo6 ann anavo).
On the R. Treguier in Bretagne, commune Plouguel, it is said
to be the custom to this day, to convey the dead to the church-
yard in a boat, over a small arm of the sea called passage de
Venfer, instead of taking the shorter way by land; besides, the
people all over Armorica believe that souls at the moment of
parting repair to the parson of Braspar, whose dog escorts them
to Britain : up in the air you hear the creaking wheels of a
waggon overloaded with souls, it is covered with a white pall,
and is called carr an ancou, carrilcel an ancou, soul's car (M6m.
de l'acad. celt. 3, 141). Purely adaptations to suit the views of
the people. As christians, they could no longer ferry their dead

Kronos asleep on the holy island far away, with his retinae of servants, is like
a Wnotan enchanted in a mountain, conf. Humboldt in Herm. Muller p. 440-1.
Welcker's Kl. schr. 2, 177.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



834 souls.

to the island : well, they will take them to the churchyard by
water anyhow; and in their tradition they make the voyage
be performed no longer by ship, bnt through the air (as in the
case of the Furious Host), and by waggon. Closer investigation
must determine whether similar legends do not live in Normandy,
Flanders and Friesland. Here I am reminded once more of old
Helium and Hel-voet, pp. 815 n. 804.

Procopius's account is re-affirmed by Tzetzes (to Lycoph. 1204)
in the 12th century; but long before that, Claudian at the be-
ginning of the 5th (in Rufinum 1, 123 — 183) had heard of those
Gallic shores as a trysting-place of flitting ghosts :

Est locus, extremum qua pandit Gallia littus,
oceani praetentus aquis, ubi fertur Ulixes
sanguine libato populum movisse silentem.
Ulic umbrarum tenui stridore volantum
flebilis audit ur questus : simulacra coloni
pallida, defunctasque vident migrare figuras ;

and not far from that region are Britain, the land of the Senones,
and the Rhine. This faint murmur of the fleeting shades is
much the same thing as the airy waggon of the Bretons. The
British bards make out that souls, to reach the underworld, must
sail over the pool of dread and of dead bones, across the vale of
death, into *the sea on whose shore stands open the mouth of
hell's abyss 1 (see Suppl.). A North English song, that used to
be sung at lykewakes, names 'the bridge of dread, no brader
than a thread/ over which the soul has to pass in the under-
world (J. Thorns' Anecd. and trad. pp. 89. 90). The same
bridge is mentioned in the legend of Tundalus (Hahn's ed. pp.
49. 50) : the soul must drive a stolen cow over it. 8

The same meaning as in the voyage of souls over the gulf or

] Owen's Diet. 2, 214. Villemarque* 1, 135.

9 The narrow bridge is between purgatory and paradise, even Owain the hero
had to cross it (Scott's Minstr. 2, 360-1). In striking harmony with it (as supra
p. 574) is a Mahom. tradition given in Sale's Koran (ed. 1801, introd. 120) : in
the middle of hell all souls must walk oyer a bridge thinner than a hair, sharper
than the edge of a sword, and bordered on both sides by thorns and prickly shrubs.
The Jews also speak of the hell-bridge narrow as a thread, but only unbelievers
have to cross it (Eisenmenger 2, 258) ; conf. Thorns p. 91. Ace. to Herbelot, the
Mahometans believe that before the judgment-day they shall pass over a redhot
iron rod, that spans a bottomless deep ; then the good works of each believer will
put themselves under his feet.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



BRIDGE. HELL-SHOE. 835

river of the underworld appears to lie in their walking the bridge
tluit spans the river. The bridge-keeper's words to (the living)
Herm63r are remarkable : ' my bridge groans more beneath thy
single tread, than under the five troops of dead men who yesterday
rode over it/ Sn. 67. I see in this a very strong resemblance to
the soft patter of the dwarfs? feet on the bridge when quitting the
country, as also their ferrying over by night (pp. 275. 459) ; and
the affinity of souls with elvish beings comes out very plainly.
When the dwarfs moved out of Voigtland, they were a whole
night crossing the Elster (Jul. Schmidt p. 143-8). At their de-
parture from the Harz, it was agreed that they should pass over
a narrow bridge at Neuhof, each dropping his toll-money in a
vessel fixed upon it, but none of the country folk were to be
present. Prying people hid under the bridge, and heard for
Iwurs their pit-a-pat, as though a flock of sheep were going over
(Deut. sagen no. 152-8). The bridge-toll brings to mind the ferry-
money of souls. With all this compare the story of the elf making
his passage in a boat by night (D.S. no. 80). Then again 'the
bridge of dread no brader than a thread y is a kindred notion,
which moreover connects itself with the iron sword- bridge
crossed by the soul that has crept out of a sleeping man (see
SuppL).

A minute examination of the various funeral ceremonies of
European nations, which is no part of my purpose here, would
throw some more light on the old heathen views as to the nature
of the soul and its destiny after death. Thus the dead, beside
the passage-money and the boat, had a particular shoe called
todtenschuh, ON. hel-sko, given them for setting out on their
journey, and tied on their feet. The Gisla Surssonarsaga says :
' j>at er tlftska at binda monnum helskd, sem menn skulo & g&nga
til Valhallar, ok mun ek Vesteini }>at giora' (conf. Miiller's
Sagabibl. 1, 171). Sir W. Scott in Minstr. 2, 357 quotes a
Yorkshire superstition : ' They are of beliefe, that once in their
lives it is good to give a pair of new shoes to a poor man, foras-
much as after this life they are to pass barefoote through a great
lawnde fall of thornes and furzen, except by the meryte of the
almes aforesaid they have redeemed the forfeyte ; for at the edge
of the launde an oulde man shall meet them with the same shoes
that were given by the partie when he was lyving, and after he

Digitized by VjOOQIC



836 souls.

hath shodde them, dismisseth them to go through thick and thin,
without scratch or scalle.' The land to be traversed by the sonl
is also called whinny moor, i.e. furzy bog (Thorns 89). In Henne-
berg, and perhaps other places, the last honours paid to the dead
are still named todtensehuh (Beinwald 1, 165), though the practice
itself is discontinued ; even the funeral feast is so denominated.
Utterly pagan in character, and suited to the warlike temper of
old times, is what Burkard of Worms reports p. 195 c : Quod
quidam faciunt homini occiso, cum sepelitur : dant ei in manum
unguentum quoddam, quasi illo nnguento post mortem vulnus
sanari possit, et sic cum unguento sepeliunt. 1 For a similar
purpose, slaves, horses, dogs were burnt with a dead man, that he
might use them in the next world. King Ring had king Harald
buried in a great barrow, his horse killed that he had ridden in
Br&valla fight, and his saddle buried with him, so that he could
ride to Walhalla. It was thought that to convey the corpse by
any road but the traditional one (the hellweg, p. 801) was bad
for the soul of the deceased, Ledebur's Archiv 5, 369 (see
Suppl.).

The poems of the Mid. Ages occasionally describe a conflict
of angels and devils round the parting soul, each trying to take
possession of it. At the head of the angels is an archangel,
usually Michael, who, as we shall see in chap. XXVIII, has also
the task of weighing souls ; sometimes he is called Cherubim :
' vor dem tievel nam der s61e war der erzengel Kerubinf he saw
the soul first, Wh. 49, 10.

L&z& l&z& tengeln !

d& wart von den engeln

1 The Lithuanians bury or bum with the dead the claws of a lynx or bear, in
the belief that the soul has to climb up a steep mountain, on which the divine judge
(Kriwe Kriweito) sits : the rich will find it harder to scale than the poor, who are
unburdened with property, unless their sins weigh them down. A wind wafts the
poor sinners up as lightly as a feather, the rich have their limbs mangled by a
dragon Wizunas, who dwells beneath the mountain, and are then carried up by
tempests {Woyoioki's Elechdy 2, 134-5. Narbutt 1, 284). The steep hill is called
Anajielas by the Lithuanians, and szklanna gora (glass mountain) by the Poles, who
think the lost souls must climb it as a punishment, and when they nave set foot on
the summit, they slide off and tumble down. This glass mountain is still known to
our German songs and fairytales, but no longer distinctly as an abode of the
deceased, though the little maid who carries a huckle-bone to insert (like the bear's
claw) into the glass mountain, and ends with cutting her little finger off that she
may scale or unlock it at last, may be looked upon as seeking her lost brothers in
the underworld (Einderm. no. 25).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SCRAMBLE FOR SOULS. 837

manec sSle empfangen

6 der strit was zegangen.

Daz weinete manec amie :

von wolken wart nie snle

alsd dicke sunder zal

beidiu uf bergen and ze tal,

als engel nnde tievel flugen,

die dd ze widerstrite zugen

die sfile her nnd widere,

d' einen uf, die ander nidere. Geo. 1284.

Der engelfiirste Michahel

empfienc des marcgraven s61,

nnd manec engel liehtgevar

die kamen mit gesange dar

nnd fuorten in vrceliche

inz sch cd ne himelriche.

Geo. 6082, conf. Dint. 1, 470. In the Brandan (Bruns p. 192-3)
we read : ( de duvele streden nmme de s61e mit snnte Michaels' ;
conf. Fundgr. 1, 92.

Gebt mir eine g&be,
daz des knniges s£le
von sante Michahele
hinte gecondwieret si. Gate fraa 2674 ;

Michael having taken upon him the office of Mercury or the
Walchure. A record of the 13th cent. (MB. 7, 371) calls him
' praepositus paradisi et princeps animarum.' A still more im-
portant passage, already noticed at p. 446, occurs in Morolt 28*- b ,
where three troops are introduced, the black, white and pale :
' den strii mahtn gerne schouwen, dens umb die sele sain han/
For similar descriptions in the elder French poets, conf. M6on 1, *
239.4,114-5. 3,284.

And even so early as the 8-9th cent, we find quite at the
beginning of the Muspilli fragment :

Wanta sar s6 sih diu s61a in den sind arhevit (rises)
enti si den lihhamun likkan lazit (leaves the body lying),
s6 quimit ein heri (comes one host) fona himilzungalon,
daz andar fona pehhe (pitch, hell) ; devr pdgant ein umpi.
I have questioned (p. 420) whether this 'pac umpi dia sela'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



838 souls.

(tussle for the soul) between the hosts of heaven and hell be
traceable to christian tradition. The Ep. of Jude v. 9 does tell
of archangel Michael and the devils striving for the body of
Moses/ and the champion Michael at all events seems borrowed
thence. But jealousy and strife over the partition of souls may
be supposed an idea already present to the heathen mind, as the
Norse OSinn, Th6rr and Freyja appropriated their several por-
tions of the slain. At pp. 60 and 305 we identified Freyja with
Gertrude : i some say the soul, on quitting the body, is the first
night with St. Oerdraut, the next with St. Michael, the third in
such place as it has earned,' Superst. F, 24. Now as Antichrist
in the great world-fight is slain by Michael (p. 811), while Surtr
has for adversaries OSinn and Thdrr: 'Gfirdrut and Michael '
may fairly be translated back into € Fr6wa and Wuotan (or
Donar)\ So at p. 198 a 'mons sancti Michaelis' was found
applicable to Wuotan or Zio (see Suppl.).

An Irish fairytale makes the spirits of the Silent Folk maintain
a violent contest for three nights at the cross-roads, as to which
churchyard a human corpse shall be buried in, Ir. elfenm. p. 68.
So that elves and dwarfs, as they steal live children and maidens,
(p. 386-8), would seem also to have a hankering for our bodies
and souls. The souls of the drowned the water-nix keeps in his
house (p. 496).

All this leads up to a more exact study of the notions about
Death.

i The passage is supposed to be founded on a lost book named * ' Arrf/tara
MoyseB', conf . Grotius ad S. Judae ep. 9, and Fabricii Cod. pseudepigr. V. T. p. 839.



Digitized by



Google



CHAPTER XXVII.
DEATH.

To the olden time Death was not a being that killed, but simply
one that fetched away and escorted to the underworld. Sword
or sickness killed; Death came in as messenger of a deity, to
whom he conducted the parting soul. Dying is announced, not
caused, by his arrival. So to that child in the fairytale the angel
of death had given a flower-bud : when it blossomed, he would
come again.

And the Jewish notion, which Christianity retained, is in
harmony with this. The soul of the beggar is fetched away by
angels of God, and carried into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16, 22 ;
or, as the Heliand 103, 5 expresses it : ' Godes engilds andfengon
is ferh, endi Uddon ine an Abrah&mes barm' ; l and it completes
the picture of the rich man's fate by adding the counterpart
(103, 9) : ' letha wihti bisenkidun is sfiola an thene suarton hel/
loathly wights (devils) sank his soul into swart hell. A sermon
in Leyser 126 has : ' wane ir ne wizzit niht, zu welicher zit der
bote (messenger) unsers herren Gotis zu ture ciopfe (may knock
at the door). Welich ist der bote ? daz ist der T6t (death)' ; and
161 : 'nu quam ouch der gemeine bote (general messenger), der
nieman ledic lat (lets alone), wie lange im maniger vorg&t, daz ist
der gewisse tdt.' 'D6 der Tot im sin zuokunft enbot (an-
nounced), s6 daz er in geleite,' he might escort him, Greg. 20.

There is no substantial difference between this and the older
heathen view. Halja, Eel, the death-goddess, does not destroy,
she receives the dead man in her house, and will on no account
give him up. To kill a man is called sending him to her. Hel

1 It is a beautiful Image, that the dying retain to God's bosom, children to that
of their father, whence they had issued at birth. But the same thing was known to
oar heathenism, which called newborn and adopted children ' bosom-children, wish-
children,* BA. 456. 464, and interpreted dying as departing to Wuotan, to Wish (p.
145). To heathens then, as well as christians, to die was to fare to God, to enter
into God's rest and peace, < Metod aeon,' Beow. 2360, ' feran on Frean were,' the
Lord's peace 52. So, to be buried is to fall into the mother's bosom (p. 642) ; mother
and father take their children into their keeping again.



VOL. II. wv D D

Digitized by



Google



840 DEATH.

neither comes to fetch the souls fallen due to her/ nor sends
messengers after them. The dead are left alone to commence
the long and gloomy journey ; shoes, ship and ferry-money, ser-
vants, horses, clothes, they take with .them from home for the
hell- way. Some ride, others sail, whole companies of souls troop
together : no conductor comes to meet them.

There were other gods besides, who took possession of souls.
The sea-goddess Ran draws to herself with a net all the bodies
drowned within her province (p. 311). Water-sprites in general
seem fond of detaining souls: dame Holle herself, at whose
dwelling arrive those who fall into the well (pp. 268. 822), has a
certain resemblance to Hel (see Suppl.).

It is another matter with the souls destined for Valholl. OSinn
sends out the valkyrs to take up all heroes that have fallen in
fight, and conduct them to his heaven (p. 418) : wish-maidens
fetch his wish-sons, *j>®r kiosa feigS 6, menn/ Sn. 89. Their
attendance and the heroes' reception are splendidly set forth in
the Hakonarmal. But these messengers also take charge of heroes
while alive, and protect them until death : they are guardian-
angels and death-angels. How beautiful, that the gracious god,
before he summons them, has provided his elect with an attendant
spirit to glorify their earthly path !

I can see a connexion between valkyrs and Hermes, who is
wielder of the wishing-rod (p. 419) and conductor of souls to
the underworld, ^1^070)709, ^i;%o7ro/A7r69, veKpoirofiiro^ These
maids are OSin's messengers, as Hermes is herald of the gods,
nay Hermes is O&inn himself, to whom the souls belong. Thus
the god's relation to the dead is an additional proof of the iden-
tity between Wuotan and Mercury. A distinction appears in the
fact that Hermes, like the Etruscan Oliarun (0. Miiller 2, 100),
conducts to Hades, but not, as far as I know, to Elysium ; valkyrs,
on the contrary, to Valholl, and not to Hel. Further, the function
of guardian-spirit is wanting to Hermes.

This idea of a protecting spirit finds expression more in the
personified Thanatos (death) of the Greek people's faith. He is
pictured as a genius, with hand on cheek in deep thought, or

1 It is only in a dream-vision that she appears : ' postera nocte eidem Proter-
pina per quietem adstare aspect a postridie ejns oomplezu n*aram denunoiat. neo
inane somnii praesagium fait.' Saxo Gram. p. 43.



Digitized by



Google



THANATOS. MORS. DAUDUS. 841

Betting his foot on the psyche (soul) as if taking possession of her ;
often his hands are crossed over the extinguished torch. At
times he appears black (like Hel, p. 813) or black-winged (atris
alis) : rbv Se ireaovra et\€ fjU\a<; Odvaros, ifrvxv ^ * K °"<»/w* T0 ^
lirrrf (Batrach. 207) 1 , and akeuaro terjpa fjuiXaivav (ibid. 85).
But usually the departing dead is represented riding a horse,
which a genius leads : an open door betokens the departure, as we
still throw open a door or window when any one dies (Superst. I,
664). As a symbol, the door alone, the horse's head alone, may
express the removal of the soul. 2 The Roman genius of death
seems to announce his approach or the hour of parting by knock'
ing at the door; 8 a knocking and poking at night is ghostly and
ominous of death (see Suppl.).

Roman works of art never give Death the shape of a female
like Halja, though we should have expected it from the gender
of mors, and originally the people can scarcely have conceived it
otherwise ; the Slavic smrt, smert (the same word) is invariably
fern., the Lith. smertis is of either gender, the Lett, nahwe fern,
alone. And the Slav. Morena, Mar ana (Morena, Marzana), de-
scribed p. 771, seems to border closely on smrt and mors.

These words find an echo in Teutonic ones. Schmerz, smart, we
now have only in the sense of pain, originally it must have been
the pains of death, as our qual (torment) has to do with quellan,
AS. cwellan, Eng. kill: 4 the OHG. MHG. and AS. have alone
retained the strong verb smerzan, smerzen, smeortan (dolere).
OHG. smerza is fern., MHG. smerze masc, but never personified.
Nahwe answers to the Goth. masc. n&us, pi. naveis, funus (conf.
ON. nar, ndinn p. 453), as 9dvaro<; too can mean a corpse. 8 But
this Grk. word has the same root as the Goth, ddujms, OHG. tod



1 One would suppose from this passage, that Death took only the corpse of the
fallen to himself, that the soul flew away to Hades, for it is said of her in v. 285

* 0. Miiller's Archaol., ed. 2 f pp. 604. 696. For the horse's head, conf.
Boeckh's Corp. inscr. no. 800. Mann. Ozon. p. 2, no. 63-7. R. Rochet te's
Monum. in6d. 1, 126. Pausan. vii. 25, 7. Gerhard's Antike hildw. p. 407.

* Hor. Od. i. 4, 13 : pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas regum-
queturres.

4 Constant use will soften down the meaning of the harshest terms ; we had
an instance in the Fr. gene, p. 800n.

* Goth, leik (corpus, caro), our leiche, leichnam, Eng. lich (cadaver} ; the OHG.
hreo, AS. hraw, MHG. re (cadaver, funus), and Goth, hrdiv (whence nraiYa-dub6 f
mourner-dove) are the Lat. corpus.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



842 DEATH.

(orig. t6du) raasc, OS. dod, d69, AS. dedff, ON. dauffi, all masc.,
the M. Nethl. dot having alone preserved the fern, gender, which
ia however compatible with the Gothic form. The verb in Gothic
is diva, d&u (morior), standing in the same relation to 0KiJ<r#w»,
eOavov, Odvaro? as the Gothic Tiv to the Slavic dan (day, p. 195).
The ON. daufti I find used only of the condition, not of the
person, while the Goth, ddujms does express the latter in 1 Cor.
15, 55 (see Suppl.).

To this affinity of words corresponds a similarity of senti-
ments. The most prominent of these in our old poets seem to
be the following.

As all spirits appear suddenly, 1 so does Death; no sooner
named or called, than he comes : ' hie naJiet der Tdt manigem
manne/ Roth. 277 b . <daz in naliet der Tdt/ Nib. 2106, 4. 'dd
nahte im der T6t ' 2002, 8. ' Mors pr asserts,' Walthar. 191. f der
Tdt gfit dir vaste zuo/ Karl 69 b . He lurks in the background
as it were, waiting for call or beck (Preidank 177, 17. 'dem T6de
winken/ beckon to D., Benn. 9540). Like fate, like Wurt, he is
nigh and at hand (p. 406). Like the haunting homesprite or will
o' wisp, he rides on people's necks : € der T6t mir sitzet uf dera
kragen, 9 Eolocz. 174. f stet vor der tiir,' Diut. 2, 158. A story in
Reusch (no. 36) makes Death sit outside the door, waiting for it
to open ; he therefore catches the soul as it goes out.

Luckless life- weary men call him to their side, complain of his
delay : ' Tot, nu nim din teil an mir ! ' now take thy share of me,
Wh. 61, 2. < Tot, daz du mich nu kanst spam ! ' 61, 12. ' wa nu
Tot, du nim mich hin ! ' Ecke 145. 8 ' Mort, qar me pren, si me
delivre ! ' Ren. 9995. € Mors, cur tarn sera venis f ' Rudl. 7, 58.
( 6 w6 Tot, dazt' ie s6 lange min verbaere ! ' shouldst forbear,
shun me, MsH. 1, 89*. ' por ce requier k Dieu la mort/ M6on
nouv. rec. 2, 241. We know the Aesopic fable of the old man
and Thanatos. To wish for death is also called seeking Death*
sending for Death, having him fetched : ' }& w»net des der degen,



1 Supra p. 325. Beinhart p. liii. oxzx. ; like Night, Winter, and the Judgment-
day, Death < breaks in. 1

* So beasts of prey are invited, Er. 5832 : ' tod n£ hungerigiu tier, bfcde wolf
und ber, iwer einez (one of you) kume her und ezze una beide I *

• Straparola 4, 5 tells of a young man who from curiosity started off to hunt
up Death.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



FETCHES THE SOUL. 843

ich habe gesant nach Tode (he fancies I have sent for D.) : ioh
wil's noch longer pflegen/ Nib. 486, 5. Of a slothful servant it is
said he is a good one to send after Death, i.e. he goes so slow, yon
may expect to live a good while longer. This saying must have
been widely diffused : € en lui avon bon mesagier por querre la
Mort et cerchier, que il revendroit moult & tart/ Ren. 5885. ' du
werst ein bot gar guot zuo schicken nach dem Todt, du kommst
nit bald/ H. Sachs 1, 478°. € werst gut nach dem Tod zu schicken'
iv. 3, 43 d . Pischart geschiohtkl. 84 a . ' du ar god att skicka
efter Doden/ Hallman p. 94. € bon & aller chercher la mort/
Pluquet contes p. 2. In Boh. : 'to dobrfi gest pro Smrt posjlati/
Jungmann 4, 193 a . Can this lazy servant be connected with
OanghJti and Oanglot, the man and maid servant of the ancient
Hel? Sn. 83.

Death takes the soul and carries it away: € hina fuartanan
T6d/ 0. i. 21, 1. 'd6 qaam der Tdt und nam in kin* Lohengr.
186. 'er begrifet,' Gregor. 413. Diut. 3,53. ergreif, gript,
Greg. 19, an expression used also of Sleep, the brother of Death,
when he falls upon and overpowers : ' der Sl&f in begreif? Pf.
Ghuonr. 7076. He presses men into his house, the door of which
stands open : ' gegen im het der T6t sines huses tur enthchen
(unlocked)/ Bit. 12058. 'der Tdt weiz manige s&ze (trick), swa\
er wil dem menschen schaden und in heim ze hits laden (entice)/
Tiirh. Wh. 2281. 'dd in der T6t heim nam in sin gezimmer
(building)/ 'br&ht heim in sin gemiure (walls)/ Lohengr. 143.
150. These are deviations from the original idea, which did not
provide him with a dwelling of his own \ or is he here an equiva-
lent for Hel T

Probably, like all messengers (RA.. 135), like Hermes the con-
ductor of souls, he carries a staff, the symbol of a journey, or
of delegated authority. With this wand, this rod (of wish), he
touches whatever has fallen due to him : ' la Mort de sa verge le
touclia, 9 M6on 4, 107. 1

To Death is ascribed a highway, levelled smooth and kept in
repair, on which the dead travel with him : ' des Tddes pfat wart
g'ebenet/ Turl. Wh. 22 a . 23 b . ' d& moht erbouwen der Tdt sin
straze, 9 Bit. 10654. 'nu seht, wie der Tdt umbe sich mit kreften

1 In Danse Maoabre p. m. 55, trois verges are wielded by Death.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



844 DEATH.

hat gebouwen,' Kl. 829. Like a shifty active servant, he greases
the boots of the man he comes to fetch, in preparation for the
great journey; in Burgundy his arrival is expressed in the
phrase: 'quan la Mor venr6 graisse no bote/ quand la Mort
viendra graisser nos bottes; Noei Borguignon p. 249 (see
Suppl.).

A thoroughly heathen feature it is, to my thinking, that he
appears mounted, like the valkyrs ; on horseback he fetches away,
he sets the dead on his ovm horse. In a folksong of wide cir-
culation the lover, dead and buried far away, comes at midnight
and rides off with his bride. 1 Possibly that horse 9 s head at p.
841 stands more for Death's horse than for the dead man's* Both
Hel and her messenger, like other gods, had doubtless a horse
at their service ; this is confirmed by certain phrases and fancies
that linger here and there among the people* One who has got
over a serious illness will say : s jeg gav Doden en skiappe havre '
(Thiele 1, 138), he has appeased Death by sacrificing to him a
bushel of oats for his horse. So the heathen fed the horse of
Wuotan (p. 154), of dame Gaue (p. 252) ; the Slavs did the same
for their Svantevit and Radegast (p. 661). Of one who blunders
in noisily they say, in Denmark as above : ' han gaaer som en
helhest,' he goes like a hel-horse, Dansk ordb. 2, 545*. There
are more things told of this hel-hest ; he goes round the church-
yard on his three legs, he fetches Death. One folktale has it,
that in every churchyard, before it receives human bodies, a live
horse is buried, and this is what becomes the walking dead-horse
(Thiele 1, 137); originally it was no other than the Death-
goddess riding round. Arnkiel quotes 1, 55 the Schleswig
superstition, that in time of plague ' die Hell * rides about on a
three-legged horse, destroying men' ; if at such a time the dogs
bark and howl in the night (for dogs are spirit- seers), they say
r Hell is at the dogs ' ; when the plague ceases, e Hell is driven
away ' ; if a man on the brink of death recovers, ' he has come



1 ' The moon shines bright, the dead ride fast,* Burger's life p. 87. Wh. 2,
90. *t maantje schijnt zo hel, mijn paardtjes lope zo snel,' Kinderm. 3, 77.
1 m&nan skiner, d&dman rider,' Sv. vis. 1, liii. and even in the Edda : * rida menn
dait&irj S»m. 166 b . 167 s . Norw. * manen skjine, dtiman grine, varte da ikkje rad? *
Conf. the Mod. Grk. song in Wh. Mailer 2, 64, and Vuk 1, no. 404.

* He writes ' der Hell,' mase. ; bat the Plattdeutsoh, when they attempt H.
Germ , often misuse the article, e.g. * der Pest ' for * die Pest.'



Digitized by



Google



BIDES A HORSE. 845

to terms with HelV Here, as in other cases, the notion of Death
has ran into one with the personified plague. In our own
medieval poems we never read of Death riding about, but we do
of his loading his horse with souls. Thus, in describing a battle :
' seht, ob der Tot d& iht sin soumer luede (loaded his sumpter
at all) ? j& er was unmiiezec gar (high busy)/ Lohengr. 71. ' daz
ich des Tddes vuoder mit in liled und vazzei ! y Ottocar 448*.
The Mod. Greeks have converted old ferryman Xapav into a
death's-messenger Xdpos ; you see him crossing the mountains
with his dusky throng, himself riding, the young men walking
before him, the old following behind, and the tender babes
ranged on his saddle. 1 The Liibeck Dance of Death makes him
ride on a lion, and he is so represented in a picture also, Douce
p. 160. 'Mortis habenae,' Abbo de bellis Paris. 1, 187. 322 (see
Suppl.).

The dead march like captives in Death* s bonds ; to the Indian
imagination likewise he leads them away bound. 2 'ei, waz nil
dem Tdde geschicket wart an sin seil (to his rope) ! ' Lohengr.
115. 'maneger quam an des Tddes seiV 123. 'in Tddes sil
stigen,' Ls. 3, 440. ' zuo dem Tdde wart geseilet,' Geo. 2585. r w6
dir T6t ! din sloz und din gebende bindet und besliuzet,* Wigal.
7793. ' der T6t hftt mich gevangen, 9 Karl 81 b . Greg. 50.

As the old divinity of the lower world fell into the background,
and Death came forward acting for himself, there could not but
ensue a harsher reading of his character, or a confounding of
him with other gods. From the silent messenger who did no
more than punctually discharge his duty, he becomes a grasping
greedy foe, who will have his bond, who sets traps for mortals.
Already O. v. 23, 260 imputes to him crafty besuichan (decipere),
and Conrad strik (meshes) and netzegarn, Troj. 12178, which
reminds of the goddess R&n with her net (pp. 311. 840). We
think of him still under the familiar figure of a fowler or fisher,
spreading his toils or baiting his hook for man : ( dd kam der
T6t als ein diep (thief), und stal dem reinen wibe daz leben flz
ir libe (the life out of her body)/ Wigal. 8033. 8 But he uses

1 Td Tpv<f*pb raiWrouXa 't t^p ceXV d/J/Sa&atf^a, Fauriel 2, 228. Wh. Miiller
2, 8 ; conf. Kind 1849, p. 14.

3 Bopp's Siindflnt, pp. 37. 50. In Bohez aantez Nonn p. 205, Death says
* j'attire tout dans mes liens a mon gtte.'

s Lifestealer, man-$layer t names for Death.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



846 DEATH.

open violence too, he routs out, pursues and plunders, Nib. 2161,
3. 2163, 1; he 'bifalta sie/ felled them, O. iii. 18, 34; 'mich
hat der T6t gevangen,' clutched, Greg. 50; hejaget, hunts, Both.
2750, bekrellet (claws?), Fundgr. 196, 20; and the Bible has the
same thing : in Ps. 91, 3 — 6 he comes out as a hunter with snares
and arrows. His messenger-staff has turned into a spear which
he hurls, an arrow which he discharges from the bow. Worth
noting are the Benn. 24508 : ( wirtdem des Tddes sper gesandt;'
and Freid. 177, 24 : € der T6t g&t her, der widerseit uns an dem
sper/ defies us at point of lance ; a reading which I prefer to the
accepted one '&ne sper, 9 without spear. OSinn has a spear
GClngnir (p. 147) whose thrust or throw was fatal. The Lith.
Smertis comes as a warrior with sword and pike, riding in a
chariot, i.e. in the form of a god. All this carries with it the
idea of Death having a regular fight and wrestle with man, whom
he overpowers and brings to the ground : ' mit dem T6de vehten/
fence with D., MS. 2, 82 b . 'der Tot wil mit mir ringen (wrestle)/
Stoufenb. 1126. 'dd ranc er mit dem T6de/ Nib. 939, 2. c als6
der Tdt hie mit ime rank/ Ecke 184 ; and we still speak of the
death agony, though without any thought of a personality. In
a Mod. Grk song a daring youth wrestles with Charos on smooth
marble from morn till midday ; at the hour of eve Death flings
him down. In another case Charos takes the shape of a black
swallow, and shoots his arrow into a maiden's heart. 1 A doubt-
ful passage in Beow. 3484 we ought perhaps to refer to Death,
who is there called a destroyer that shoots with arrow-bow of
fire : ' bona, se y& of fianbogan fyrenum sceoteft; ' conf. the Serv.
h-vnik, bloodshedder p. 21. Brun von Schonebeke makes Death
wield a scourge of four strings ; and our MHG. poets lend him an
arrow and battle-asee : 'des T6des strdle het si gar versniten/
cut them up, Tit. 3770. 'w& snldet des T6des barte/ Wh. 8,
220 (Cod. cass.). The ' isernporte ' in a Meister-song of the
14th cent. (Hagen's Mus. 2, 188) means surely itternbarte?
Here Death promises a tliousand years 9 grace, should his adversary
gain the victory (see Suppl.). 8

i Wh. Muller 2, 4. 6 ; conf. Tommaseo's Canti popolari 3, 801 seq.

3 Our poets too are no strangers to the idea of Death pro$ecuting at law his
claim upon a man : ' do begunde der Tdt einen graven beelagen und mit getoalU
twingen ze n6tigen dingen,' accuse a count and drive him to straits, Iw. 6636 seq.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HIS WEAPONS. HIS ARMY. 847

In such a conflict, however, Death must appear as the leader
of a large and ever increasing army. There is a following, a
retinue assigned him : ' der T6t snochte s£re d& sin gesinde was/
Nib. 2161, 3. The Greeks set us the fashion of calling the dead
ol irkioves the majority, and is irXeovcw Uiadat, meant the same
as & "At&ov Ik. 9 to reach the abode of the great multitude, join
the great host, as we still say. In the ' Bohemian Ploughman,'
Death is styled captain of the mountain; because, as in the Greek
song (p. 845), the march of his army covers the mountains ? ' In
des Todes echo* vorn/ fare to D.'s host, Wh. v. Orl. 2113. <ist
an die vcurt/ gone his way (obiit), Walth. 108, 6. Though taking
no part in the fight, the dead seem to bear a badge (flag or
lance), which, so to speak, he fastens on the dying, with which
he touches them, enrolls them in his band. 1 That is how I
understand 'des Tddes zeichen tragen,' Nib. 928, 8. 2006, 1,
though it may include the collateral sense of having received a
death-wound, which now serves as his badge and cognisance.
Hence in Nib. 939, 3 : ' des T6des zeichen ie ze s&re sneit/ D.'s
token aye too sore he cut; where one MS. reads wafen (arms),
and elsewhere we find 'eines wafen tragen* carry some one's
arms, Parz. 130, 4. Freidank 74, 18. Wigal. 7797, and even
' des tddes wdpen (coat of arms) tragen/ Wh. 1 7, 16. ' Tristandes
zeichen vHeren/ Heinr. Trist. 2972, is to be wounded like him.
So far back as Alfred's Boeth. p. 16 (Bawl.) we have « DeiSes
tacnung' ; even Zio's or Tiwes tdcen p. 200, and OSin's spear
p. 147 are worth considering (see Suppl.). 3

With the idea of messengership and that of the great company
were associated some others, which probably reach a long way

the count is called ' der verlorne, wand' er mnoae im ze suone (satisfaction) geben
beide sin gesunt und sin leben.* So Iw. 7161 speaks of having to ' gelten (pay) vtir
des TddeB $chelten ' ; and the same perhaps is meant by * der T6t hat uf si geeworn,'
Nib. 2017, 5. In the * Ackermann aus Bohmen ' on the contrary, Death is the
defendant, and a man whose wife he has carried off is prosecutor. Similar law.
suits are brought by the Devil. *Nn kume Til grimmeolicher T6t, und rihte
Gote von uns beiden ! ' MS. 1, 17. Observe too ' mit des Tddes hantveste Uber-
eigeletj sealed with D.'s sign manual, Wh. 391, 27. The Indian god of death,
Tama, is a lord of law.

1 Conf. ' einem des Tddes muoder (mieder) sniden,' Titur. ; to cut D's. coat on
(or for) a man.

* It is worthy of note, that in the Meister-song already quoted (Mus. 2, 187)
Death says : * be ready, when I send thee my messengers (the infirmities) to give
thee the signs,' to mark thee for my own. Death, orig. a messenger himself, sends
out under-messengers. Conf. Kinderm. no. 177. Even the O. Fr. Chanson des
flaxons 2, 134 has : * la Morz le $emont sovent et menu,' viz. by fainting-fits.



Digitized by



Google



848 DEATH.

back. Messengers in ancient times were often fiddlers and pipers :
it was nothing oat of the way, to make Death and his meny
perform a reihen (rig, round dance) ; with fife and fiddle he seeks
to win recruits. Really a pleasant fancy, tending to mitigate
the harshness of dying : the souls of the dead enter at once
upon dancing and revelry. To the ancient Romans there were
songs and dances in the Elysian fields ; 1 and it accords with the
resemblance of departed spirits to elves, who also love music and
dancing (p. 470). Tet our poets of the 13th cent, never once
allude to the Dance of Death, which from the 15-16th became
such a favourite subject. The oft-recurring phrase ' er hat den
Tot an der hant,' by the hand (Nib. 1480, 4. 1920, 4. 1958, 4.
Wigal. 2453. 4700. Alph. 28(5. 345. 359) seems to mean, not
catching hold for the purpose of dancing, but of leading away
(like < d6d is at hendi/ p. 406).

Holy Scripture having already likened our fleeting life to grass,
it was not difficult to see in Death a mower or reaper, who
cuts men down like flowers and corn-stalks. Knife, sickle, or
scythe is found him in this connexion : ' There's a reaper they call
Death, Power from God most high he hath, He whets his knife
to-day, Keener it cuts the hay ; Look to thyself, O flowret fair ! *
Pop. Hymn. The older poets never give him these implements,
but the figure of ' Death carried out ' is sometimes furnished with
a scythe (p. 772). In later times the harpe (sickle) of the Greek
Kronos (O. Miiller's Archaol. p. 599) may have had an influence
too, conf. faldtenens in Radevicus 2, 11. To 'match men with
flowers, make them bite the grass/ Lohengr. 138, is said equally
of other conquerors beside Death. But he weeds out the plants :
' in lebens garten der Tot nu jat,' Turl. Wh. 23 b . Conversely
Death, like the devil, is called a sower, who disseminates weeds
among men; 'do der Tdt stnen samen under si ges»te/ Wh.
361, 16. 'er ier durch in des Todes furch,' he eared through him
D/s furrow, Ulr. Trist. 3270, simply means : he planted in him
a mortal wound (see Suppl.).

Before explaining certain other conceptions, I have to enumer-
ate the names and epithets of Death in our old poetry.

1 Virg. Aen. 6, 644 : pars pedibas plaudunt chorea* et carmina dicunt. Tibnll.
. 3, 59 : hie choreae cantusque vigent.



Digitized by



Google



HIS DANCE. A SKELETON. 849

Very commonly he is called ' der grimme,' furious, Roth. 2750.
Nib. 1360, 4. 1558, 3. Mar. 218. Flore 1931. Troj. 2317-25.
10885. Ls. 3, 124; l — < der ferchgrimme/ Morolt 4059, a felicit-
ous compound, as Death has designs upon the life or soul (ferch) ;
—der grimmige,' Roth. 517. Reinh. 360. 1248. Berthold 803;
— f der bitter e y (irucp6<; ddvaros:) and ' amara Mors/ 8 Rudl. 1,
110. Unibos 117, 4. Diut. 3, 89. Mar. 206. Alex. (Lampr.)
820.1097.8999.4782. Gr. Ruod. C b 15. Wh. 258, 28. Wigal.
1113;— der bitterliche, Troj. 3521. 22637;— 'der sure, 9 sour,
Parz. 643, 24; — der scharfe' : ein scharpher bote, Freid. 21, 6; —
' der irre/ Amgb. 29* in Wizlau neighbhd. therefore prob. for
erre } ireful; — 'der genuine/ common (qui omnes manet), En.
2081. All, so far, epithets taken from his unavoidableness,
cruelty, bitterness ; not a hint about his personal presence. No-
where is he the black, the pale, after the Latin 'mors atra,
pallida.' Otto II was called 'pallida mors Saracenorum,' Cod.
lauresh. 1, 132 ; and in Renner 23978. 80 I find ' der gelwe
tdt/ yellow d. ; in both cases the aspect of the dead, not of
Death, is meant. So when Walth. 124, 38 says of the world,
that it is ' inn&n swarzer varwe, vinster sam der t6t/ inwardly
black of hue, dark as death, he means the abode of the dead,
hell, not the figure of Death. In one song he is addressed as
< lieber Tdt ! ' dear D. (Hagen's Mus. 2, 187), and H. Sachs i. 5,
528 d speaks of him as ' der heilig Tod/ holy D. ; ' her Tot ! ' Sir
D., again in voc. case only, Apollonius 295 and often in the
Ackermann aus Bohmen (see Suppl.).

It is more important to our inquiry, that in the Reinardus 3,
2162 a bone fiddle is said to be ' ossea ut dominies Blicero,' by
which nothing but Death can have been meant, whether the word
signify the pale (bleich), or the grinning (Weekend), or be, as I
rather think, the proper name Blidger, Blicker with a mere sug-
gestion of those meanings. A bony horse's head is here handed
in mockery to the wolf as a skilful player (joculandi gnarus) by
way of fiddle, ' bony as a skeleton/ And now that unexplained
caput caballinum at p. 661n. may be interpreted as in fact a sym-



1 Der grimme tfit, the name of a knife (Wolfd. 1313), is remarkable, as Hel's
knife was called tultr (p. 313) from tvelta esurire, which m the Goth, tviltan takes
the meaning of mori.

* Isidore even says, * mors dicta quod sit amara. 1



Digitized by VjOOQIC



850 DEATH.

bol of Death (p. 844) and the dead-man's steed (p. 841). As
the convent clergy set up human death's-heads in their cells for
a memento mori, may not they also have nailed np horse? s skulls
inside their walls f did an older heathen custom, here as in so
many instances, have a christian thought breathed into it ? If
this holds good ; we can see why the horse's head should have set
the Flemish poet thinking of Death; it may even be, that fanatic
sculptors used to fashion Death as playing on it instead of a
fiddle or fife. 1

In any case dominus Blicero proves that in the middle of the
12 th cent, it was the practice to represent Death as a skeleton.
I do not know of any earlier evidence, but think it very possible
that such may be hunted up. We know that to the ancient
Romans fleshless shrivelled-up masks or skeletons served to
indicate Death. 9 On tombs of the Mid. Ages, no doubt from an
early time, corpses were sculptured as whole or half skeletons (see
Suppl.). Poets of the 13th cent, paint the World (p. 792n.) as
a beautifully formed woman in front, whose back is covered with
snakes and adders : 8 the notion itself may be of much higher
antiquity ; it is closely related to the story of three live and three
dead kings. 4

This mode of representing Death, which soop became universal,
stands in sharp contrast with the ancient portraitures and the
old heathen conceptions of him. The engaging form of the
genius, akin to Sleep, the childlike Angel of death, is now
supplanted by a ghastly figure copied from the grim reality of
corruption in the grave. Tet even here poetry steps in with her
all-embracing, all-mellowing influence. The older conceptions
of Death as leading away, as attacking, as dancing, applied to this
new and hideous figure, have called forth a host of truly popular,
naive and humorous art-productions; nay, their wealth is not
nearly exhausted by the artists yet. Without this bag of bones

1 Todenpfeife is a place in Lower Hesse, Bommel 5, 875. Bemigius demonol.
145 says, at witches' gatherings they played on a dead hone'$ head instead of a
cithern : a coincidence almost decisive. Philand. von Sittew. (p. m. 174) has also
a Death with his lyre.

* O. Mailer's Archaol. 696-7. Lessing 8, 251-2.

8 The poem was printed before the Wigalois.

4 Staphorst i. 4, 263. Bragar 1, 369. O. Fr. < les trois mors et les trois vis/
Boqnefort 2, 780. Catal. de la Valliere p. 285-6 ; oonf . Douce p. 31 seq. and Gatal.
of MSS. in Brit. Mus. (1834) 1, 22 (Cod. Arund. no. 83 sec. xiv), also plate 7.



Digitized by



Google



SIB BLICERO. FBIBND HE IN. 851

aping the garb and gestures of the living, 1 and his startling
incongruity with the warm life around, all the charm and quaint-
ne88 of those compositions would be gone. Less enjoyable must
have been the processions and plays in which these spectacles
were exhibited in France during the 15th cent, and perhaps
earlier; there and then originated that peculiar name for the
Dance of Death : chorea Machabaeorvm, Fr. la danse Macabre*

Another name of Death, much later seemingly than Blicker,
but now universally known, is Freund Hein or Hain ; I cannot
even trace it up to the middle of last century. 8 In itself it looks
old and fitting enough, and is susceptible of more than one
explanation. Considering that Death has so many points of
contact with giants and other spirits, the name Heine (p. 503)
might be borrowed from the homesprite for one, and the addition
of Friend would answer to the ' fellow, neighbour, goodfellow '
of those elvish beings whom we meet with under the name of
Heimchen, Heinchen (pp. 275. 459n.), and who border closely on
the idea of departed spirits. Add the L. Germ, term for a
winding-sheet, heinenkleed (p. 446). But it is also spelt hunen-
kleed, which brings us to 'heun, hiine/ giant (p. 528); and
Hein itself might be explained as Heimo (p. 387), or. Hagano
(p. 371). A Voigtland story of the god Hain (Jul. Schmidt,
p. 150), or the Thuringian one about an ancient haingott, grove-
god (Rosencranz's Neue zeitschr. i. 3, 27), being themselves very
doubtful, I am not inclined to fasten on our still doubtful Friend
Hein. Still less attention is dne to a name for mortuarium,
' hainrecht,' 4 coming as it probably does from heimrecht, i.e.
heimfall, lapse of property.

1 As the beasts in a fable ape those of men.

* Latest writings on the Dance of Death : Peignot, • Beoherohes snr les danses
des morts ' (1826). F. Donee, * The Dance of Death 1 (1838). The latter derives
Macabre from St. Maeariui, to whom three skeletons appeared in a vision. I do
not see how * chorea Machabaeorum,' as the oldest authorities have it, could have
come from that ; oonf . Carpentier sub v. (a. 1424-53). It ought to appear by the
old paintings, that the 7 heroes of the O.T. martyred in one day [2 Maccabees 7]
were incorporated as leading characters in the dance. Perhaps it is more correct
to explain ' macabre ' from the Arabic magabir, magabaragh (dead-yard, oimeterium).
On the French performances oonf. Michelet's Hist, de France 4, 409 — 412 (Paris
1840).

> It is used by Musaus (Volksm. 1, 16), Claudius and Gotten J. R. Schellen-
berg in Pref. to Freund Heine ersoheinungen (Winterthur 1786) thinks Claudius in
his Asmufl (after 1775) invented the name, which I very much doubt ; he has given
it currency.

4 Mittermaier's Privatreoht § 77, no. 27.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



852 DEATH.

Kaisersberg calk Death holz-meier, wood- mower. He wrote a
book, De arbore humana (Strasb. 1521 fol.), € wherein easily and
to the glory of God ye may learn to await blithely the woodcutter
Death.' Then, p. 118 b : ' So is death called a village-mower or
wood-mower, and justly hath he the name, for he hath in him the
properties of a wood-cutter, as, please God, ye shall hear. The
first property of the village-mower is commnnitas, he being pos-
sessed in common by all such as be in the village, and being to
serve them all alike. So is the wood-cutter likewise common to
all the trees, he overlooketh no tree, but heweth them down all.' 1
Here Death is regarded as a forester, a ranger, who has a right
to fell any of the forest-trees. It is said that in some places the
gravedigger is called holzmeier.

In the Deutsche Schlemmer, a drama of the 16th cent.,
Death is called the pale Streekefuss or Streckebein (leg-stretcher),
as Gryphius too (Kirchhofsged. 36) names him Streckfuss, because
he stretches out the limbs of the dying, loosens them (\v<rifi€\q<;) ;
and before that, the twice quoted Meister-song of the 14th
cent, has : ' er hat kein ru, er hab gestrecket mvr das fell (my
skin)/ Hag. mus. 2, 188. In Chr. Weise's Drei erzn. 314 I find
Streckebein and Bleckezahn, bleak (i.e. bared) teeth; and else-
where Diirrbein, Klapperbein, names for a skeleton. The allusion
in kupferbickel (Ackerm. aus B. p. 34) remains obscure (see
SuppL).

It remains for me to mention certain more fully developed
myths respecting Death, which have survived from assuredly a
remote antiquity.

H. Sachs (1, 102 b ), speaking of Death's arrival, says he twitcliAs
or jerks the stool from under man, tips it over, so that he tumbles
to the ground. He takes from him his seat and standing among
the living : I suspect there was a fuller story at the back of this.
More commonly the same thing is expressed by ' Death has
blown the man's candle out ' (as Berhta blew out the lights of the
eyes, p. 277), for the notions of light, life and sojourn among the
living, run into one another. 8 The living principle was linked

1 The earlier editions in Latin (1514, 115*-°, and 1519, 106* ■•) hare in paren-
theses ' der dorfmeyger ' and * der holzmeyger. 1

* Wh. 416, 14 : * bl liehter sunnen da verUuch (went oat) manegem Barraztn
sin liehL' Lohengr. 183 : ' er sluoo in, daz im mnose daz Ueht erluchen.'



Digitized by VjOOQIC



QUENCHES LIGHT. A GODFATHER. 853

to a light, a taper, a brand: when these were wasted, death
ensued (pp. 409. 415). Here then the idea of Death is intimately
connected with that of fate. The genius lowers his torch, re-
verses it, and the light of life is quenched. For the child as
soon as born, the norn has kindled a light, to which his thread of
life is fastened; possibly even our lighting of tapers in con-
nexion with birthday gifts has reference to this. 1 We have a
capitally contrived story of Qossip Death (gevatter Tod, Kinderm.
no. 44), the conclusion of which represents a subterranean
cavern, with thousands of lights burning in endless rows. These
are the lives of men, some still blazing as long tapers, others
burnt down to tiny candle-ends ; but even a tall taper may topple
or be tipt over. The preceding part relates, how Death has
stood gossip 3 to a poor man, and has endowed his godson with
the gift of beholding him. bodily when he approaches the sick,
and of judging by his position whether the patient will recover
or not. 8 The godson becomes a physician, and attains to wealth
and honours : if Death stands at the sick man's head, it is all
over with him ; if at his feet, he will escape. Occasionally the
doctor turns the patient round, and circumvents Death ; but in
the end Death has his revenge, he catches his godson napping,
and knocks his candle over. 4 Throughout this fable Death shews
himself friendly, good-natured and indulgent, only in case of
absolute need does he fulfil his function ; hence too his gossip-
hood 6 with man, which evidently corresponds to that ancient
visit of the norns to the newborn child, and their bestowing
gifts on him (pp. 408 — 12), as in some nursery-tales the fays are
invited to stand godmothers. 6 The extinguished light resembles
the taper and the brand, to which are linked the lives of Norna-
gestr and Meleager (pp. 409. 415). It is then a primitive myth

1 In the child's game * If the fox dies I get the skin ' (Kinderm. 2, xviii.), a
piece of burning wood is passed round, and its extinction decides.

* God-sib expresses the kinship of god-parents to each other or to the parents.
—Trans.

3 So the bird oharadrius, by looking at or away from you, decides your life or
death, Freid. introd. lxxxvi., where a couplet in Titurel 6154-5 and the O.Fr. Bes-
tiaire (Boquef . sub v. caladrio) are left unnoticed.

4 May not that * stool ' also, when upset, have knocked the candle over ?

* Is Death likewise called the brother of man, as he is of Sleep? The
' bruoder t6t ' in Ben. 262 means fratrii mors.

6 The semi-divine norns and fays protect and bestow gifts like christian
sponsors.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



854 DEATH.

of heathen Germany ; in telling which, Death was pictured, even
till recent times, not as a skeleton, but in the shape of a living
man or god. We cannot wonder that the story is found with a
great many variations, which are collected, though still incom-
pletely, in Kinderm. 3, 72 : in some of them Death presents his
godson with a ring, by which he can judge of diseases. 1 Old
Hugo von Trimberg at the close of his work had told a tale
* von dem Tode, wie er ein hint huop (took up),' but there is not
much in it (Bamb. ed. 23665 — 722) : Death promises to send his
gossip some messengers before he comes to fetch him (as in the
Meister-song p. 847n.) ; these are, ringing in the ears, running
at the eyes, toothache, wrinkled skin, and grizzled beard. The
gossiphood is the only guarantee of any connexion with the later

marchen. The resemblance of the OHG. toto, godfather,

MHG. tote (Parz. 461, 10. Wh. 7, 21) to tot, death, is striking,
though strictly the quantity of the vowel keeps the two words
apart, and to harmonize them some derivative process must be
presupposed. The story never grew out of a play on the words
(see Suppl.). 3

Equally celebrated, but gayer in tone, is the tale of Death and
Player Jack (Spielhansel, no. 82 ; conf. 3, 135 — 148), who by a
spell binds Death to a tree, so that nobody dies in the world
for seven years. Welcker (Append, to Schwenk p. 323-4) has
pointed out a parallel story in Pherekydes, how Death is set on
by Zeus to attack Sisyphos, who binds him in strong chains, and
then no one can die; Hades himself comes and sets Death free,
and delivers Sisyphos into his hands. Our • German fable inter-
weaves the Devil into the plot. Once the Devil was put in
possession of hell, he had to take his place beside Death, as
the alliteration ' death and devil ! ' couples them together. So
Welnas, Wels, originally the death-god of the Lithuanians and
Lettons, got converted into the Devil. According to the chris-
tian view, angels received the souls of the just, devils those of
the wicked (p. 836) ; therefore Death in coming for souls was
divided into a double power, according as he resembled the
angel or the devil. As angelic messenger, he comes nearest the
christian Michael, whose office it was to receive souls (Morolt

1 Etfcner's Unwtird. doctor p. 290.

9 Conf. p. 14 on the affinity between gVd and gdde.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



A GOD. 855

2660. 2715), conf. p. 836. Of very aged people, who still live
on, we say ' Death has forgotten to fetch them.' The Nib.
Lament 122 has : ' der T6t het ir minne, die d& sterben solden/
D. bore those in mind that there should die, or, as Lachmann in-
terprets it, desired them for his band (conf. p. 848).

These investigations will hardly have left it doubtful, that the
heathen ' Death ' is one of a secondary order of gods ; hence too
he coincides more especially with the semi-divine valkyrs and
norns, he is dependent on OSinn and Hel ; of the Grecian gods,
it is Hermes and Hades, Persephone and the ferryman Charon
that come nearest to him. But his nature is also not unrelated
to that of elves, homesprites and genii.

Chap. XXIV. has explained how he got mixed up with one of
the time-gods, Winter; no wonder therefore that he now and
then reminds us of Kronos.

In our Heldenbuch, Death figures as a false, god, whom the
heathen Belligan serves above all other gods, and whose image is
demolished by Wolfdietrich. I do not know exactly how to
account for this : it must be a diabolic being that is meant.

In the Finnish lays, Manala and Tuonela are often named
together, but as separate beings. One is the underworld, from
1 maa/ earth ; the other the kingdom of the dead, as Tuon (0dv~
aro?) is Death, Halja. In Kalewala, runes 6 — 9, Tuonela seems
to be a river of the underworld, with sacred swans swimming on
it (see Suppl.).



VOL. II. e e

Digitized by VjOOQIC



CHAPTER XXVIII.
DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

This is the place to insert a more exact survey of ancient
opinions on fortune and destiny, than it was possible to take in
chap. XVI, where the semi-divine directresses of human fate
were spoken of. Fate in the proper sense has so much to do
with men's notions about birth, and more especially those about
death, and these have only just been expounded. Thus, a man
over whom there impends a speedy and inevitable death is said
to be fey. 1

Our ancestors, like other heathens, appear to have made a
distinction between destiny and fortune. Their gods bestow
prosperity and bliss : above all, Wuotan is the giver of all good,
the maker and author of life and victory (pp. 133-7). But
neither he nor any other god was at the beginning of creation,
he has himself sprung out of it (p. 559), and can do nothing
against a higher constitution of the world, which exempts neither
him nor victory-lending Zeus * from a general destruction (pp.
316-8). Some things turn out contrary to his will: OSinn
and all the ases cannot prevent the misfortune of Balder;
another instance of overruling destiny at p. 425. Ragnarok, the
world's destruction, far overtops the power of the gods.

This predetermined and necessary character of all that comes
into being and exists and perishes, was expressed by a plural

1 OHG. feigi, MHG. veige; O&.figi, Hel. 72, 4; AS. fage t Beow. 6946; ON.
feigr. The old meaning of the word has been preserved longest in Lower Saxony

[and Scotland] : ' dar is en veege in'n buse * ; * en ttt££minsohe, dat balde sterven
werd (will die soon) ' ; per contra, * he is nan nig veege (not fey yet) ' of a man
who comes in when yon are talking of him. Also Nethl. * een veeg man (with one
foot in the grave), een veege teken (sign of death)', hence also veeg — debilis, peri-
cnlis exposito8. Our own feig has acquired the sense of fainthearted, cowardly,
pitiable, as the Lat. fatalis has, in the Fr. fatal, that of unluoky, disagreeable. So
the Lith. paikas, bad (see Suppl.).

2 Tp&em /SoJJXerai rlxrjw (II. 7, 21. 16, 121), as /3ovXi} will, counsel, is usually
attributed to Zeus (i^uy /Soi/Xeroi 17, 931) ; and sometimes *6os (17, 176) or ?%£<*,
purpose (17, 409). His great power is illustrated by the gold chain (rec/jd, II. 8,
19—28), Dut passages presently to be cited shew that he had to leave destiny to be
decided by the balance.

866



Digitized by VjOOQIC



DESTINY. 857

noun, ON. scop, OS. giscapu, AS. gesceapu; I have not found
an OHG. scaf, kiscaf in the same sense, though the sing, is forth-
coming, and, like the sing, skap in ON., signifies indoles, con-
silium, Graff 6, 450. The later Icelandic uses a maso. shapnaSr,
and the Dan. skiebne (ON. skepna= forma, indoles). The OS.
intensifies its giscapu by prefixes: vmrdigiscapu, Hel. 103, 7.
reganogiscapu (supra p. 26), decreta fati, superorum, where the
old heathen notions of wurd and regin plainly assert themselves.
In ON. the neut. pi. log (statuta) is never used of destiny, except
when joined to the particle or (for or), orlog, which in all the
other dialects becomes a sing., OHG. urlae (neut. ? Graff's
quotations 2, 96-7 leave it doubtful, Notker uses urlag as masc,
pi. urlaga), OS. orlag, AS. orkeg, all denoting a ' fixing from
the first ; ' but as the most momentous issue of fate was to the
heathen that of war, it early deviated into the sense of be}lum,
and in Hel. 132, 3 urlagi bellum seems distinct from orlag', orleg
fatum, but in reality both are one. So the OHG. urteil, urteili,
AS. ordcel, from being the award of a judge, came to mean that
of battle. The OS. compound aldarlagu (vitae decretum), Hel.
125, 15 retains the old plural form. Now aldr, aldar is strictly
aevum (p. 792), and hveila, OHG. huila tempos, but also vitae
tempus; hence these words also run into the sense of fatum,
conf. AS. gesceap-hwil, orleg-hwil, Beow. 52. 4849. 5817, OS.
orlag-huila, Hel. 103, 8, and OHG. huils&lida. 1 Then there is
an ON. auffna, Swed. ode, destiny, and ( auftinn ' fato concessus :
' auffna ra$r hvors manns lifi/ rules every man's life, Fornald.
sog. 1, 95. Our modern words, not introduced till late, vchicksal
(fr. schicken aptare, conf. geschickt aptus), verhdngnis, filgung,
do not come up to the old ones in simplicity or strength.

To the nouns i scapu, lagu/ correspond the verbs to shape, to
lay, which are used in a special sense of the decrees of fate (pp.
407. 410): 'ist tha kindee skepen (is it shaped for the child)' says
the O. Fris. Law 49, 10. But we also meet with an ON. cetla
(destinare, to intend for some one), OHG. ahton and perhaps
ahtildn, MHG. ahten, and beslahten, as ahte and slahte are akin
to one another (see Suppl.).

1 WUsdlda (fortuna), N. Cap..20-S-5. 53. 77. MHO. wilsalde, Kaiserchr. 1757.
Massmann 8, 669. Geo. 61*. ' diu wile mln and ich muez Got bevolhen sin,' mast
be committed to God, Bit. 3 b .



Digitized by VjOOQIC



858 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

Destiny has principally to do with the beginning and the end
of human life. The Word visits the newborn and the dying,
and it is for one or the other of these events that the above-
mentioned names of destiny are mostly nsed by the poets ; thus
Beow. 51 speaks of dying ' t6 gesceaphwile/ at the appointed
time: Hel. 103, 7: 'tho qu&mun wnrdegiscapa thema 6dagan
man, orlaghnlle, that he thit licht farlfit/ The honr of birth too
settles much as to the course and outcome of one's life : € qualem
Nascentia attulit, talis erit/ and ' Parcae, dum aliquis nascitur,
valent eum designare ad hoc quod volunt/ Superst. A, and C
198 e . The infant's whole course of life shall be conformable to
what the norns or fays in their visitation have bestowed, have
shaped. l

It is a deviation from this oldest way of thinking, to put the
settlement of destiny into the hands of the gods; yet it is a
very old one. Undoubtedly the faith of many men began early
to place the Highest God at the very head of the world's manage-
ment, leaving those weird-women merely to make known his
mandates. The future lies on the lap of the gods, 6eo>v iv youvaat
Kelrac, and with this agrees that ' laying on the lap/ that c taking
to the bosom/ which is performed by the paternal or maternal
deity (pp. 642. 839). If above the gods themselves there could
be conceived a still higher power, of the beginning and end of all
things, yet their authority and influence was regarded by men as
boundless and immeasurable, all human concerns were undoubtedly
under their control (see Suppl.).

The Gautrekssaga tells us (Fornald. sog. 3, 32), that at mid-
night Hrossharsgrani 2 awoke his foster-son Starka$r, and carried
him in his boat to an island. There, in a wood, eleven men sat
in council ; the twelfth chair stood vacant, but Hrossh&rsgrani
took it, and all saluted him as OSinn. And OSinn said, the
demsters should deem the doom of StarkaSr (ddmendr skyldi
doema orlug St.). Then spake Th&rr, who was wroth with the
mother of the lad : I shape for him, that he have neither son nor

1 We ajill say : « born in happy hour.' OHG. ' mit heilu, er giboran ward,* O.
Sal. 44. Freq. in theO. Span. Cid : ' el que en buen ora nascio, el que en buen punto
nascio.' From this notion of a good hoar of beginning (a la bonne heure) has
sprung the Fr. word bonheur (masc.) for good hap in general. Similarly, about
receiving knighthood, the 0. Span, has * el que en buen ora cinxo espada.'

2 That is, Grani, Siftgrani, the bearded, a by-name of Otiinn (p. 147).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



w-y^-j-'.'-iLj



DESTINY. 859

daughter, but be the last of his race. OSinn said : I shape him,
that he live three men's lifetimes (conf. Saxo Gram. p. 103).
Thdrr: in each lifetime he shall do a ' ntSings-verk.' OSinn:
I shape him, that he have the best of weapons and raiment.
Thdrr : he shall have neither land nor soil. OSinn : I give him,
that he have store of money and chattels. Thdrr : I lay unto
him, that he take in every battle grievous wounds. ■ OSinn : I
give him the gift of poetry. Thdrr: what he composes he shall
not be able to remember. OSinn : this I shape him, that he be
prized by the best and noblest men. Thdrr : by the people he
shall be hated. Then the demsters awarded to StarkaSr all the
doom that was deemed, the council broke up, and Hrossharsgrani
and his pupil went to their boat.

Thdrr plays liere exactly the part of the ungracious fay (pp.
411-2), he tries to lessen each gift by a noxious ingredient.
And it is not for an infant, but a well-grown boy, and in his
presence, that the destiny is shaped.

According to Greek legend, Zeus did not always decide
directly, but made use of two scales, in which he weighed the
fates of men, e.g. of the Trojans and Ach»ans, of Achilles and
Hector :

Kal Tore Stf ^piaeia trarffp iwlraive raXavra*

iv 8* iridei Bvo tcrjpe Tavrj\eyio$ davaroio,

Tpaxov 0* iTnroBdfjLCDV Kal y Ayat&v xoKkoxltcovcdv.

e\jee Sk fiiaa-a XafJ&r peire £' atatfiov fjpap 'Axai&v.

II. 8, 69. 22, 209; conf. 16, o58. 19, 223. The same of
Aeneas and Turnus, Aen. 12, 723 :

Jupiter ipse, duas aequato examine lances

sustinet, et fata imponit diversa duorum,

quern damnet labor, et quo vergat pondere letum.

I am the more particular in quoting these, as the christian legend
also provides the archangel Michael, the conductor of souls, with
scales, in which the good and evil deeds of them that die are
weighed against one another, and the destinies of souls determined
by the outcome 1 (see Suppl.). The application of a balance to
actions, to sins, is very natural ; the (apocryphal) 2 Esdras 3, 34*

i Conf. Deut. S. no. 479; a coll. of authorities in Zapp art's Vita Acotanti
(Vienna 1839), pp. 79, 88.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



860 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

has : ' nunc ergo pondera in statera nostras iniquitates/ and 4,
36 : ' quoniam in statera ponderavit seculum/ 1 The Jomsvikinga-
saga cap. 42 (Fornm. sog. 11, 128-9) describes the magical luck-
scales or wishing-scales of Hakon iarl : ( Sftan tekr iarl skcttir
goSar J>»r er hann atti, J>»r voro gervar af brendu silfri ok gylldar
allar, en )?ar fylgSo 2 met, annat af gulli en annat af silfri; a
hvarotveggja metino var gert seen v»ri likneskja, ok hSto )>at
hlotar, en ]>at voro reyndar hlntir, sem monnam var titt at hafa,
ok fylgfSi )>esso n&ttftra mikil, ok til Jress alls, er iarli J?6tti skipta,
J>4 hafiSi hann ]?essa hlati. Iarl var ]?vi vanr at leggja hlnti )?essa
i skalimar, ok kva$ a hvat hvar skyldi merkja fyrir honum, ok
avalt er vel gfingo hlutir, ok sa kom upp, er hann vildi, )?a var sa
6kyrr hlntrinn i sk&linni, er ^at merkSi at hann vildi at yr$i, ok
breysti sa hlntrinn nokkot sva i skalinni, at glam varS af .'

I do not find that in onr earlier heathen time the fates of men
were calculated from the stars at their birth. This kind of
soothsaying (p. 721) seems not to have become known till the
latter part of the Mid. Ages. Radulphus Ardens -(an Aquitanian
priest of the 11th cent.) says in his Homilies (Antverp. 1576,
p. 4l b ) : Cavete, fratres, ab eis qui mentiuntur, quod quando
qaisque nascitur, stella sua secum nascitur, qua fatum ejus con-
stituitur, sumentes in erroris sui argumentnm, quod hie in scrip-
ture, sacra (on the star of the Magi) dicitur ( stella ejus.' One
instance we find in Klinsor's star-gazing on the Wartburg;
another in the wishing-wife who looks into the stars, Altd. bl.
1, 129 (see Suppl.).

For individuals then, as well as for whole families and nations,
length of days and happiness were ordained beforehand. 3 But
the decrees of norns and gods lay shrouded in an obscurity that
disclosed its secrets only to the glances of wise men and women
(p. 400). 8 The people believed in a predetermining of fates, as
they did in the certainty of death.

' We need not go to 2 Esdras to find plenty of similar passages in the O. T.,
e.g. 1 Sam. 2, 3. Job 81, 6. Prov. 16, 2. Isa. 26, 7. Dan. 5, 27.— Trans.

9 Not unfrequently depending on their possession of certain things : a hoard
drags the whole kindred of the Nibelungs to ruin ; the gift, the jewel, of the dwarfs
(p. 457) insures the prosperity of particular families.

* It is worthy of remark, that, ace. to the ON. view, not all the gods, but only
the highest ones possessed a knowledge of destiny; so to the Greeks, none but Zeus
and those whom he made his confidants knew of it. Of Frigg it is said, 8em.
63 b : * at oil drlog viti, J>6tt hun sialfgi segi,' all fates she knows, but tells not. And



Digitized by



Google



FATALISM. 861

The Old Norse fatalism is proved by the following passages :
' lagt er alt for, 9 predestined is all ; and ' era me"? lostom logff
89fi J>er/ Siem. 175 b . 'si& mun gipt lagiff k grams »6/ and
'munat shopom vinna/ 179 b . 'eino doBgri mer var aldr um
skapadr oc allt lif um lagit/ 83*. ' var }>er }>ar shaped/ 164 b . * }>at
verSr hverr at vinna, er cetlat er' ; ' J?at man verSa fram atkoma,
sem cetfatf er'; 'ecki man mer )>at stoSa, ef mer er dau&inn
cetla&r ' ; ' koma man til min feig9in, hvar sem ek em staddr, ef
mer vertSr J>ess atiftit', Nialss. pp. 10. 23. 62. 103. So in Swed.
and Dan. folksongs: 'detta var mig spadt nti min barndom/
Arvidss. 2, 271. 'hver skal nyde skiebnen sin/ Danske V, 1,
193.

The same with our MHG. poets : ' swaz sich sol fiiegen, wer
mac daz understfin (what is to happen, who can binder) V Nib.
1618, 1. 'swaz gescliehen sol, daz fiieget sich/ what shall be,
will be, Frauend. ' d& sterbent wan die veiyen/ there die (none)
but the fey, Nib. 149, 2. 'ez sterbent niuwan die veigen, die
lasgen doch d& heime tdt/ would lie dead though at borne,
Wigal. 10201. 'di veigen fielen dar nider/ Lampr. 2031. 'hin-
nerstirbet niman wan di veigen/ Pf. Chuonr. 8403. 'then veigen
mac nieman behuoten, thiu erthe ne mag in niht ffl gehaven
(hold up), scol er tha werthen gestagen, er sturve (would die)
thoh thaheime/ Pr. belli 42 b . ' swie ringe er ist, der veige man,
in -mac ros noch enkan niht viirbaz getragen/ the fey man, how-
ever light, no horse can carry farther, Karl 72 b . Rol. 207, 24.
' die veigen muosen ligen tdt/ Livl. chron. 59 b . ' der veigen mac
keiner genesen/ none recover, ib. 78*. ' ich ensterbe niht vor
minem tac (day)/ Herb. 53 d . 'nieman sterben sol wan zu sinem
gesatten zil (goal)/ Ulr. Trist. 2308. 'daz aver (whatever) scol
werden, daz nemac nieman erwenden (avert)/ Diut. 3, 71. 'ge-
mach erwenden niht enkan swaz dem man geschehen sol/ Troj.
58*. 'daz muose wesen (what had to be), daz geschach/ Orl.
11167. 'swaz geschehen sol, daz geschiht.' Freid. 132 b . MS. 1,
66 a . 71 b . 'daz solt eld sin, nu ist ez geschehen/ MS. 74*. 80*.
' ez geschiht niht wan daz sol geschehen/ Lanz. 6934. ' ez



Oftinn says (62 b ), that Gefjon knows the world's destiny (aldar drldg) equally with
himself. Among men, particular heroes and priests spy out the secrets of the
fit tare, preeminently Grlpir (p. 94) ; to women, to priestesses, belonged the gift of
divination.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



8G2 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

erg&t doch niht, wan als ez sol/ Trist. 6776. € tot avenra qan-
que doit avenir,' Ogier 7805. ' bin ich genislich, s6 genise ich/
if I was made to live thro' it, I shall, A. Heinr. 190. *' swaz ich
getaon (do), bin ich genislich, ich genise wol ; bin ich dem valle
ergeben (doomed to fall), so n' hilfet mich mtn woltuon nicht ein
h&r/ MS. 2, 129*. ' ez muose sin, nnd ez was mir beschaffen/ it
was to be, was shaped for me (134 b ). ' din maget was in beschaf-
fen,' that girl was cnt out for you, Wigal. 1002. ' ez was im
beslaht (destined)/ Eracl. 2394. ' swaz ist gescJiafen (shapen),
daz muoz geschehen/ MsH. 3, 484 b . i nu mir daz was in telle,'
well, that was in my lot (portion), En. 11231. ' ez was enteile uns
getan/ Herb. 18418. 'ez ist mich angeborn,' I was born to it,
Herb. 6 C . — The words geschaffen, beschaffen and beslaht are identi-
cal with the ON. skapat and oetlat, and this sameness of the
words testifies to their original connexion with the heathen doc-
trine. Even at the present day the fatalist view prevails largely
among the common people (Jul. Schmidt pp. 91. 163). 'ez miiste
mir sein gemacht gewesen/ must have been made for me, Sieben
ehen eines weibes, p. 211. 'fatum in vulgari dicitur "'tis allotted
unto me (bescheert, my share)"; ego autem addo "allotting and
deserving run alway side by side/" Sermones disc, de tempore,
sermo 21. 'was bescheert ist, entlauft nicht/ Schweinichon 3,
249 (see Suppl.). 1

Now, in themselves, the gifts of destiny would include every
earthly blessing. But gradually men began ascribing whatever
in human life seemed bane or blessing (excepting birth and
death) to a separate being : thus the Greeks and Romans, in
addition to polpa and fatum, held by an independent Tvxn an< l
Fortuna..

Mtillenhoff in the Nordalbingia p. 11 (conf. Schlesw. hoist,
sagen xliv) infers from the name of a place Welanao, occurring
in Ansgar (Pertz 2, 687-99), an OS. god Welo, AS. Wela, the
very thing I had had in my mind (p. 163) : an older god of weal
in the place of the later goddess S&lida, Sselde. But instead of
his interpretation Welanaha, I should prefer Welan-owa, which
is supported by the more modern Welnau, a place that stood on

1 The same belief ifl held by the Lithuanians and Lettons, fate they call likkimas
liktew, from lik-t to lay down, arrange : * tai buwo jo likkims,' ' tas jaa bija wiu-
nam liktz,' that was destined for him.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



WEAL. S.ELDE. 863

the right bank of the Elbe near Itzehoe, the river Stor having
apparently formed the 'aue, ea'; Welan-owa would then be
uniform with Wunschesouwa and Pholesouwa (p. 600). The
great thing is, first to establish from other sources the personality
of Welo, which the quotations from the Heliand fail to do, for
welanowa taken simply as isle of luck ( Atterbom's lycksalighetens
6) is quite compatible with the old ways of thinking : Beichenau
(augia dives) has much the same meaning, and in the vicinity of
Welnau has arisen Gliickstadt. In the AS. ' welan bewunden '
(Gramm. 4, 752), wela is used, though mythically, yet not of a
person but a thing : God himself sits ' welan bewunden/ Adam
and Eve stand 'mid welan bewunden/ wrapt in splendour, in
bliss, Ccedm. 42, 2. 27, 19. But the 'gold welan bewunden'
forme a contrast to the ' gold galdre bewunden/ a holy divine
power is imagined confronting that of sorcery ; and this wela
does seem to lead up to Wela, as the kindred notion of wunsch
to Wunsch.

The ON. distinguishes its fern, heill (felicitas) from a neut. heil
(omen), so does the AS. its hselu f. (salus) from hael n. (omen),
and the OHG. its heil! f. (salus) from heil n. (omen). Both
meanings are combined in MHG. heil n. Personifications of
this I scarcely know, unless such be intended by a passage
obscure to me, Ottoc. 683 b , which gives out as a common pro-
verb : ' chum hail hauenstain ! J In MS. 2, 130 b : ' waz ob iuwer
heil eime andern kumet an sin seil/ what if your hap prove
another's hanging? And so early as 0. ii. 18, 7 : 'thaz heil ni
gif&hit iuwih/ luck comes not your way (see Suppl.).

On the other hand, it is the commonest thing with our 13th
cent, poets to treat scelde (fortuna) as a female person, and that
apparently not in imitation of the Romance writings : even the
OHG. sdlida occurs with the like import, and the compound
huilsdlida (supra p. 857) was a stronger expression of the same
thing. 0. i. 26, 4 speaking of the baptism of Christ in the
water, uses a remarkable phrase, to which no church writer could
have prompted him : ' sid wacheta allfin mannon thiu Sdlida in
thfin undon.' Waking presupposes life. The personification
comes out still more clearly in poets four centuries after him:
' unser Scelde wachei/ Parz. 550, 10. ' mln sorge sl&fet, so din
Scelde wachel,' Tit. 31, 3. 'z'aller zit des 8. wachetj MS. 1, 16 b .



Digitized by



Google



864 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

' unser 8. din wil wachen/ Trist. 9480. ' des noch sin 8. wachet/
Ernst. 5114. 'ir 8. wachet/ Amgb. 85*. r daz mir 8. wache/
ib. 43*. € ich waen sin 8. slafe/ ib. 44*. € s6 ist im al dia 8.
ertaget (dawned)/ Trist. 9792. ' din S. ist dir betaget,' Wartb.
kr. jen. 21. ' dia S. was mit im betaget, 9 Dietr. 5*. 27*. r iawer
S. wirt erwecket/ Lohengr. 19. Observe in these MHGL quota-
tions the frequent poss. pron. 1 or gen. case : the Seelde dedicates
herself to certain men, protects and prospers them, wakes for
them while they sleep, as we say ' lack came to me in my sleep/
A mode of speech so common need not always be felt to personify :
'daz im stn heil niht slief/ Troj. 9473. 'd& wachet schande,
and slffift daz heil/ Zauberbecher (magic bowl) 1113. 'Tristans
geliicke dfl, niht slief/ Heinr. Tr. 2396. It was even extended to
other notions of the same kind : ' wachet sin fire nnd ouch sin
lop/ honour, praise, Amgb. 47*. ' ir milte wachet/ ib. 12 b . ' ir
gen&de (kindness) mir muoz wachen/ MS. 1, 33*. r ich wasne an
ir ist gen&de entsl&fen (asleep), daz ich ir leider niht erwecken
kan/ MS. 1, 48*. ' du (minne) bist gegen mir hart entsl&fen/
MS. 1, 60*. 'min schade wachet/ Ben. 121. 'din kraft mit
ellen dd niht slief/ Parz. 85, 24. We still say, c treason sleeps
not } ; and some phrases of this sort can have a personal sense.
The heathen colouring of Scelde's waking and being waked I infer
chiefly from the analogous ' vekja Hildi ' noticed on p. 422, who
not only was awaked, but herself awoke the heroes (Sn. 164).
And e viibwrg seal vaka,' Seem. 46*, may bear the same meaning :
we can translate it ' jucunda salus/ or suppose it a proper noun.
FrfrSi makes Penja and Menja (p. 531) grind gold, peace and
happiness (gall, friS oc seelu), allowing them but scanty rest at
night : they wake to grind prosperity for him, and afterwards
misfortune (salt) for M^singr, Sn. 146-7 (see Suppl.).

And this is far from being the only way personification is
applied to her. Seelde is called /rau, she appears, meets, bends
her face toward her favourites, hearkens to them (as a god hears
prayer), smiles on them, greets them, is kind and obliging, but
can be cross ; those whom she dislikes, she forgets, shuns, flees,
runs away from, 2 turns her back upon ; she has a door and a

1 So : ' des si min S. gein iu bote/ Parz. 416, 4. • des sol min S. pfant sin,' be
pledge thereof, Frauend. 23, • l&t dir'z din S. wol gezemen,' MS. 2, 252*.

' This escaping is the same thing as the ON. hverfa (evanescere) : heillir



Digitized by VjOOQIC



8MLVE. 865

road. Here again old Otfrid leads the way (ii. 7, 20) : ' thiu
Sdlida in thar gaganta' (eis oecurrit). Walther sings 55, 85:
'fro Scelde teilet nmbe sich (scatters gifts around), und heret mir
den riigge zuo (turns her back), sie stfit ungerne gegen mir, si n*
ruochet (recks) mich niht an geselien' ; and 43, 5: ' min frou 8.,
wie si min vergaz !' f vro S. h&t in an sich genomen, wil din
pflegen (cherish)/ Ecke 10, 160. 'ob vrouwe 8. mines heiles
welle ruochen/ Ben. 425. ' die wile es min 8. ruochte/ Parz.
689, 20. ' h»te mir diu 8. ir ore baz geneiget/ inclined her ear,
MS. 2, 220 b . ' d6 was mir 8. entrunnen/ Parz. 689, 8. ' 8. was
sin geleite/ conductress, Wigal. 8389. i frou 8. ir was bereit,'
ready to help, Br. 3459 ; and perhaps we ought to add what
follows: 'diu Gotes hovescheit ob miner frowen swebte/ God's
kindness over my lady hovered; for so hover the valkyrs over
the heroes they befriend. 'Got wise mich der Scelden wege/
guide me on Fortune's way, Parz. 8, 1 6. ' den vuoz (foot) setzen
in der 8. pfat/ Ben. 306. 'frowe S. muoz in 6f ir straze wtsen/ «
Tit. 5218. 'der Scelden site/ path, Karl 19 b . 'iiber fro 8. stec
g&n/ Pragm. 46\ 'tuo mir ftf (open) der 8. Mr!' MS. 1, 36\
'der 8. porte/ A. Heinr. 243, 33. 'der 8. tiir beBliezen/ shut,
MsH. 8, 336*. 'setzen zuo der 8. tiir,' Zauberb. 1150. 'den
begiuzet 8. vluot,' flood, MsH. 3, 205*. ' Scelde und ir gesinde
(household) wait ir/ MS. 1, 88 b . 'diu Saldefolget sinen vanen/
follows his banners, Lampr. 2089. 'mir enwil diu 8. ninder
folgen einen fuoz/ Ben. 367. ' mir ist diu 8. gram/ unfriendly,
Gregor 2390. ' diu S. was ime gram/ Diut. 1,10. Athis D. 84.
' diu 8. vliuhet (flees) von mir/ Greg. 1526. ' din 8. h&t mich
verldn/ Karl 95*. ' diu 8. h&t si besezzen/ possessed her, Wigal.
884. ' diu 8. het ir gesworn ' 941 . ' diu 8. het zuo im gesworn
zeim staeten ingesinde/ to be his steadfast follower, Lanz. 1561.
' der Scelden spil/ game, Wigal. 8761. 9271. 9386. ' diu gespil
der S./ playmate 10532. ' swes diu 8. ze gesellen gert/ desires
as companion 945. ' im gab diu 8. ir hantgift/ Silv. 534. ' diu
8. vl6z im in den flaunt' 1024. 'ez rise (drop) fif dich der 8.
tuft 9 1389. 'so griienet diner 8. ris/ spray, MsH. 2, 258*.
'frouwe 8. IcLchet mir/ laughs, Ernst 4334. ' daz dir fro 8. lathe,
und al din heil bewaehe/ Silv. 2565. ' Fortune wolt im do niht

horfnar (felicitates evanitae), Bern. 93». * swi ime di Balden volgen, werdent si ime
vcrbolgtn, si ne keren xornliche wider,' once offended, they come not back, Al. 6189.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



866 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

m& gensedeclichen (graciously) lachen,' Troj. 5754. ' s6 decket
uns der 8. huot,' hood, hat, Winsbekin 45, 7 : a wishing-cap.
'daz iuch frouwe 8. miieze behullen' (fovere), Lohengr. 101:
b&hulleri prob. in its literal sense, to wrap, to clothe, as Walther
43, 1 and 7 makes frd S»lde hidden (clothe) people, and schroten
(cat out) for them ; she cuts out sorrow and high courage. And
so, no doubt, under many more aspects, which we can guess from
our present figures of speech : ' fortune favours, visits, pursues
him/ etc. etc. And here again we find, even in old poets, the
more vague neuter : ' geliicke h&t den nuwen gegen mir gekfirt/
turned its back toward me, LS. 1,238; 'h&t den nuwen noch
gegen mir endecket; enblecket gfin mir sinen zan (bared its
teeth, gnashed) ; het zer rechten hende griffen ' 3, 539. ' dd
kfirte von im unde vldch geliicke/ Troj. 5750. We say 'my
fortune blooms, grows/ as though it were attached to a tree
or herb : ' mein gliicke das bliihete mir/ Schweinichen 1, 170.
'geliicke wahset mit genuht/ Troj. 5686. 'uns ist niht wol
erschozen geliicke ' 12438. 'Got wil uns seelde l&zen wahsen/
Lohengr. 66. The proverb ' das gliick kommt von ungefahr wol
tiber neunzig stauden her/ Simplic. 2, 158, well expresses the
suddenness and surprise, the windfall nature of luck, to which
are owing the very names of rvxv (from rvxelv, riryxweiv) and
fortuna (from fors). Very likely some of the phrases quoted
above have come to us from the ancients, or they had them in
common with us (see Suppl.).

The tale of the Wunderer (wonder-worker, Etzels hofh. 208),
makes frau Scelde a Tang's daughter with three miraculous gifts,
(1) that of knowing a man's thoughts, (2) of blessing warriors
against wounds in battle, (3) of transporting herself whither she
will (24 — 26). Who can fail to detect in this the echo of an old
heathen valkyr ?

The now universally familiar image of Fortune riding on a
rolling wheel (rcvkivSpos;), 1 which was attributed to Fors, Tyche
and Nemesis (0. Miiller's Archaol. 607), is, I consider, an im-
portation. ' Versatur celeri Fors levis orbe rotae/ Tibull. i. 5, 70.
' stans in orbe dea,' Ov. ep. ex Ponto ii. 3, 56. ' Fortunae rotam
pertimescebat/ Cic. in Pison. 10. 'rota Fortunae/ Tac. de orat.

1 A different thing therefore from the wheel that Krodo and Vishnu carry in
the hand (p. 248-9).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



fortune's wheel. 867

23. ' assumptns in amplissimum Fortnnae fastigium, versabiles
ejus moiuB expertus est, qui ludunt mortalitatem, nunc evehentes
quosdam in sidera, nunc ad Cocyti profunda mergentes/ Amm.
Marc. 14, 11 : ' Fortunae volucris rota ad versa prosperis semper
alternans' 31, 1. € Fortunae te regendum dedisti, dominae
moribus oportet obtemperes, tu vero volventis rotae impetum
retinere conaris ? Si manere incipit, For* esse desistit/ Boeth. de
consol. ii. pr. 1. Notker cap. 25. ' rotam volubili orbe versamns
(says Fortuna of herself), infima summis, summa infimis mutare
gaudemus. a%cem.de si placet, sed ea lege uti ne, cum ludicri mei
ratio poscet, descendere injuriam putes/ ib. ii. pr. 2. — There
seem to be two separate images here : one, that of the goddess
herself standing or sitting l on the revolving wheel, 9 and so
whirling by in breathless haste ; the other, that she makes the
favoured ones ascend the wheel, and the unlucky ones descend,
those soar aloft, these hang below. Our poems of the Mid. Ages
often speak in general terms of the rat (wheel) or schibe (disc,
orb) of Fortune, of luck, of Sselde : ' orbita Fortunae ducit
utroque rotam (a better reading: utramque viam)/ Reinh. 1,
1494. 'volubilis Fortunae rota/ Rodulfus chron. Trudonis, p.
881. ( rota Fortunae/ Radevicus 1, 40. 'swaz ie geschiht, daz
stat an gluckes rode, 9 whatever happens rests on fortune's wheel,
Freid. 110, 17. r daz im der scelekeit rat mit willen umbe lief/
Troj. 9471 ; ' ja walzet ir geluckes rat vil steteclich uf und nider,
her und hin, dan und wider loufet ez/ her (i.e. Slide's) wheel of
luck rolls right steadfastly, 8 etc. 2349. * im dienet daz geluckes
rat, daz im nach 6ren umbe lief ' 7229. * geluckes rat louft uns
die sumer und die winder/ Lohengr. 119. 'min schibe gat ze
wunsche/ Ben. 353 ; € dem g6t sin schibe enzelt/ 360. € wol gie
(or, gie fiir sich) ir schibe,' Lohengr. 146. 189. ' si vuoren (they
rode) uf gelilckes rode/ Flore 844. ' Scelde diu ist sinewel (sphe-

1 Pentam. 5, 9 has also a * vecchia $eduta ncoppa na rota ' as Fortuna.

9 The mere turning of a wheel (daz sueibonta rad, N. Boeth. 47) may, quite
apart from the goddess, suggest the mutability of fate. When Cyras saw a captive
king attentively watch the rising and falling spokes of wheels, and inquired the
reason, the latter replied, that they put him in mind of the instability of life, twi
r& K&Tta torn yirorrai, Kcd r& &ru> kotw (Cedrenus, ed. Paris, 142).

• This is contrary to James I. of Sootl.'s idea : • the sudden sweltering of that
ilk wheel .... so tolter whilom did she it to- wry (twist about).' But it seems the
prevailing one here, unless * stn schibe g&t en-zclt ' (3 lines lower) mean ' goes
tolter,' tolutans, ambling, as zelter is an ambler. Further on, ' mich hin verdruoke,'
push me off, need not imply a waddling movement.— Trams.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



868 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

rical), und walzet umb als ein rat, 9 Uebel wip 241. s der Soehlen
schiben trtben/ Amis 2053. ' entschiben,' Ulr. Trist. 708. Yet
that ascending and descending is often mentioned too : ' sd stige
ich uf, and ninder abe/ never down, Parz. 9, 22. ' geiucke ist
rehte als ein bal, swer stiget der sol vurhten val/ who climbs
must fear a fall, Freid. 115, 27. 'sd hangen ich an dem rades
teile (limb), dft maneger hanget &ne trfist (without hope)/ Ben.
88 ; ( 6 daz der Sodden schibe mich hin verdriicke gar zuo der
verzalten schar'91. 'si waren h6he gar gestigen (mounted
high) uf des . . . geliickes rat, nu miiezens leider von der stat aber
nider riicken (move down again)/ Flore 6148. ' swer hiute sitzet
uf dem rode, der slget morgen drunder (sinks under it to-morrow)/
Troj. 18395. ' er ist komen uf geliickes rat, daz muoz im immer
stille stAn/ Geo. 193. € geliickes rat, wenne sol ich mine stat uE
dir vinden ? ' Ben. 306. ' swebe oben an der Soelichkeit rade/
Zauberb. 1860. € Got werfe in von (hurl him from) geliickes rat !'
Kolocz. 74. ' geliickes rait geit up ind neder, ein velt (one falls),
der ander stiget weder/ Hagen's Coin. chr. 1770. ' geliickes rat
nurtdeinuf die hoBhe/ turn (writhe) him up aloft, Tit. 5218;
' gelucke, din rat nu ride ! ' 5275. ' Fortuna diu ist so getan, ir
schibe l&zet si umbe g&n, umbe loufet ir rat, dicke vellet der da
vaste saz/ oft falleth he that sat there fast, Lampr. Alex. 3066. 1
This notion carried into detail shews us four (or twelve) men at
once standing on fortune's wheel in ceaseless revolution : € ge-
liickes rat treit vier man, der eine stiget uf, der ander stiget abe,
der dritte ist obe, der vierde der ist under/ MS. 2, 221* ; and
WigaL p. 41 tells us of one who had in his house such a wheel
cast of gold, and who was always happy (like Frode with his mill
of luck, which also went round) : ' ein rat enmitten uf dem sal,
daz gie uf und ze tal (down) ; da w&ren bilde gegozzen an (molten
images thereon), iegelichez geschaffen als ein man. hie sigen diu
(sank these) init dem rade nider, so stigen (mounted) diu ander
uf wider, daz was des geliickes rat. 9 9 In Renart le nouvel 7941
— 8011, Fortune lifts the fox on to her wheel, and promises not
to turn it. Hence too the story of the twelve landsknechts or

1 Conf. the passage on la roe de la Fortune in the Jen d'Adan (ThS&tre fran-
9ais aa moyen fge p. 82).

3 From this wheel, which Wigalois wore on his helmet (1862—6), came the
name of Bitter mit dem rod (already in Gildas of Banchor • miles quadrigae '), not
frcm the adventure he had to brook with a brazen wheel (pp. 252 — i of the poem).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



CHILD OF LUCK. 869

Johanneses on fortune's wheel, Deut. sag. nos. 209. 337. Oar
Sselde is never painted blind or blindfolded 1 (see Suppl.) .

What seems to me to be far more significant than this wheel,
which probably the S&lida of onr heathen forefathers never had
(a whole carriage to herself would be more in their way), is the
circumstance of her adopting ckildr&n, owning her favourites for
her sons : 'ich bin ouch in fro Scelden schoz geleit,' laid in her
lap. Fragm. 45 b . To be a darling of fortune, a child of luck, to
sit in fortune's lap, implies previous adoption (Goth, frasti-sibja,
Rom. 9, 4), conf. RA. 160. 463-4. A select being like this is
called ' der Sadden barn, 9 Barl. 37, 36. 191, 38. Engelh. 5070.
< Artus der 8. hint,' Zauberb. 1433. < 8. kint h&t S. stift ' 1038.
' Maria der S. kint,' Wartb. kr. jen. 56. 'ir sit gezelt geliicke ze
ingesinde (as inmate), dem heile ze liebem kinde,' Warnung 2596.
' Si ist 8. sundertriutel (fondling), in der wiirzegarten kan si
brechen ir rosen/ MS. 1, 88*. Now, as Wuotan can take the place
of the gifting norn (p. 858), so he can that of Sselde; he is himself
the bestower of all bliss, he takes up children to his bosom.
Altogether identical therefore with Saalden barn must be 'des
Wwisches barn, an dem der Wunsch was voile vara/ on whom
Wish had perfectly succeeded, Orl. 3767. A child of luck has
' des Wunsches segen,' Lanz. 5504. For more references, see pp.
138 — 144. s Accordingly Sdlida can be regarded as a mere
emanation of Wuotan (see Suppl.).

Such a child of luck was Fortunatus, to whom Fortuna (conf.
Felicia, MsH. 2, 10 b and infra ch. XXXII.) appears in a forest of
Bretagne, and gives a fairy purse : and who also wins the wishing-
cap (souhaitant chapeau), the tarn-cap, which one has only to
put on, to be in a twinkling at some distant place. Evidently
a hat of Wish or Wuotan (p. 463), a iriraao? or winged cap of
Hermes the giver of all good, of all s»lde. And ' Sselde's hat'
is expressly mentioned : * sd decket uns der Salden huot, daz uns
dehein weter selwen mac/ no weather can befoul us, MsH. 3,
466*. The never empty purse I connect with the goddess's horn
of plenty : ' mundanam cornucopiam Fortuna gestans/ Amm.



1 Nor is she called gletin, like the Lat. Fortuna vitrea; Gotfrid of Strasftburg
alone (MS. 2, 45* ) has * daz glerin glUcke,' and we have now the proverb * luck and
crock are easy broke.'

2 I find also a proper name Seldenbot» Snide's messenger, Weisth. 8, 277-8.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



870 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING,

Marc, 22, 9. ' formatum Fortunae habitnm cnm divite cornu,'
Pradent. lib. 1 contra Symm.; also with Amalthea's horn or
Svantovit's (p. 591), nay with the Kepas wrqpta?, Luke 1, 69.
Of the wishing-rod we are reminded by the synonymous expres-
sions: 'alles heiles ein wunscheUris,' -twig, -wand, Troj. 2216,
and 'des Wunsches bluome/ Barl. 274, 25.

^The belief in fairy things [wunscheldinge, lit. wishing-gear] is
deeply rooted in our mythology: let us examine it minutely.
There are things, belonging to gods, but also lent to men, which
can bestow a plenitude of bliss, the best that heart can wish ;
so that our old vernacular word seems quite appropriate. The
Sanskrit for wish is significant : mano-ratha, wheel of the mind ;
does this open to us a new aspect of the divine wish ? Wish
turns the wheel of our thoughts. In the Edda the wishing-gear
is the cunning workmanship of dwarfs, and is distributed among
the gods. OSinn possessed the spear Qungnir, the hurling of
which brings victory, Thdrr the hammer Miolnir, which comes
crashing down as thunderbolt, which also consecrates, and of
itself comes back into his hand. Freyr had a sword of similar
nature, that swung itself (er si&lft vegiz), Saem. 82*. Sn. 40; its
name is unrecorded. The r cudgel jump out o' your sack ! ' in
our fairy-tale is the same story vulgarized; in GEgi's hall the
pitchers or beakers of ale brought themselves (si&lft barsc )?ar 61),
Saem. 48 ; Wolfdieterich (Cod. dresd. 296-7) fell in with god-
desses, to whose table the wheaten loaf came walking, and the
wine poured itself out : such gear the Greeks called avrofiarov
(self-taught), H. 18, 876. (Egis-hialmr must originally have
been (Egi's own (and (Egir is at times undistinguishable from
OSinn), as Aegis is wielded by the two highest deities Zeus and
Athena: afterwards the helmet came into the hand of heroes.
Out of the magic helm sprang heht-lielm, grim-helm, tarn-kappe,
wunsch-mantel (Kinderm. no. 122), wunsch-hut, which bestow
on dwarfs, heroes and fortune's favourites the power to walk
unseen, to sail swiftly through the sky. To the goddesses
Freyja and Frigg belonged Brisinga men, which, like the J/lu*?
of Venus and Juno, awakened longing (ifiepos), and matches the
sword, spear and hammer of the gods (p. 885). On the veil or
hood of the goddess Sif grew golden hair, as corn does on the
earth : its proper name is not given. SkiSblaffnir is described,

Digitized by VjOOQIC



WISHING-aBAB. 871

now as a ship, now as a hat, both of which could either be folded
up or expanded, for sailing in or for raising a storm ; wishing-
ships occur in Norske eventyr 1, 18. 142 and Sv. folkv. 1, 142-5.
Not unlike this are our winged sandals and league hoots. QulUn-
bursti, too, Frey's boar, carries him through air and water.
From OSin's ring Drcmpnvr dropped other rings as heavy; the
miraculous power of Folia's ring (Folio ftngrgull, Sn. 68) is not -
specified, perhaps it made one invisible, like that of Aventiwe
(p. 911). Draopnir suggests the broodpermy (Dent. sag. no. 86)
or hatching dollar of later times : whoever ate the bird's heart,
would find a gold-piece under his pillow every morning. With
this are connected the wishing-pwrse, and the wishing-rod, which
unlocks the hoard, but apparently feeds it as well (ch. XXXI) ;
also the wunderblume and the springwurzel [root which springs
open the door of a treasure] ; a bird's nest makes invisible (Dent.
s. no. 85. Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 861. Mone's Anz. 8, 589).
Frdfti's wishing-mill Grdtti would grind anything the grinder
wished for aloud (Sn. 146), gold, salt, etc. ; this we can match
with the wheel of fortune, an image that may be an importation
to us (p. 866), yet not have been strange to our remote ancestry ;
of manoratha I have spoken before. British legend too had
its own version of fortune's wheel (p. 869). Such a mill, such
a wheel ought above all to grind food for gods. The gods
possess the drink of immortality, which inspires man with song,
and keeps a god young. ISun's apples restore youth, as apples
in Volsungasaga make pregnant, in Sneewitchen send sleep, and
in Fortunatus give horns and take them away. But the wishing-
cloak becomes a wishing-chth, which when spread brings up any
dish one may desire : in Danish and Swedish songs such a cloth
is woven of field wool (ageruld, D. vis. 1, 265. 800. dkerull, Sv.
vis. 2, 199), a sort of grass with a woolly flower (eriophorum
polystachium) ; the same wishing-cloth occurs in Norske ev. 1, -
44. 274, it is pulled out of a mare's ear, p. 112. Other wishing-
cloths have to be spun in silence, or the hemp for them must be
picked, baked, braked, hatchelled, spun and woven all in one
day. The Servians tell of a miraculous cow, out of whose ear
yarn is spun, she is then killed and buried, and miracles are
wrought on her grave. A wishing-cow Kamaduh or Kdmadhenu
is mentioned in Indian myth (Pott 2, 421. Somadeva 1, 198) ;

VOL. II. F F

Digitized by VjOOQIC



872 DESTINE AND WELL-BEING.

a winking -goat, who procures money, in the Norw. tales 1 , 45 ;
an om in Pentam. 1, 1. The machandelbom (juniper) in our
fairy-tale is a wishing-tiree, so is that from which Cinderella
shakes down all her splendid dresses ; the Indians call it kalpa
vriksha (tree of wishes) or Manoratha-dayaka (wish-giving),
Somadeva 2, 84. Beside the dresses of sun and moon, the
gold-hen and seven chickens (p. 728) are contained in the nut.
Portuna carries a horn of plenty (p. 870). The goat Amaltheia's
horn supplied the nymphs who had nursed Zeus with all they
wished for ; another legend makes the nymph Amaltheia possess
a bull's horn, which gave in abundance all manner of meat and
drink that one could wish. A Scottish tradition has it, that
if any one can approach a banquet of the fairies, take away their
drinking-bowl or horn, and carry it across a running stream
without spilling, it will be to him a cornucopia of good fortune ;
if he break it, his good days are done (R. Chambers pp. 32-3).
We know that wise-women and elfins offer drinking-horns to men
(p. 420) ; that jewels of the elves (like those of the smith dwarfs)
ensure luck to human families, viz. their sword, ring and goblet
(p. 457) ; that the swan left in Loherangrin's family a sword,
liorn and fingerling (ring, Parz. 826. 19). Oberon's liorn, and
he is of elf kind, was a wishing-horn, and excited magic dancing.
Other wonders are wrought by the harps of gods and heroes
(p. 907). The elves, beside the horn, have in their gift a bread
of grace that blesses. By the side of this may stand the beau-
tiful myths of the cruse of oil that never runs dry, the savoury
pottage that brims over, the yarn that has never done winding.
Jemshid's goblet too was a miraculous one, so was the far-famed
Or ail (greal, Ducange sub v. gradalus, graletus, grasala, grassale,
grassellus), that nourished and healed, which Romance legend took
up and interwined with christian, as indeed the spear of Longinus
and the bleeding lance are very like a heathen wishiog-spear ;
nails of the true cross are worked up into bridles that bring
victory (El. xxii), wood of the cross and a thousand relics are
applied to thaumaturgic uses (ch. XXXVI), rings and precious
stones were held against a relic, that its virtue might pass into
them ; precious stones themselves are in a sense wishing -stones,
such to the Indians was Divyaratna (Pott 2, 421), which .fulfilled
all the wishes of its owner. And the Grail cannot be more

Digitized by VjOOQIC



WISHING-GEAR. 873

celebrated in the poems of the Round Table than Sampo is in
the epic of the Finns. It was fashioned by the god Umarinen
in Pohjola, and a joy it was to live in the land that possessed it,
the fields were covered with standing corn and hanging fruits.
But the gods tried to win it back (just like OShrcerir, p. 902),
and Wainamoinen and Umarinen succeeded in the theft; yet
Louhi the princess of Pohjola pursued them in eagle's shape (as
Suttiing did OSinn), and overtook the fugitives on the open sea.
While Louhi makes a clutch at Sampo, and Wainamoinen strikes
at her fingers with the rudder, Sampo falls into the sea and
breaks ; the lid alone (Kirjokannen 23, 393, conf. 11, 361) is left
in Louhi 1 s hand, and with it she flies back to Pohjola : wretched-
ness and famine have reigned there ever since. Wainamoinen
finds pieces of Sampo on the shore, and has them sown, out of
which grow up trees, one of them a lofty oak that darkens the
sun. The points of likeness between this Sampo and the Norse
drink of immortality are startling, and the pieces picked up on
the strand by the highest god, and giving birth to trees, may
be compared to Askr and Embla, whom the three &ses found on
the sea-shore (p. 560. S»m. 3 b ). The name Sampo, doubtless
one of high antiquity and sacredness, calls to mind a Mongolian
legend of a tree Asambu-bararkha, whose fruit dropping in the
water uttered the sound sambu (Major's Myth. wtb. 1, 565) ;
sangpa in Tibetian means purified, holy. We gather from all
these examples, still far from complete, how under the veil of
sensuous images — spear, hammer, hat, helmet, cloak > horn,
goblet, necklace, ring, ship, wheel, tree, rod, flower, cloth, meat
and drink — lay hidden the spiritual ones of victory, happiness,
peace, healing, fertility, riches, virtue and poetic art. But when
several single attributes met in one object, as in Sampo and
the Grail, they still further enhanced its meaning and sacredness
(see Suppl.).

From the prologue to the Grimnism&l, Seem. 39, we learn that
OSinn and Frigg, beside being the chief paternal and maternal
deities of antiquity, bestow their protection on special favourites:
under the form of an old man and woman, they bring up the
boys GeirroSr and Agnar respectively, the act being expressed
by the verb fostra. Frigg had even, according to Sn. 38, a

Digitized by VjOOQIC



874 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

special handmaid, herself a divine being, whom she appointed
for the defence (til g®tslu) of such foster-sons against all dan-
gers ; this personified Tntela was named Him (p. 884), as if the
couch, tekivri, OHG. hltna (recubitus, 01. Ker. 273) on which one
leans (root hleina hl&in, Or. k\Ivg>, Lat. clino). We find 'harmr
Hlinar,' Saem. 9 a , and there went a proverb ' sA er forSaz hlei-
nir/ he that is struggling leans for help. Hlin (Goth. Hleins?)
shelters and shields, the Goth, hlams is a hill [Germ, berg, a hill,
is from bergen, to hide], the OHG. hlinaperga, linaperga=
fulcrum, reclinatorium.

Those who are born with a caul about their head are popularly
believed to be lucky children. Such a membrane is called glucks-
liaube, wehmidter-havblein, and is carefully treasured up, or sewed
into a band and put round the babe. 1 Fischart in Garg. 229 b calls
it Jcinderpelglin (balg, bag), while the Icelanders give it the name
of fylgja f., and imagine that in it resides the child's guardian-
spirit or a part of its soul : midwives are careful not to injure it,
but bury it under the threshold over which the mother has to
pass. Whoever carelessly throws it away or burns it, deprives
the child of its guardian, Edd. Saem. Hafniens. 2, 653. This
guardian-spirit is variously named fylgja (who follows man),
sometimes forynja (who goes before him, F. Magn. lex. 879),
oftener hamingja (felicitas) from hamr induviae, nay, this hamr
of itself seems to stand for the same thing : ' hamr Atla/ genius

» Kinderm. no. 89, oonf. 8, 89. Ettner's Hebamme p. 584. Journal y. o. f. D.
1788. 1, 574. Ital. 'nascer vestito' —avventurato ; Fr. n6 co\ff6; Pol. w ciepku
urodzil, Haupt's Zeitschr. 1, 187. The Servians name the caul koshulitsa, little
shirt, and a child born with it vidavit : he will go to the Vilas and know more than
other men. In Holland they say * met den helm geboren zin ' (oonf. p. 389) : such
children have the power of seeing spectres ; a ham (ovum) in which a foal came
into the world is hung np on a high tree, Westendorp p. 518. Of the gluoks-helm
we are told : * ab eo tegmine obstetrioes et delirae anionlae infantibus bona ex colore
rubicundo, vol mala ex nigrioante praesagire solent. magno vendnnt hnjnsmodi
pileos infantiles credulis advocatis, qui se nine adjuvari putant.' This in Anton.
Diadum. cap. 4 is borrowed from an older passage in Aelius Lampridius : * solent
pueri pileo insignari naturali, quod obstetrioes rapiunt et advocatis credulis ven-
dant, siquidem oausidioi hoc juvari dicuntur.' [AS. heafela, hafela. MHG. hiiett-
lin, batwdt, kindbUlgel, westerh&fe, westerhuot; conf. the westerwdt preserved in
churches, and the names Gliiokshelm, Barnhelm. • Membranulae ad modum retis
dispositae, in quibus quandoque nasountur pueri et vooantur in vulgari (Bohemioo)
wodienic. de his memhranis faznant vetulae : si recipiantur IX vel ad minus V et
habeantur eumJUo aureo et sericeo in eeclesia per novem dies illo tempore quo horae
canonieae dicuntur per nonam, et ferantur per aliquem ad judicem vel ad judicium,
ille obtinet causam suam. 1 Jungmann sub v. od&nj. Lith. namai kudikio, child's
house. ON. HloVr born with helmet and sword.— Extr. from Suppl., vol iii.
Mot a word about it as a charm against drowning.]



Digitized by VjOOQIC



child's caul, guabdian angel. 875

Atlii, Ssem. 253\ According to Ihre (de Superst. p. 24-5), the
Swed. hanm denotes a genius that follows each man.

What is essential to the notion of a guardian-angel is his being
native to us : this distinguishes him from the home-sprite (genius
familiaris), who devotes himself to an individual man, but not
from birth. Begula Benedicti cap. 7 : 'ab angelis nobis deputatis
cotidie die* noctuque Domino Factori nostro opera nostra nun-
tiantur.' Berthold preaches (p. 209) : ' als daz kint lebende
wirt an siner muoter libe, sd giuzet im der engel die tele in, der
almehtige Got giuzet dem kinde die sele mit dem engel in ; ' and
St. Bernard (sermo 12 in ps. Qui habitat) : ' quoties gravissima
cernitur urgere tentatio et tribulatio vehemens imminere, invoca
custodem tuum, doctorem tuum, adjutorem tuum. in opportuni-
tatibus, in tribulatione, in quovis diversorio, in quovis angulo,
angelo tuo reverentiam habe. tu ne audeas illo praesente, quod
vidente me non auderes.' One more passage I will transcribe,
from Notker's Capella 137 : ' allfin menniskon wirdet sunderig
unde gemeine huotdre gesezzet. ten heizent si ouh flihtare
(pflichter, care-taker), wanda er alles werches fliget. ten gemeinen
betdnt (adore) tie liute sament, unde &ne daz iogelih ten sinen
(beside that, each his own), fone diu heizet er genius, wanda er
genitis s&r gegeben wirt ze flihte. tiser huotftre unde diser getriwo
bruoder behuotet iro s61A unde iro sinna allero. wanda er ouch
tougene gedancha Gote chundet, pediu mag er ioh angelus
heizen.' l This doctrine, partially retained as we see by the
church, seems to have got mixed up with that grosser native
superstition of guardian and attendant spirits. Caesar heisterb.
8, 44 supposes every man to have a good and a bad angel, who
seeks to bring him weal or woe. The valkyrs too were to a
certain extent guardian-spirits of the heroes (pp. 400. 419), and
remained bound to them for a time. It is said of slain heroes
(Lament 922) : ' ir engel vil wol wisten, war ir sfile solten komen/
full well their angels wist whither their souls should go. Other

i The Lai text rone: 'et generalis omnium praesnl, et specials singulis
mortalibus genius admovetur, quern etiam prae$titem y quod praesit gerundis
omnibus, voeayerunt. nam et populi genio. quum generalis poecitur, supplicant, et
unuscjuisque gubernatori proprio dependit obsequium. ideoque genius dicitur,
quoniam quum quit hominum genitus fuerit, max eidem eopulatur. hie tutelator
fidissimusque germanus animos omnium mentesque custoait. et a.uoniam oogi-
tationum arcana Superae annuntiat Potestati, etiam angelus potent nuneupari.'
Conf. Porphyry's Vita Plotini p. 14. Plutarch's Vita Antonini p. 430.



Digitized by



Google



876 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

passages speak of these angels : € sie redeten, daz ir engel muose
lachen/ they said her angel must laugh for joy, Wartb. kr. jen.
38 ; ( ein wiser (wizer, white ?) engel bi dir gat, der dinen tiuvel
sd von dir gescheiden hat* 47: 'teile din pater noster mite
dinem engel 9 23 ; € em engel, der din hat gepflegen (tended) ' 62.
' ich wil gelouben, daz den list din engel finde,' will find out a
way, Lohengr. p. 3. 'in was ir engel bi/ Geo. 343! 'daz der
engel din diner 6ren hiiete ! * guard thy honour, MsH. 3, 230 b .
' zuo im was geweten ein engel, daz im niht geschach/ Geo. 8205.
' ah im sin engel gab die 16re/ Kolocz. 148 ; ' daz iuch min engel
griieze ! ' greet you 102; and elsewhere 'daz iuwer min engel
walte!' Graceful equivalents for e l from my inmost soul/ 1
(see Sappl.).

In Nialssaga cap. 101 a heathen submits to baptism, but only
on the assurance that St. Michael (receiver of souls, p. 854-5)
shall thereby become his fylgju engill. And cap. 23 speaks of
the fylgja Gunnars.

One who is near death sees his angel first: 'Jrft mant vera
feigr maiSr, oc munt J>u s&8 hafa fylgju pina? sure thou art fey,
and hast seen thy f., Nialss. cap. 41. Quite logically, as the
man's death severs the bond between him and his fylgja. Then
the fylgja presents herself to another person,^ and offers him her
services : Helgi forecast his own death, because a Witch riding
her wolf appeared to his brother at night, and offered her
attendance, 'hauS fylgB slna; fylgjo beiddi/ Ssem. 14*. 147*.
When a man sees his fylgja, she is giving him up, quitting him.
In Norway the vulgar opinion is, that the folgie likes to shew
herself in the shape of some animal that typifies the character
of the man she belongs to (Faye p. 77). Can this have indi-
cated a future transmigration ? conf. p. 823. There were fylgjor
that, like the dwarfs, stuck to certain families : hynfylgjor,
cettarfylgjor ; and this is important, as teaching the affinity of

1 Conf. H. Saohs'B poem * die engels hat,' and « der lockige knabe,' in Hebel's
Earfnnkel. [Not only men, but even some animals, have an angel of their own,
Keisersp. brosamL 19°. The Pass. 387, 46 agrees with Oaes. heist. : ' zwene engel,
einen guoten, einen leiden ' ; yet ' sin engel ' 41 means only the good one, and so
it is generally. Conf. Menander's protest (abridged) : * a good daemon is given at
birth ; never dream that there are evil daemons, for God is good.' Angels are
always imagined as male ; thus, when two ladies appear : * ob ez von himele weren
zwene. engele (maso.), des enweiz ioh niht,' Frib. Trist. The guardian-angels of two
friends are also friends, Benn. 18902.— Extr. from Suppl.]



Digitized by



Google



GUABDIAN ANGEL. 877

such spirits to elves and dwarfs, who (like the white lady, the
ancestress Berhta, p. 280) shew themselves when a death in the
family is imminent.

Hamingjor, occurring as early as S»m. 37 b . 93 b , are very like
our personified scelde: hamlngja too at first denoted fortuna,
felicitas, and afterwards a being that bestowed these blessings,
holding a middle place between a fate, a guardian-spirit and a
goodnatured homesprite; conf. Laxd. saga p. 441. ' Harmngjor
horfnar, heillir horfnar ' in Seam. 93 are those that have aban-
doned their man.

The ON. landvcett (p. 441) is, like the fylgja and hamfngja, a
female being, not however the guardian-spirit of an individual
or a family, but of the whole country. In the code of Ulfliot
it is ordered that every ship shall have its figure-head taken
down before it come in sight of land (i landss^n), lest the gaping
jaws affright the landvoettir : e sigla eigi at landi me*S gapandi
hofSum ne ginandi tridnu, sv& at landvcettir froldist vr3 ' l (see
Suppl.).

With the Slavs the notions of luck, chance and destiny touch
one another, yet their mythology is destitute of beings equivalent
to the norns and parcae (p. 436). For luck the Servians have
sretia [from s-r6titi to meet], the Slovdns srezha, and they
personify them too : dobra Sretia (bona Portuna, Vuk 3, 444)
is their ayaOq Tuxn, their frd SsBlde. 8 The Lettish Laima (p.
416) comes nearer the parca or moira : she is called mahmina, i.e.
mother, goddess. Then again the fostermother Dehkla (ibid.) by
the boon of her milk bestows luck and aptitude: 'k& Dehkla
noleek, tk noteek,' as D. disposes, so it happens. 8 In Lith. also
Laima = AaijMo, Lat. Lamia (see Suppl.).

1 Fornm. sog. 8, 105. IsL s6g. 1, 198-9. This gaping yawning ship reminds
me of the Gepanta fnavis tardins veota) in Jornandes cap. 17. [Biarki's fylgja
appears as a bear, ana fights while B. slumbers ; Gannar's fylgja too is a biarndyr.
Glumr, having dreamt of a woman higher than the hills coming towards him,
concludes that Vigfus is dead, and this is hit hamlngja coming to look for a new
place. It follows, th&t fylgja and hamingja are one. Similar is the Engl, fetch
(Soot, fye) or double, N. Biding waff, vriff, Soot, wraith, Cumbl. twarth (all in Hone's
Daybk). Ir. taUe, etc. — Extr. from Suppl.]

3 The name has given rise to a sad blander. Anton in Yersuch 1, 50 having
paraded a Dalmatian goddess Dobra Friehia, he was followed by Karamzin 1, 85,
by Jungmann 1, 342, and who knows how many more. It all rests on a clerical
error in translating Forti's Viaggio in Dalmazia (Venice 1774) ; the Ital. text, 1, 74
has quite correctly Dobra-$richia. I would have any one beware of likening this
false Friehia to our fru Freeke (p. 804).

8 Magaz. der lett. gesellsch., Mitau 1838. 6, 144.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



878 DESTINY AND WELL-BEING.

As the goddess of destiny has both good and evil in her
hand, there needs no separate representation of misfortune. Oar
elder poets however do treat her more or less as a person, and
apply to her much the same phrases as to Saelde. ' Unscelde h&t
uf mich gesworn/ Gregor 2394 (so of T6t, p. 847n.). € Unscelde
h&t mich bed&ht/ Troj. 17105. 'der Unscelden knit/ Iw. 4449.
'din heil sin ungelilcke begonde erwecken harte/ Gold, schm.
1306. 'liber in het gesworn sines libes wnheil,' Elage 1240.
' Unscelde si mir uf getan I ' Bab. 896. ' wie in diu Unscelde
verriete/ Dietr. 38 b . € der Unscelden vart varn/ go the way of,
Doc. misc. 2, 163. 'so wirt unheil von mir gejaget/ chased
away, Herm. Dam. 42. 'ungelilcke, ws& ir mir leides tuotl' what
hurt yon do me, Lampr. Alex. 3065. Other images are peculiar
to misfortune : she is a dog bestriding one's path, and barking
at one : ' unheil mir fiber den wee schreit gelich einem hunde/
Hartm. erstes biichl. 1671. ' wen n&oh geliicke grdz unheil an
bellet (barks, billet f or vellet, velt ? )' Ls. 1, 239. A M. Nethl.
poet ascribes to her a net : ' al hfift dat ongheval nu mi aldus

onder tnet ghevaen f ' Rein, 6180. Two separate stories

deserve quoting at greater length : A poor knight sits in
the forest, consuming a scanty meal; he looks up and spies
in the tree overhead a monstrous being, who cries to him ' I am
thy ungelilcke. 9 He invites ( his ill-luck ' to share his meal, but
no sooner is it down, than he seizes it firmly and shuts it up in
an 'eicher' (hollow oak?). From that moment all goes well
with him, and he makes no secret of what has happened. One
who envies him, wishing to plunge him into misery again, goes
to the wood and releases UUluck; but, instead of burdening the
knight any longer, it jumps on the traitor's back, just as a kobold
would (Ls. 2, 575). This fable was known to H. Sachs iii. 2, 72 e :
Misfortune shall be made fast with chains and ropes to an oaken
stake, so it may visit no houses more, unless some man be so

fond to let it loose again. The other story may as well be given

in Reinmar's own words, MS. 2, 184 b :

Ez was ein gar uns®lic man (a most unlucky man)

in einer stat gesezzen, dar inne er nie dehein heil gewan,

der d&hte, ich wil versuochen, wie min geliike in fremden

landen si.
dd im der reise ze muote wart (resolved to travel),

Digitized by VjOOQIC



UNS-ELDE. 879

Unscelde wart sin geverte, diu huob sicli mit im ilf die vart ;
er lief gegen einem walde, er wande er w»re Unsselden wor-

den vrf (he weened he was free of U.).
er sprach : € Unscelde, nn bin ieh dir entrunnen (escaped). 1
' nein ' sprach Unscelde, € ich han den sig (victory) gewunnen ;
swaz du geliefe, daz selbe ich rande (I ran as fast as thou),
ufdinem hahe (neck) was min gemach (I took my ease.)' 1
der man da zuo im selbe sprach (to himself spake) :
c s6 } 8t niht sd guot, ich enkere wider ze lande I ' (best to tnrn

back).

Exactly the story of the homesprite, who flits with you, and
you cannot shake him off (p. 513) ; Misfortune personified is
here substituted for the more living kobold. Unsralde occurs
in the plural too : ' ganc z' alien onselden hin ! ' in a Lower Rhine
poem by Wilhelm (F. A. Reuss p. 13). It reminds me of € zuo
zallen marsen yarn' (p. 362; see Suppl.).

1 Post eqnitem gedet atra Cnra. Hor. Od. 3, 1



Digitized by



Google



CHAPTER XXIX.
, PERSONIFICATIONS.

This is a convenient place to treat more fully of Mythical
Personification.

All objects are either perceptible to our senses, or merely exist
in our thoughts. Of sensible objects a very general characteristic
is, that they strike upon the eye {eh &va, tt/>09 &Tra), for which
we once possessed the pretty word augen, OHG. ougan, Goth,
dugjan, to come in sight, appear (hence sich er-eignen, Gramm.
1, 226). The form and shape of this appearance was called
in Goth. siuns, ON. syn s OHG. gisiuni, which come from
safhva (I see), as species from specio, visas from video, e?So?
from the lost e?8a>, and signify the seen, the present; 1 while
vaiht8, which Ulphilas uses also for cZSo? (p. 440), is derived
from veiha (facio, p. 68). More commonly still we find combina-
tions : Goth, anddugi, andvairjti, OHG. antwerti, Goth, andavleizn,
AS. andwlite, OHG. cmasiuni, anasiht, gisiht; all of which,
formed like the Gr. irpoa&Trov, have alike the sense of aspectus,
obtutus, and the narrower one of facies, vultus, frons (Goth, vlits
fr. vleita), because vision is directed mainly to the visage. The
Lat. persona, obscure as its origin * may seem, agrees with the
above in its use, except that siuns and irpoawirov may refer to
any sight, vlits and persona more especially to the human form.

The freest personality is proper to gods and spirits, who can
suddenly reveal or conceal their shape, appear and disappear
(chap. XXX). To man this faculty is wanting, he can but slowly

1 MHG. sMn used in the same way : disen ritter oder stnen schm, Pans. 18, 13.
sante Martins gewer oder Bin schin, Fragm. 28 b . wip, man oder tieres schm, Dint.
2, 94. sin wesen and sin sohin (sehein), Er. 10047-9. der mensohlich schm, Ls.
8, 263.

9 Hardly from t/^wtot, like Proserpina from Ile/xrt^n;, where the change of
sound is exactly the other way. What if the old etymology from personare
should prove defensible, and sonus be conn, with siuns 7 There are plenty of
analogies between sound and sight (e.g. that Romance * par son', p. 745), and also
changes of short vowels into long (persona) ; Tpovurrw itself happens to be an
example of both (6$ voioe and eye, 6$ts visio, &\L eye, face, Mi look) ; the forma-
tion of persona would be as in Perenna, Pertunda, Pervinoa.

8b0



Digitized by VjOOQIC



PERSONIFICATION. 881

come and go, and in his body he mast bide, unless magic inter-
vene ; hence he is [not] in the strictest sense a person, his veriest
self being emphasized in our older speech by the term Up (life),
body (Gramm. 4, 296). But language and an open brow distin-
guish him from beasts, who have only voice and irporop,rj f not a
real trpoa-onrov or countenance. Still less of personality have
plants, silent as they are, and rooted to the soil. Never-
theless both animals and plants have in common with man a
difference of sex and the power of propagation ; to both of them
language assigns natural gender and, only where that is non-
apparent, a purely grammatical. It goes yet further, and con-
cedes it to lifeless tools and to things beyond the reach of sight
or sense.

Then poetry and fkbles set themselves to personify, i.e. to extend
personality, the prerogative of gods, spirits and men, to animals,
plants, things or states to which language has lent gender. All
these appear in JEsop endowed with human speech, and acting
by the side of gods and men ; and this not only in the case of
trees and shrubs (like the bean or corn stalk in the fairy-tale),
but of utensils like pot and file (x^ r pV 9 P<W)> of days and seasons
(koprrj, varriprj, %€ifid>v, eap), even of mere emotions, as love,
shame (e/>a>9, alaybvr}). Our own simple-hearted eld loves to
emphasize this livingness by the formalities of address and rela-
tionship : horse, ship and sword are gravely apostrophized by the
hero (Gramm. 3, 331. 434. 441) ; such entities receive the title of
' herr ' or ' frau ' (3, 346) ; as animals are invested with gossip-
hood and brotherhood (Beinh. p. xxvii), the Edda makes air (the
awl) brother to knifr, Sn. 133. Under this head too I bring
the practice of coupling € father ' and 'mother* with lifeless
things (Gramm. 4, 723).

Things deeply intergrown with speech and story can at no
time have remained foreign to mythology, nay, they must have
sucked up peculiar nourishment from her soil, and that universal
life conceded in grammar and poetry may even have its source in
a mythical prosopopoeia. As all the individual gods and godlike
attributes really rest on the idea of an element, a luminary, a
phenomenon of nature, a force and virtue, an art and skill, a
blessing or calamity, which have obtained currency as objects of
worship ; so do notions related to these, though in themselves



Digitized by



Google



882 PERSONIFICATIONS.

impersonal and abstract, acquire a claim to deification. A distinct
personality will attach to animals, plants, stars, which stand con*
nected with particular gods, or have sprung out of metamor-
phosis. One might say, the heathen gods as a whole have arisen
out of the various personifications that were most natural to each
nation's way of thinking and state of oulture ; but that individual
figures among them, by combining several attributes and by
long continued tradition, were sure to attain a higher rank and
reputation.

In this process however we notice an important distinction
with regard to sex : strong, vehement forces and operations are
by preference made into gods, mild and gracious ones into god-
desses, which of itself determines the superior power, as a rule, of
the male divinities. Yet this inferiority of the goddesses, added
to their grace, tended, as I have more than once remarked, to
secure their status longer, while the stern sway of the gods was
being rooted out.

Everywhere the two sexes appear hand in hand, so that out of
their union, according to human notions, may issue new births
and new relationships. Wherever personification is not directly
intended, it is the habit of our language to use the orude unde-
veloped neuter.

Amongst elements, we find air and fire handed over more to
gods, earth and water more to goddesses. Wuotan appears as
an all-pervading atmosphere, as a murmur that sweeps through
heaven and earth ; this we made out under the words wuot (p.
131) and woma (p. 144; conf. p. 745), and perhaps we have a
right to connect even wehen (to blow) with waten (to wade),
beben (to quake) with Biflindi (p. 149). The hurricane of the
'furious host' will then have real point and significance. Favour-
able wind (p. 636-7) was in the hands of Wuotan and Zeus, OSinn
'weathered/ stormed or thundered, and was called ViSHr (ibid.).
The shaking of the air by thunder is everywhere traced to the
highest god, whom our antiquity represents separately as Donar,
Thunar, the son of Wuotan, but in Zeus and Jupiter it is the
father again ; Thrymr seems identical with Thdrr (p. 181). Loptr
(pp. 246. 632) is another emanation of OSinn. Zio, and perhaps
Phol, as whirlwinds (turbines), must be regarded in the same

Digitized by VjOOQIC



AIE. FIRE. WATER. EARTH. 883

light (p. 632) . Of goddesses, we have to reckon whoever may

stand for the ' wind's bride J and whirlwind, Holda who accom-
panies the 'furious host/ and Herodias (p. 632); and bear in
mind that to the same Holda and to Mary is given power over
snow and rain (pp. 267. 641. 174-5). It is in Wikram 251* that
a ( fran loft ' first occurs, as H. Sachs makes aer, ignis, aqua all
' fraulein.' Whenever dwarfs, giants and giantesses raise wind,
weather and storm (pp. 631-6-7), they act as servants of the
highest god. Kdri also represented air.

Loki and Logi (p. 241) are gods of fire, and so was probably
atihns, ovan, which to us denotes the mere element itself (p.
629). The c dea Hludana 9 (p. 257) might stand beside him.
Donar, like the Slavic Perun, hurls the lightning flash, yet the
Slavs make Qrom, thunder, a youth, and Munya, lightning, a
maiden (p. 178 n.). Fire, the godlike, is spoken to, and called
€ bani vr8ar/ wood-killer. Balder, Phol, is perhaps to be under-
stood as a divinity of light (pp. 227. 612-4), and from another
point of view Ostara (p. 291). Mist was taken for a valkyr (p.
421).

Hler (p. 240) and Oegir (pp. 137. 311) are gods of the wave,
and Ban a goddess (p. 311); Oeban, Qejjon (pp. 239. 811) is
divided between both sexes. The fern, ahva (p. 583 n.) and the
female names of our rivers (p. 600) lead us to expect water-
goddesses, with which agrees the preponderance of nixies and
mermaids (p. 487), also the softness of the element, though
OSinn too is found under the name of Rnikar (ibid.) Snow and
Hoarfrost are thought of as male (p. 761), but the Norse Drifa
(loose drifting snow) is a daughter of Snior (Tngl. saga 16).

The Earth, like Terra and Tellus, could not be imagined other
than female, so that the masc. Heaven might embrace her as
bride; Rinda is a goddess too, and Nerthus (p. 251), though she
and the masc. NiorSr play into one another. Out of the Goth,
fafrguni's neutrality unfolded themselves both a male Fiorgynn
(p. 172) and a female Fiorgyn (p. 256) ; the former answers to
Perkunas (Fairguneis) and to other cases of gods being named
after mountains, conf. ans, &s (p. 25) and Etzel (p. 169). And
Hamcvr the rock-stone (p. 181) is another instance of the same
thing. The forest-worship dwelt upon in ch. IV could not fail
to introduce directly a deification of saored trees, and most trees

Digitized by VjOOQIC



884 PERSONIFICATIONS.

are regarded as female; we saw (pp. 651-2-3) how the popu-
lar mind even in recent times treated ' frau Hasel, frau Elhorn,
f ran Wacholder, frau Fichte ' as living creatures. Klin and Q-nd,
handmaids of Frigg, are named in Sn. 38 among asynjor, and
Rloch in Sn. 39 among valkyrjor : all three, according to Biorn,
are likewise names of trees, Hlin apparently of our leinbaum,
leinahorn, lenne (acer, maple), in the teeth of our derivation
(p. 874) ; conf. AS. hlin. Again Sn. 128 tells us more generally!
why all fern, names of trees are applicable to women, e.g. selja
is both salix and procuratrix.

Zio, like Zeus, appears to mean, in the first instance, sky and
day (pp. 193. 736); yet our mythology takes no notice of his
relation to the earth (p. 700). But still it personifies Day m.
(p. 735), and makes him the son of Night f. At the same
time evening and morning, Apantrod and Tagarod (p. 748) are
masculine. 1 It is therefore the more surprising that the sun,
the great light of day (p. 701), should be pictured as female and
the moon as male, especially as the sun shines fiercely and the
moon softly. Though this view is of high antiquity (p. 704), yet
the identity of the Goth, sduil, AS. segil, with sol and 77X109,
makes it appear likely that with us too the relation between sun
and moon was once the same as in the classical languages (p. 701),
and was only departed from by slow degrees. Even in MHG.
the gender of ' sunne ' continued to vacillate, as the Latin con-
versely shews a Lunus by the side of Luna. In the same way
the Goth. stairn6, ON. stiaraa, is fern, like stella, but the OHG.
sterno, OS. sterro, AS. steorra, masc. like <z<rn?p ; and each has
its justification in the particular stars personified.

Our Summer and Winter are masculine (p. 758), the Lat.
aestas and hiems feminine, to which add the Gr. ^e^aiv m., and
the Slay, zima f. Excepting Hrede and Edstre, all our names
of months were masc, and Mai in particular often stands for
summer. On the contrary, the vagueness of the neuter ' year '
shews the absence of mythical prosopopoeia, (see Suppl.).

On mere tools and utensils its operation seems more stinted :
an exception must at once be made in favour of the sword.
As this weapon received proper names and a living accusative

1 Iith. ' Berlea dea vespertina, Breksta dea tenebrarum,' Laeioz 47. In our
Tristan, Isot is beautifully compared to the Sun, and her mother to the Dawn, f.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



HBATA. 885

(Gramm. 3, 441), as it was often apostrophized (Klage 847.
Wigal. 6514), and like Norse heroes, or like fire, was called bani
(occisor, e.g. Hialmars bani, Fornald. sog. 1, 522), as its hilt and
point were the haunt of snake and adder (p. 687-8) ; agreeable to
all this is a deification of the sword ofwat (p. 203-4), and for this
would be found available not the lifeless neuter ' swert/ but the
masc. ' hairus, heru, cheru/ p. 203, to which correspond the divine
names Eor, "Apiys and Sahsnot : from this divine progenitor's name
proceeded the national names of Cheruscans, Saxons, conf . Suar-

dones, with Sweordweras, in Cod. exon. 322, 13. In contrast

with the sword, which ennobles men, stands female decoration,
from which our language drew similar designations ; and it is a
significant thing that, as one of the highest gods borrowed lustre
from the sword, so did the fairest of goddesses from her necklace,
she after whom all ladies are called freyja (pp. 299. 306) . In
our oldest laws the sword 1 was an essential part of the 'her-
gewate/ war-equipment, and the necklace of the ' frauen-gerade/
woman's outfit (RA. 567 seq.) ; now, as we find in the Lex Angl.
et Werin. 7, 3 the expression ' ornamenta muliebria quod rhedo
dicunt/ it becomes a question, whether a totally different ex-*
planation of the AS. goddess Bheda from that attempted on
p. 289 be not the right one. Ostara, Eastre, was goddess of the
growing light of spring, and Hrede might be goddess of female
beauty, another name for Frouwa, Freyja, or a personification of
the necklace ; 2 the root might be the same as in the OHG. hrat,
A.S. hrffld, ON. hrafcr (velox, celer), as the notions of swiftness
and sweetness often meet. We must not overlook another word
used for the above ' gerade : ' radelSve (RA. 567), OHG. rado-

1 And with it a horse and * hip, the most precious of movable goods in antiquity.
'Mearas and matfmaB' are coupled together in AS. poems ; out of m&ftrn was
developed the notion of the Goth. mai)>ms, a costly gift, while the MHO. meiden
retained the literal meaning of horse ; the formula * schiff und geschirr,' ship and
harness, which afterwards meant the land-ship (waggon) and its rigging, may
originally have signified the sea-ship, which ON. and AS. poets in varying phrase
denominate • sea-horse,' Andr. and EL zzziv.-v. ; even in the French Simplic.
8, 46 I find * to put the wooden water-horse to his paces' = to sail. This borders
closely on the notion of demonic sea-horses (p. 490).

* The personifications Hamar and Heru as weapons of the highest gods, and
their counterpart the feminine spindle and necklace, support each other (conf.
p. 204). The hammer was left to grow diabolic (oh. XXXIII) and superstitious
(XXX VII), but the men would not allow their sword to be dishonoured. The In-
dians personified and apostrophized the sacrificial knife (GOtting. anz. 1831, p.
1762).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



886 PEBSONIFICATIONS.

leiba (Graff 3, 855), more exactly hrataleipa, on comparing which
with the AS. sweorda Utfe, homera life (Beow. 5868. 5654), i.e.
life preceded by a genitive, we see that Hredan or Hredean ]&fe
would originally mean jewellery the legacy (leavings) of the god*
dess, which afterwards all women divided among them. And this
explanation is supported by several other things. Not only do
the Norse skalds designate woman in general by the name of any
ornament that she wears; but Freyja herself, whose bosom is
adorned with that costly Brfslnga men (Goth. BreisiggS mani f
p. 306), as mother earth too wears her ' iarSar men' the green-
sward (p. 643), gave birth to a divine daughter identical with
herself, whose name also gets to mean ornament and jewelry.
Sn. 37 says, she was called Hnoss, and was so beautiful that
everything elegant and precious was named hnossir; 'hnossir
velja/ S»m. 233 b , means to select jewelry for a present. Hnoss
may either be derived from hnofta, glomus, nodus (as hlass from
hlaSa, sess from sitja), or be connected with an OHG. form hnust,
nust, nusc (Graff 2, 1006-7) ; either way it so obviously agrees
withbris (compages, nodus), or with nusta (ansula), nuskil (fibula),
that it is wonderfully like the Brlainga (or Bristnga) men of the
mother. But elsewhere we find Freyja provided with another
daughter Oersimi (Sn. 212. Yngl. saga c. 13), whose name ex-
hibits the same notion over again, nay it has found its way, like
rhedo, into ancient legal phraseology. Gersemi (fern.) means costly
ornament, cimelium (Gloss, to Gr&g&s p. 26), also arrha, and mulcta
pactitia; the Ostgota-lag giptab. 18 has garsimi, the Vestgota-lag
p. 140 gorsimar, the Dan. laws giorsum, giorsum; even A.S.
records repeatedly use the phrase ' gsersuman, gersuman niman/
gersumam capere in the sense of thesaurum, cimelium (Spelm. p.
263\ Ducange 3, 513), but I have not come across it in the poets.
As the AS. -sum answers to OHG. -sam (Gramm. 2, 574), I con-
jecture an OHG. karosemi (from karo, gar, yare, paratus) mean-
ing the same as wip-garawi, mundus muliebris (Graff 4, 241) ;
we should then have learnt three new equivalents for the gerade
of our German law : rhedo, hnoss, gersemi, all of them personified
and deified as Hreda, Hnoss, Qersemi. Again, it occurs to me
that in the story of Oswald, one that teems with mythical allusions
(think of Tragemund, and the raven all but Odinic), there appears
a maiden Spange (Z. f. d. a. 2, 96-7. 105, ver Spange 103, vor

Digitized by VjOOQIC



HNOSS. GBBSIMI. SPANGE. HASHABT. 887

Spange 115, like ver Hilde, ver Gaue), 1 plainly a personified
spange (armilla), a meaning highly appropriate to the beautiful
princess. Such goddesses of female adornment and of household
implements may also be supposed among the Lithuanian deities
named in Lasicz p. 48-9. Nddala the snuggling, insinuating
(p. 246) occurs at least as an 0H6. proper name in Irmino 187* ;
compare the personal relation attributed to air and knifr (p. 881).
Hlock we have explained (p. 401, conf. 421-2) as hlancha, catena
(see Suppl.).

Latin, Romance and German poems of the Mid. Ages, as early
as the 12th cent, it seems to me, introduce the player's die as a
personal demonic being; the Cod. Monac. ol. benedictobur. 160*
fol. 94 contains the following passage : € cum sero esset una gens
lusorum, venit Decivs in medio eorum, et dixit, Fraus vobis I
nolite cessare ludere, pro dolore enim vestro missus sum ad vos ;'
and fol. 97 b speaks of the € secta Decii,' i.e. of dicers. Other
auths. are given by Ducange sub v. Decius = talus, taxillus, with
a correct explanation of the word by the Fr. d6, O. Fr. dez, Prov.
dat, datz, It. Sp, dado=Lat. datus, 9 because in playing 'dare'
was used for edere, jacere. The same Munich codex fol. 95 b
furnishes another remarkable phrase : ' nil hie expavescimus preter
Hashardi minas/ the threatenings of the die; yet 'hasehart/
which is known to MHG. poets also, 3 can only be traced to the Fr.
hasart, hasard, whose own origin is obscure, whose wider meaning
brings it sooner to the verge of personification. Add to all this,
that the Indian myth makes Dvdpara, a demon, squeeze himself
into the dice, and that these come in the shape of birds, Bopp's
Nalus pp. 38-9. 50 (see Suppl.).

Scarcely will a deification grow out of notions of place; on the
other hand, the idea and name of a deity can be transferred to
space. Thus from the heathen Hali, H61, arose the christian hell ;
the ON. Laufey (p. 246) is perhaps another instance, and the idea
of a god often mingles with that of wood and grove.

1 Ettmtlller's text has an erroneous unmeaning Pange.

1 Conf. 16, lez. It. lato, Sp. lado, Lat. latns ; ne, nez, It. nato, Sp. nado, Lat.
natus ; pre, prez, Prov. pratz, It. prato, Sp. prado, Lat. pratnm.

* Examples coll. In Z. f . d. a. 1, 577 ; to which may be added : ' spil geteilet
of bret aid an hasehart,' Gate tea 1093. ' den hasehart werfen,' Tattler's Sermons
in Cod. Argent. A, 89.

VOL. II. O O

Digitized by VjOOQIC



8S8 PERSONIFICATIONS.

Abstract immaterial objects open a far wider field for personifi-
cations ; and here we see female ones decidedly predominate over
male.

Of the latter the most striking instances are, I think, the
following. Donar is pictured at once as father and grandfather
(p. 167) ; Aija to the Lapps, Ukko to the Finns, are grandfather
as well as thunder. Wunsch, Oski, a name of Wuotan (p. 148)
signifies much the same as the female figures S&lida, Fruma, Xdpis ;
and the Gr. iroOo? (wish, longing) occasionally occurs as II60o<$.
If I am right in my interpretations of Oibiha (p. 187), Oduts (pp.
23. 367—72), Sigi (pp. 27. 371), we can easily find female beings
to match them also. All these names belonged to the highest
god, whose creative bounty blesses ; others to his near kinsman
the majestic god of war : Wig (pugna, p. 203, conf. Graff 1, 740)
and Hadu (pp. 207. 223), to which many female names corre-
spond, Hilta, etc. 1 With Tggr (p. 208) I have identified the
Pallor and Pavor of the Romans ; Omi, Woma is better explained
as elemental. What comes nearer to Wig and Hadu is Death,
Daujrus (p. 842), which likewise from a male becomes a female
person ; that death is immediately related to hunger is shewn
in our language, Goth, svults being mors, and ON. sultr fames
[Germ, sterben, Bng. starve], like \*/a6? hunger, \oifios pesti-
lence ; and personifications start up on every side : hungr is
Hel's dish, sultr her knife (Sn. 33), Herbout (Renart 23362.
Roman de la rose 18097) is a visitation of famine, a name I derive
from the OHG. Heribalt, for Hunger stalks like a mighty warrior
through the world : ' ferid unmet grot Hungcvr h£tigrim obar
helido barn/ Hel. 132, 8. ' der Hunger gie liberal, breite sich
in die werlt wite/ Diut. 3, 101. The Roman Fames is fern., her
personality comes out in Ov. Met. 8, 800. Doubt still hangs over
the comparison attempted on p. 374 between a MHG. Billich and
the Eddie Bil or Bil, whose own being is as yet unexplained ;
but that the sexes do interchange is most satisfactorily proved
by the frequent appearance, side by side, of an identical god and
goddess, who are parent and child, or brother and sister, as
NiorSr and Nerthus, Freyr and Freyja, Liber and Libera. So
Berhta became Berchtolt, p. 279 (see Suppl.).

1 Bruoder Zornli, Ergerli (p. 274). H. Sachs i. 5, 688* exhibits Hederlein in a
bear's hide as brother of Zenklcin,



Digitized by VjOOQIC



SNOTRA. WARA. SUNIA. FRUMA. 889

Of goddesses and godlike women that have sprung out of
moral ideas, the number is far greater (p. 897). Under various
forms a divine mother stands beside the father or grandfather :
frau Uote, ancestress of all the heroic families (Zeit6chr. f. d. a. 1,
21), Holda the gracious, Berhta the bright, Frouwa, Freyja the
fair or happy, Sippia, Sif the kindly (p. 309). Folia, Fulla,
Abundia means fulness of blessing rather than full-moon ; the
Romans hallowed Oopia with her horn of plenty ; ' aurea fruges
Italiae pleno defundit Oopia cornu/ Hor. Bp. i. 12, 28. 'divesque
meo bona Copia cornu est/ Ov. Met. 9, 85. Snotra the wise,
well-behaved, Sn. 38 ; the word lived on as an adj., Goth, snutrs,
AS. snotor, ON. snotr, prudens, callidus, liter, emunctae naris,
OHG. snozar by rights, but snotar appears to be used also (Graff
6, 845) ; any discreet sensible woman can be called snotra.
Three &synjor, who are protectresses in the sense of the Roman
Tutela, are cited by Sn. 38 : Vor, OHG. prob. Wara, she who is
aware and wary, from whom nothing can be hidden ; Syn, who
guards the doorway, with which I connect the Goth, sunja Veritas,
sunjdns defensio (sunjd p. 310 was an error), and the sunnis
excusatio found in our oldest laws, so that the meaning seems to
be defence ; Hlin, whom Frigg has set for the protection of all
men that are in peril, from hltna tueri, f overe. 1 Even Hali, Halja
is a sheltering goddess, who hides us in the bosom of the under-
world, and originally a kind one.

From the oft-recurring phrases : f was im thiu fruma gibidig/
Hel. 110, 2. 130, 13 ; < thiu fruma ist hiar irougit/ 0. i. 15, 32 ;
'thaz in thiu fruma queman was' 16, 17 ; 'sd quimit thir fruma
in henti* 18, 42; c nu uns thiu fruma irreimti/ O. ii. 14, 120;
one would think this fruma (lucrum, utilitas) had once had a
personal Fruma underlying it, especially as the OS. gibidig
gibidi, AS. gifeSe (datus, concessus) is habitually used of superior
gifts of fortune: ttr gifeSe (gloria concessa), Jud. 136, 5; e&d



i Snorri, in proof of the three goddesses, quotes as many proverbs : * kona
verftr vor >ess er hon verBr vis,' a woman is wary of what she is aware of ; ' syn er
fyrir sett,' a defence is set Tip (when one denies his guilt, conf. Fornm. sog. 9, 5 :
hann setti >ar syn fyri, ok bauft skirslur) ; * s& er forftaz hleinir,' he that is struggling
leans (on the tutelary goddess). From hltna to slant, tcXlyew, inclinare, Goth,
hleinan, comes the causative hleina to lean, Goth, hlainjan. Hlains in Gothic is
collis, [slanting or] sheltering hill ? I do not see how to reconcile with this the sense
attributed to hlln of a (sheltering?) tree (p. 884).



Digitized by VjOOQIC



890 PEBSONIFICATIONS.

gifefce (opes concessae). 1 Like the above c thiu fruma uns ir-
reimta' we have 'th6n thin s&tida gireim/ O. i. 8, 17 ; giriman
again is a higher ' falling to one's lot/ and in O. iii. 9, 11. 12 is
the combination : ' fruma thana fuarta, s&lida inti heili.' And
s&lida, like fruma, comes ' in henti/ to hand. The unquestionable
personifications of Salida have been treated p. 864, etc.

The OHG. name Sigukepa would suit a victory-giving valkyr,
as the Norse Victoria or Nucrj is in like manner named Sigrdrifa
(p. 435) ; drlfa is one that drives, and the name Drifa was also
fitly given to a goddess of the snowstorm, for in the heat of battle
darts and arrows fly like snowflakes, 8 Holda sends out the flakes,
Wuotan the arrows^ Our Bellona was both Hiltia and Kwiidia
(p. 422).

Beside these divine or at least superhuman beings, from whom
proceeded splendour, light, shelter, deliverance and a heap of
blessings, especially victory, there were also others who were
imagined as personifications of single virtues : as deity branched
out bodily into separate powers, its spiritual attributes appeared
likewise as though distributed into rays, so as to shine before
mankind. But here again, honour, love, truth, gentleness, shame,
self-control and pity all assume the guise of goddesses, because
the people were accustomed from of old to hand over all that was
fair and gracious to the female sex (see Suppl.).

It was the accepted belief that, like the wise-women of
heathenism (pp. 400. 424), the virtues selected favourites with
whom to lodge and consort. Offended or wronged by evil-doing,
they took their leave, and returned to the heavenly dwelling, the
place of their birth. In this too they are like the swan-wives,
who after long sojourn among men suddenly take wing and seek
their better home (p. 427).

Such notions must reach a long way back, and be widely spread.
Hesiod in"Epya 198—200 tells how AlBdk and Niseis, Shame
and Remorse, having wrapt them in white raiment (put the swan-

i Eadgifu, OHG. Otikepa, a woman's name -opes largiens, might translate the
Lat. goddess Ops.

1 Ao veluti Boreae sub tempore nix glomerata

spargitur, hand aliter saevas jecere sagittas. Walth. 188.

Von beidenthalben flouoh daz seoz (flew the shots)

alsd dicke s6 der sn& (as thick as snow). Alex. 2886 (8235).

Daz gesohoz als diu snie gie (went),

und die wurfe under daz her (and the darts among them). Wigal. 10978.



Digitized by



Google



BBS. FBOMUOT. 891

shift on), depart from men to the immortal gods. We still say,
Truth and Honour are gone out of the land ; a chronicler of the
14th cent. (Bohmer's Pontes 1, 2) writes : ' tunc enim pax in
exilium migravit.' Kl. 1575 : f j& ervwil min vrowe Ere beliben m
dem riche, std als6 jaemerltche die fire tragende sint gelegen.
wer solt si denne widerwegen, swenn ir geswtchet din kraffc ? des
het gar die meisterschaf t min lieber vater Riiedegdr. vrowe Ere
din wirt nimmer mfir mit solchem wnnsche getragen, als er sie
truoo bi sinen tagen.' (Honour will not stay, now her bearers
are in such pitiful case. Who is to steady her, when strength
fails her ? R. had the secret ; she'll never again be borne as he
bore her.) The hero to whom dame Honour had attached herself,
knew how to maintain her equilflrfhm, to carry her upright.
Nithart 135 speaks of a female being Vromuot (merry-mind) in
a way that excludes a human person ; something mythical must
lie at the back of it. Hiltrftt and some other maidens are to
meet for dancing, and with them shall fare Fromuot, ' diu ist ir
aller wisel/ queen-bee of them all. They brought their atten-
dants, she at springtime had entered the land, but afterwards she
is missing, she has fled out of Austria, probably because she was
not held in honour there. The poet closes this (first) song with
the exclamation : € could we but win her back, we should bear
her on our hands,' * as the hero of the hour (a king, a bride) is
raised on high and carried about ; the passage on Riidiger sug-
gests the same kind of ' chairing.' In the second song we are
told that Frdmuot fareth sorrowful from land to land in search of
cheerful men ; now who so certain of his happiness and luck,
that he dare send an embassy to her ? Why, none but prince
Friderich, his court by all means let her visit. It is mirth and
gaiety that have left the kingdom : frdmiiete, OHG. frawamuati,
OS. frdmdd (Hel. 35, 1) means jovial, but Fromuot likewise
occurs as a woman's name (Graff 2, 699), it is that of Sigeminne's
handmaid in Wolfd. 673-5-6-7. 719, and the personification
may have its reason in ancient ways of thinking. 1 In a poem of
the early part of the 15th cent. (Z. f. d. a. 1, 424), frau Qerechtig-
keit (righteousness) and her companions say : ' now am I clean

1 The emendation proposed in Altd. bl. 1, 871, ' vrou Maot,' is actually found
in MsH. 3, 218 b , in case the var. leott. 768 b have had full justice done them. But
I have never met with the simple Muot as a woman's name.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



892 PERSONIFICATIONS.

rejected and driven to another land ... we all have taken
flight and are chased out of the lemd.' So Helbl. 7, 61 makes
Wwrheit (veritas) and Triuwe (fides) quit the country, but what
he further tells of W&rheit is peculiar, how she slipt into a
parson, and nestled in his cheek, but left him at last when he
opened his lips, 7, 65—102. In 7, 751 vices are summoned to
creep (sliefen) into a judge. So that both virtues and vices, like
the daemon, take up their abode in men, and retire from them
again. But such fancies were not far to seek, and even the elder
poets make Minne especially visit the heart of man, possess it,
e.g. MS. 1, 26 b : ' ach sueze Minne, fuege dich in ihr herze, und
gib ir minnen muot I ' Notice too the naive question the daughter
puts to her mother, MS. 2, 260* : ' nu sage mir ob diu Minne lebe
und hie bi uns ftf erde si, aid ob una in den liiften swebe (or
hovers in the air above us) ? ' She has heard of higher beings,
whom she imagines living in the air, as the heathen valkyrs
glided through it. The mother answers, speaking of Venus : ' si
vert unsihtic (travels viewless) als ein geist, si en h&t niht ruowe
(no rest) naht noch tac ; ' conf. p. 456.

In the Gute frau 576 : s d6 kam vrou Scelde und Ere, die wurden
sine geverten (companions), die in bit dicke ernerten von aller
slahte swaere (oft saved him from harm) ; ' 61 1 : c im enschatte
ouch niht s£re, daz vrou Scelde und vrou Ere sich sin unterwunden
(took charge), dd si'n M der str&ze vunden (found him on march).
vrou 8. 16ste im diu pfant (difficulties), dar n&ch versatzte si ze
hant vrou E. aber viirbaz.' Dietr. 49 : ' des hete diu Ere zuo im
fluht (resorted), durch daz (because) er ir so sch6ne pflac (treated);'
105 : ' daz er die Ere het ze hfts/ MS. 2, 174* : € vro Ere kumt
mit im gerant.' Wartb. kr. cod. jen. 112 : € ver Triuwe nam
(took) an sich die Scham, sam tete diu Zuht, diu Einsche (so
did courtesy, chastity), MiUe und Ere alsam, si j&hen daz ir aller
vriedel w»re (they all declared their darling was) der viirste d&
fiz Diiringe lant; ' the preceding stanzas make it clear that dame
Faith commands and leads the other five (see Suppl.).

It was clumsy of Otfried, after making Karitas (iv. 29) spin
and weave the Saviour's tunic 1 in the manner of a heathen norn,

1 The tunica incontutilU (gisoafftta sia mit filu kleindn fadtunon joh ungin&t&n
redfnon kleindro garno), and ace. to the Orendellied span by Alary and wrought
by Helena. Whence arose this myth? Greg. Tru. mirao. 1, 8 has already * tunica



Digitized by VjOOQIC



MtLDB. MINNE. MAZE. 893

to give her for sisters two unfeminine ideas, ' fridu ' and € reht '
(v. 23, 125); the Latin Caritas, Pax, Justitia would more fitly
have discharged the office of fates, and a German Sippa and Rehtf
would have answered to them: Notker in Cap. 133 manages
better, when he translates Concordia, Fides, Pudicitia by Qemevn^
muoti, Triwa, Chiuski. I bring these examples to shew how
familiar such personifications were even in the 9- 10th cent. ; they
need not have been invented or introduced first by the MHG-.
poets. *

Minna, even in OHG. (p. 59), could signify not only caritas,
but amor and cupido ; and there is nothing offensive in Veldek's
Lavinia and Eneas addressing Venus as Minne (En. 10083.
10948) ; in Hartmann, Wolfram and Walther, frou Minne appears
bodily (Iw. 1537. 1638. Parz. 288, 4. 30. 291—5. Walth. 14,
10. 40, 26. 55, 16), and Hartmann, who is fond of interweaving
dialogue, has a talk with her, lw. 2971 seq., a thing imitated in
Gute frau 328-46-80. Afrowe Maze (modus, meetness) occurs in
Walth. 46, 33 ; a frou Witze in Parz. 288, 14. 295, 8 ; examples
of frou Ore were given a page or two back, and of frou Scelde
p. 865-6. These personifications are brought in more sparingly
by Gotfried and Conrad, yet in the Trist. 10929 diu Maze cuts
out a garment, and just before that comes the fine passage (10900)
on Isot's figure : ' als si diu Minne drote ir selber z'eime veder-
spil, dem Wunsche z'einem endezil, d& fur er niemer komen kan/
as if Venus had made her for a toy to herself, and for utmost
bound to Wish, that he can never get beyond. Tristan 4807 has
€ diu gotinne Minne/ and Parz. 291, 17 once frou Liebe as well as
frou Minne. Frou Ere is freq. in Prauenlob : ' d& h&t vrou Ere
ir wiinschelruot ' 41, 18; ' vroun Eren diener' 134, 18; 'vroun
Eren bote ' 194, 8 ; she excludes € unwip ' from her castle (vesten)
274, 18 ; € vroun Eren str&ze ' 384-5 (see Suppl.).

In the 14-15th cent, these fancies are carried to excess, and
degenerate into mere allegories : my ladies, the Virtues, instead
of coming in, one at a time, where they are wanted to deepen the
impressiveness of the story, intrude themselves into the plot of
the whole story, or at least of long formal introductions and
proems. And yet there is no denying, that in these preludes,

Christi non oonsuta.' [The author forgets the ' coat without seam/ %crdv &fi/xx#os,
John 19, 23.]

Digitized by VjOOQIC



894 PERSONIFICATIONS.

nearly all of one traditional pattern, which even Hans Sachs is
excessively fond of, there occur now and then shrewd and happy
thoughts, which must be allowed to possess a mythical signifi-
cance. By degrees all the devices of poetry were so used up,
the art was so denuded of her native resources, that no other
expedient was left her; our Mythology will have to remember
this, and in stray features here and there recognise [mangled but]
still palpitating figures even of the heathen time. When the
poet has missed his way in a wooded wild, and beside the mur-
muring spring comes upon a wailing wife, who imparts advice
and information, what is this but the apparition of a wish-wife
or valkyr, who meets the hero at the forest fount, and makes
a covenant with him? And that dwarfs or giants often come
between, as servants of these wild women, and conduct to their
dwelling by a narrow path, this also seems no invention, but
founded on old tradition.

Out of many examples I will select a few. MS. 2, 136 b : Ich
kam geriten fif ein velt vtir einen griienen wait, d& vant ich ein
vil schcen gezelt (tent), dar under saz diu Triuwe, si wand ir
hende, si bdt ir leit, si schrfi vil Mite../ mtn schar ist worden al ze
kleine (my followers are grown far too few).' Cod. Berol. 284
fol. 57-8 : By a steep cliff in the greenwood lives Virtue, and on
a high rock beside it her sister dame Honour, with whom are
Loyalty, Bounty, Meekness, Manhood, Truth and Constancy, be-
wailing the death of a connt of Holland. Ls. 1, 375 (a charming
tale) : On a May morning the poet is roused from sleep by a
passionate cry, he starts up, goes into the forest, and climbs over
steep rocks, till high up he reaches a delectable flowery vale, and
in the dense thicket spies a little wight, who rates him soundly
and wishes (like Lanrin) to impound him for trampling his lady's
roses. When pacified at last, he tells him that here in a strong-
hold not to be scaled lives dame Honour with five maidens of
her household, named AdeUrut, Schamigunt, Zuhtliebe, Tugenthilt
and Mazeburc (the ancient Hiltia, G-undia, DrAt, p. 422). Ls. 3
83 : A woman on a pilgrimage, having lost her way in the wooded
mountains, comes to a little blue house, in which there sits an
ancient dame clothed in blue, who receives her kindly. This
good dame calls herself the Old Minne, she ptill wears the colour
of truth, but now she is banished from the world. The pilgrim

Digitized by VjOOQIC



PEBSONHTCATION. 895

journeys on to the tent of Young Minne, who like her playmate
Wankelmut (fickle-mind, a fern, formed like Fr&muot) wears
checkered garments, and is busy entering men and women's
names in a book (like the parca and wurd, p. 406 n.), and pro-
claims the new ways of the world. In the end Old Minne de-
clares that she hopes some day to appear again among men, and
drag the false Minne openly to justice* A song in MsH. 3, 43 7 a
describes how dame Honowr sits in judgment, with Loyalty,
Charity and Manhood on her right, Shame, Chastity and Modera-
tion on her left. P. Suohenwirt xxiv. : The poet follows a narrow
path into a great forest, where a high mountain rises to the
clouds : a dwarf meets him at the mouth of a cave, and informs
him of a court to be held in that neighbourhood by dame Con-
stancy and Justice. He goes on his way, till he comes to the
judgment-seat, before which he sees Minne appear as plaintiff,
followed by Moderation, Chastity, Shame, and Modesty, he hears
her cause pleaded and decided, but frau Minne spies him in his
lurking-place. H. Sachs i. 273 b : In May time, in the depth of
the forest, on a lofty moss-grown rock, the poet is met by a hairy
wood-wife, who guides him to the tower of dame Charity, shows
him through her chambers, and at last brings him before the
high dame herself, who sends him away not empty-handed. The
rock-dwelling in the wooded mountain seems an essential part of
nearly all these narratives : it is the ruined castle in which the
' white lady ' appears, it is the tower of Veleda, MengloS, Brunhild
(p. 96 n.). Are the companions, 'playmates/ by whom dame.
Honour is attended, as the highest virtue by the lower ones, to
be traced back to a retinue of priestesses and ministering virgins
of the heathen time ? to valkyrs and messengers of a goddess f
Dame Era, Aiza (p. 414 n.) may go a long way back by that very
name : in the story from P. Suchenw. xxiv. 68 is uttered the
notable precept ' 6re all frouwen fin ! ' honour all gentle dames
(p. 398 ; and see Suppl.)

As a counterpart, there are personifications of Vices too, but
far fewer and feebler, as our antiquity in general does not go
upon dualism, and in higher beings the idea of the good prepon-
derates. Besides, when malignant daemons do appear, they are
by preference made masculine: zorn (anger), hass (hate), neid
(envy) ; though the Lat. ira and invidia are fern., and odium



Digitized by



Google



896 PERSONIFICATIONS.

remains neuter, like our general word for vice (laster) against
the fern, virtue (tugend). It surprises me that no personification
of ' siinde' f., sin in the christian sense, is to be found in MHO.
poets, for the word itself may lie very near the old heathen Sunja
(p. 310), inasmuch as defence and denial includes fault and sin;
the notion of ' crying sins, deadly sins ' is Biblical. Neither does
' schuld ' f. (causa, debitum, crimen) put in a personal appearance,
the part she played of old (p. 407) seems totally forgotten ; what
lends itself more readily to personification is Sckande f. (dedecus).
It would be hard to find the negatives 'unfire, unmilde, unstaate'
treated as persons, and we only meet with Untriuwe in Frauen-
lob 253, 5. 14;frou Unfuoge (unfitness) was quoted p. 311 n., but
if, as is likely, the positive Gefuoge contains fundamentally a
physical sense, it hardly falls under the category of vices, but like
Unseelde (p. 878) marks the negation of a state. In the Bible
Guiot (Meon 2, 344) the three fair maids Ckarite, Verite, Droiture,
are confronted by three old and ugly ones, Traison, Ypocrisie,
Bimonie ; virtue is always painted fair and godlike, vice foul and
fiendish (see Suppl.),

The personification of Rumour is of high antiquity. It was
very natural to think of it as a divine messenger sent out through
the air, to listen to all that goeson, and bring tidings of it to
the highest gods, who have to know everything. To the Greeks
"Oaaa (voice, sound) was Aims Sr/yeXos, II. 2, 93 ; Sacra i/e J*09,
Od. 1.282:

"Oaaa 8* ap ayyeXo? wrca Kara irrokiv $x €T0 ^vr^,

Od. 24, 413.

Another name is #j?/lm7, Dor. $dfia, to whom, says Pausanias i.
17, 1, as well as to *JB\eo9, AiSm and 'Op/xtf, there was an altar
erected at Athens ; the word is conn, with <f>rjfil } </>*)/lu9, as the
Lat. Fama is with fari and famen (in effamen) ; I incline to refer
the AS. b£me, tuba, to the same, preferring that spelling to the
commoner b^me. As there would otherwise be nothing in the
Edda parallel to this Fama, it is perhaps allowable to find her in
the goddess Gna, Sn. 38, whom Frigg sends out on her errands
(at eirindum sinum) to all parts of the world ; through air and
sea she rides on a steed named Rofvarpnir (who flings out the
hoof), she will neither fly nor drive, but ride through the air, and



Digitized by VjOOQIC



MiERE (fama). 897

all highflown things are said to c gnsefa:' our Gotfried in a song
puts ' gnaben ' by the side of € flying, flowing, trotting, creeping/
H&fvarpnir may have been a winged horse, 1 but to the Greeks
and Romans Fama herself was winged, and this appears to me to
have arisen out of the notion of a bird that bore tidings as a
divine messenger : ' ex ipsa caede volucrem nuntium mittere y in
Cic. pro Roscio 86 simply means the speediest intimation, conf.
Pertz 2, 578 : ' subito venit nuntius pennigero volatu.' In our
folksongs birds do errands (p. 672), and 08inn has two ravens
for his chosen messengers, but their office could also be handed
over to divine beings of secondary rank, as Zeus employs Iris and
Ossa, and the notion of angel has arisen directly out of that of
messenger. Virgil's famous description of Fama, small at first,
but quickly growing to enormous size (Aen. 4, 173) with innu-
merable feathers, eyes, ears, and mouths, seems almost borrowed
from the image of a bird getting fledged; at all events the
St. Gall monk (Pertz 2, 742) delivers himself thus : ' cum fama
de minima meisa (sup. p. 683) super aauilarum magnitudinem
excresceret.' Other writers : € daz mcere (news) d6 vedere gewan,
witen f uor ez ze gazzen/ Mar. 144. ' alsus flouh Morg&nes tdt,
als ob er flucke waere/ so flew M.'s death as if it were fledged,
Trist. 5483. ' ein boese mcere wirt gar schiere vlucke,' ill news is
soon fledged, Renn. 18210. Yet Veldeck, just where we might
have expected an imitation of Virgil, has merely : € do daz mcere
{if brack — uz guam — uz sprane/ En. 1903-16-97, not giving it
wings, though he does make it grow : ' daz mcere wahsen began, 7
9185. 12575; conf. Geo. 521: 'diu mcere in der stunde (illico)
wuohsen,' Most of the other poets confine themselves to the
image of flight : ' leidiu niumdre (ill news) diu nu fliegent in diu
lant/ Pf. Chuonr. 7544. i daz mcere fluoc d& witen/ Mar. 45 ;
1 do daz mcere chom geflogen ' 214. i do flugen disiu mcere von
lande ze lande/ Nib. 1362, 2 ; ' do flugen diu mcere von schare
baz ze schare' 1530, 1. 'ob diz mcere iht verre (far) fluge?'
Wh. 170, 20. ' diu mcere flugm iiber daz velt/ Wigal. 2930. < s&
daz mcere ie verrer vliuget, s6 man ie m6r geliuget/ the farther it
flies, they tell more lies, Preid. 136, 3. l mcere vliegent in diu



1 Like Pegasus; conf. the O. Boh. gloss of Mater verb. 215 : kridlatec (alatas)
Pegasus equus Neptuni, qui * fama ' interpretatur.



Digitized by VjOOQIC



898 PERSONIFICATIONS.

lant/ Karl 116*. 1 M. Neth. poets also make their fern, niemare
fly: € niemare ghevhghen/ Ploris 358; but often, like Veldeck
above, they make her run or leap like started game : ' die niemare
liep ' 178 ; 'die niemare sal hpen 9 1295 ; and with this agree the
Dan. € det springer nu saa vide/ DV. 1, 63, and perhaps the
AS. ' bleed wide sprang/ Beow. 36, if bl®d (flatus, OHG. pl&t)
may here be taken for fama. In a passage quoted above, p. 78,
fama is imagined walking, and ' gressus suos retorquens.' Now,
vivid as these representations are, it is not personification that
lies at the bottom of them, as we may see by the vague neuter
mcere, OHG. mdri ; the OHG. m&rida, Goth. m£ri)>a (us-iddja
m6ri)?a is, i%Yj7J)ev i\ atcoi) avrov, Mark 1, 28) would have lent
itself more readily to that, but MHG. had no maerde in use,
though Latin writers undoubtedly retained fama, e.g. in Helmold
1, 65: € interim volat haec fama per universam Saxoniam/
Hartmann in Er. 2515 personifies frowe Melde, while Tybo, a
Dan. poet of the 17th cent., more floridly names her Fyg-om-by
(aestuans per terrain, from fyge, ON. fiuka), and gives her a
fiedreham, Nyerup's Digtek. 2, 185. Ovid in Met. 12, 30 seq.
attributes to Fama a house with innumerable approaches, and
this is elaborately imitated by Conrad in Troj. 179°. 180*, only
for fame he puts a masc. Liumet, OHG. hliumunt, our leumund
(Gramm. 2, 343. Graff 4, 1100), who together with his followers
is winged, and flies forth, but signifies more the listening fama ;
conf. Goth. hliuma=auris, and Liumending = Favor in N. Cap.
51. To such male beings would correspond the Lat. rumor, of
which we read in Isengr. 13 : ' Rumor per saltus et arva tonans ';
or the ON. qvittr : « s& kvittr flo 1 bygSum/ Pornm. sog. 9, 237
(see Suppl.).

1 * Die ©chtesal vlouc uber al ; • * ir eobte vlouc in die lant,* Kaiserchr. 6406-79.



Batler ft Tanner, Frome, and London.

Digitized by VjOOQIC



April, 1882.

A CLASSIFIED LIST

OF

EDUCATIONAL WORKS

PXTBLI8HM) BT

GEORGE BELL & SONS.



Full Catalogues will be sent post free on application.



BIBLIOTHECA CLA88ICA.

A Series of Greek and Latin Authors, with English Notes, edited by
eminent Scholars. Svo.

JBsohylus. By F. A. Paley, HA. IBs.

Cttoero's Orations. By G. Long, M.A. 4 vols. 16*., 14*., 16*., 18*.

Demosthenes. By R. Whiston, MJL 2 vols. 16*. eaoh.

Buripidea. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 8 vols. 16*. each.

Homer. By F. A. Paley, M.A. Vol. L 12*. ; Vol H. 14*.

Herodotus. By Rev. J. W. Blakesley, B.D. 2 vols. 82*.

HesiocL By F. A. Paley, M.A. 10*. 6d.

Horace. By Rev. A. J. Macleane, M.A. 18*.

Juvenal and Peraroa. By Rev. A. J. Macleane, MJL. 12*.

Plato. By W. H. Thompson, D.D. 2 vols. 7*. 64. each.

Sophocles. Vol. I. By Rev. F. H. Blaydes, M.A. 18*.

Vol. II. Philoctetes. Electra. Ajax and TrachiniaB. By

F. A. Paley, M.A. 12s.
Tacitus : The Annals, fiy the Rev. P. Frost. 15*.
Terence. By E. St. J. Parry, M.A. 18*.
Virgil By J. Conington, M.A. 8 vols. 14». each.
An Atlas of Olassloal Geography; Twenty-four Maps. By

W. Hughes and George Long, If .A. New edition, with oolonred outlines.

Imperial 8w>. 12s. 6cL

Uniform with above.

A Complete Latin Grammar. By J. W. Donaldson, D.D. 8rd
Edition, lis.

grammar-school classics.

A Seriesof Greek and Latin Authors t withEngUsh Notes. Fcap.Qvo*,
OsBsar: De Bello Galileo. By George Long, MJL 5*. 6U

Booki I.~m. For Junior Classes. By G. Long, MJL 2*. 6&

OatuHus, TIbullus, and Properttos. Selected Poeras. With Life,
ByRer.!. H.Wratislaw. 8s.M.



Digitized by



Google



George Bell and Sans 9



Oioero: De Seneetute, De Amicitia, and Select Epistles. By

George Long, M.A. 4*. 6d.
Cornelius Nepos. By Bev. J. F. Macmichael. 2s. 64.
Homer : Iliad. Books I.-XH. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 6s. 64.
Horace. With Life. By A. J. Maoleane, M.A. 6s. 64. [In

2 parts. 8c 6d. each.]
Juvenal : Sixteen Satires. By H. Prior, M.A. As. 64.
Martial: Select Epigrams. With Life. ByF. A.Paley,M.A. 6s. 64.
Ovid: the Fasti. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 6s.
Sallust: Oatilina and Jngnrtha. With Life. By G. Long, M.A. 5*.
Taoltus : Germania and Agricola. By Bev. P. Frost. 8s. 64.
Virgil: Buoolics, Georgios, and iEneid, Books I.-IV. Abridged

from Professor Ctonington's Edition. 5t. 6&. — .fineid, Books V.-XII. 5a. &£

AlBoin 9 separate Volumes, Is. 64. eaoh.
Xenophon: The Anabasis. With Life. By Bev. J. F. Macmichael. 5*.

Also in 4 separate volumes, Is. Qd. each.

The Cyropadia. By G. M. Gorham, M.A. 6s.

Memorabilia. By Percival Frost, M.A. is. 64.

A Grammar-School Atlas of Classical Geography, containing

Ten selected Maps. Imperial 8vo. 5s,

Uniform with the Series.
The New Testament, in Greek. With English Notes, Ac By
Bev. J. P. Macmichael. 7s. Cd.



CAMBRIDGE GREEK AND LATIN TEXTS.

JEschylus. By F. A. Paley, MA. 8*.

Osssar: De Bello Galileo. By G. Long, M.A. 2s.

Cioero : De Seneotute et de Amioitia, et Epistola* Select®. By

G.Long, M.A. l*.6d.
doeronis Orationes. Vol. I. (in Verrem.) By G. Long, M.A. 8s. 64.
Euripides. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 8 vols. 3s. 64. each.
Herodotus. By J. G. Blakesley, B.D. 2 vols. 7*.
Homerl Ulas. I.-XH. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 2s. 64.
Horatius. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. 2s. 64.
Juvenal et Persius. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. Is. 64.
Luoretlus. By H. A. J. Munro, M.A. 2s. 64.
SaDusti Crlspl Oatilina et Jugurtha. By G. Long, M.A. Is. 64.
Sophocles. By F. A. Paley, M.A. • [2» the press.

Terenti ComoBdiae. By W. Wagner, PhJ>. 3s.
Thuoydldes. By J. G. Donaldson, DJX 2 vols. 7s.
Virgilius. By J. Gonington, M.A. 3s. 64.
Xenophontls XxpediUo Oyrt By J. F. Macmichael, B JL 2s. 6sL
Novum Testamentum GrsBOum. By F. H. Scrivener, M.A.

4s. 6d. An edition ivith 'wide margin for netes, half bound, lis.



Digitized by



Google



Educational Works. 3

CAMBRIDGE TEXTS WITH NOTES.

A Selection of the most usually read of the Greek and Latin Authors,
. Annotated for Schools. Feap. 8vo. 1*. 6d. each., with exceptions.

Burlpldea. Alceatis.— Medea.— Hippolytus.— Hecuba.— Bacclue.
Ion. 2s. — Orestes. — Phoeniaaa). — Troades. By F. A. Paley, M. A.

JBsohylus. Prometheus Vinotus. — Beptem contra Thebas.— Aga-
memnon. — Persffl. — Eumenides. By F. A. Paley, MJL

Sophocles. (Edipus Tyrannus. — (Edipus Coloneus. — Antigone.
By F. A Paley, M.A.

Homer. Iliad. Book I. By F. A. Paley, M.A. Is.

Terence. Andria. — Hauton Timorumenos. — Phormio. — Adelphoe.
By Professor Wagner, Ph.D.

Otoaro's De Seneotute— De Amicitia and EpistohB Select®. By
O. Long, M.A.

Ovid. Selections. By A. J. Maeleane, M.A.
Other* im. preparation.

PUBLIC SCHOOL SERIES.

A Series of Classical Texts, annotated by well-known Scholars. Cr. Svo.
Aristophanes. The Peace. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4s. to.

The AcharnianB. By F. A. Paley, M.A. As. 6d.

The Frogs. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4s. 6d.

Otoero. The Letters to Attious. Bk. I. By A. Pretor, M.A. 4s. 6<f.
Demosthenes de Falsa Legation*. By B. Shilleto, M.A. 6*.
The Law of Leptinea By B. W. Beatson, MA. 8*. 6d.

Plato. The Apology of Socrates and Orito. By W. Wagner, PhJ).
6th Edition. 4s. 6d.

The Phsedo. 6th Edition. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 6*. 6<f .

The Protagoras. 3rd Edition. By W. Wayte, M.A. 4s. 6J.

The Euthyphro. 2nd edition. By G. H. Wells, M.A. 8*.

The Euthydemus. By G. H. Wells, M.A. 4s.

The Republic. Books I. AH. By G. H. Wells, M.A. 5*.6<7.

Mautua. The Aulularia. By W.Wagner, Ph.D. 2nd edition. 4s. 60.

Trinummus. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 2nd edition. 4s. 6d.

The Menaechmei. By W. Wagner, PhJ). 4s. 6d.

Sophoolla Traohinlse. By A. Pretor, M.A. 4s. 64.

Terenoe. By W. Wagner, PhJ). 10*. 6d.

Theocritus. By F. A. Paley, M.A. 4s. 6d.
Others in preparation.

CRITICAL AND ANNOTATED EDITIONS.

JEtna. By H. A. J. Munro, M.A. 9s. 6d.

Arlatophanls Comosdis. By H. A. Holden, LL.D. 8vo. 2 Tola.

88a. 6d. Plays sold separately.

Pax. By F. A. Paley, MA. Feap. 8vo. 4s. 6d.

Catullus. By H. A. J. Munro, M.A. 7s. M.

Oorpue Poetarum Latlnorum. Edited by Walker. 1 vol. Svo. 18s.

Horaoe. Quinti Horatii Flacci Opera. By H. A. J. Munro, MJL

Large 9ro. 11. Is.
Xitvy. The first five Books. By J. PrendevUle. 12mo. roan, 5s.

Or Books Un.8s.6A, IV. and V. 8s. 64.



Digitized by



Google



George Bell and Sons'



Luoretius. Titi Lucretii Can de Rerum Natura Libri Sex. With
a Translation and Notes. By H. A. J. Mnnro, M.A. 2 Tola 8ro. VdL I.
Text (New Edition, Preparing.) Vol. II. Translation. (Sold separately.)

Ovid. P. OvidiiNasonisHeroideaXlV. By A. Palmer, M. A. 8vo.6s.

Propertius. Sex Aurelii Propertii Cannina. By F. A. Paley, M.A.
8vo. Cloth, 9a +

Sex. Propertii Elegiarum. Lib. IV. By A. Palmer. Fcap.8vo.5s,

Sophocles. The Ajax. By 0. B. Palmer, M.A. 4*. id.

Thuoydides. The History of the Pelopozmesian War. ByBiohard
ghffleto, M.A. Book I. 8to. 6s. 6d. Book II. 8yo. 5s. 6d.

LATIN AND GREEK CLASS-BOOKS.

Anxflla Latina. A Series of Progressive Latin Exercises. By
M. J. B. Baddeley, M.A. IVsap. 8ro. Part I. Aocidenoe. la 6d. Part TL
3rd Edition, 2a Key, 2a 64.

Latin Prose Lessons. ByProf.Ghuroh,M.A. 6th Edit Foap. 8vo.
2a 6d.

Latin Exercises and Grammar Papers. By T. Collins, MJL 3rd

Edition. Foap.8vo. 2a 6d.
Unseen Papers in Prose and Verse. With Examination Questions.

By T. Collins, M.A. 2nd edition. Foap. 8vo. 2s. 6d.
Analytical Latin Exeroises. By 0. P. Mason, B.A. 3rd Edit 8s. 64.

Soala OrsBoa : a Series of Elementary Greek Exercises. By Rev. J. W.

Davis, M.A., and B. W. Baddeley, M.A. 8rd Edition. Foap.8ro. 2a 6d.
Greek Veinie Composition. By G. Preston, M. A. Orown8vo.4f.6d.
By the Rev. P. Fbobt, M.A., St. John's College, Cambridge.
Xologee Latina* ; or, First Latin Reading-Book, with English Notes

and a Dictionary. New Edition. Foap. 8ro. 2s. 64.
Materials for Latin Prose Composition. New Edition. Fcap.8vo.

2s. 64. Key, 4«.
A Latin Verse-Book. An Introductory Work on Hexameters and

Pentameten. New Edition. Foap. 8vo. Ss. Key, 5s.
Analeota Gneca Minora, with Introductory Sentences, English

Notes, and a Dictionary. New Edition. Foap. 8ro. 8s. 64.
Materials for Greek Prose Composition. New Edit. Fcap. 8vo.

8a 64. Key, 5s.
Tlorilegium Poetioum. Elegiac Extracts from Ovid and Tibullus.

New Edition. With Notes. Foap. 8vo. 8s.

By the Rev. F. E. Gbbtton.
A First Cheque-book for Latin Verse-makers. 1*. 64.
A Latin Version for Masters. 2s. 6cZ.
Beddenda ; or Passsges with Parallel Hints for Translation into

Latin Prose and Terse. Grown 8ro. 4s. 64.
Beddenda Beddita (ue next page),

Bt H. A. Holder, LL.D.
FoUorum Silvula. Part I. Passages for Translation into Latin

Elegiao and Heroio Terse. 9th Edition. Post8yo. 7s. 64.
Part IL Select Passages for Translation into Latin Lyric

and Comic Iambio Terse. 8rd Edition. PostSro. 5s.

Part m. Select Passages for Translation into Greek Vene.



3rd Edition. PostSro. 8a



Digitized by



Google



Educational Works.



Folia SUvulse, give EclogsB Poetaram Angliooram in Latinum et
Grawum oonvenw. 8to. VoL 1. 10s. 6d. VoL II. 12s.

Foliarum Oentarte. Select Passages far Translation into Latin
and Greek Prone. 7th Edition. Post8ro. 8s.



TRANSLATIONS, SELECTIONS, &o.

* # * Many of the following books are well adapted for School Prizes.

.fflsohylus. Translated into English Prose by F. A. Paley, M.A.

2nd Edition. 8ro. 7s. 6d.
Translated into English Verse by Anna Swanwiok. Post

8to. 6s.
Anthologia Grssoa. A Selection of Choice Greek Poetry, with Notes.

By 7. St. John Thackeray. UK cm* Ctagwr Edition. 16mo. 4& 6d.
Anthologia Latina. A Selection of Choice Latin Poetry, from

NsBTios to BoSthins, with Notes. ByRer. F.St. John Thaokeray. Berised

and Cheaper Edition. 16mo. 4*. 6a.

Horace. The Odes and Carmen Saoulare. In English Terse by
J. Conington, M.A. 8th edition. Fcap. 8vo. 5s. 6d.

The Satires and Epistles. In English Terse by J. Coning-
ton, M.A. 5th edition. 6s. 6d.

Illustrated from Antique Gems by C. W. King, M.A. The



text revised with Introduction by H. A. J. Monro, M.A. Large 8n>. 11. Is.
Horace's Odes. Englished and Imitated by various hands. Edited

by O. W. F. Cooper. Grown 8ro. 6s. 6d.
Mvssa Etonenses, sive Carminvm Etona Conditorvm Delectvs.

By Biohsfd Okes. 2to1s. 8yo. 15s.
Propertius. Terse translations from Book V., with revised Latin

Text. By F. A. Paley, M.A. Foap. 8ro. 3s.
Plato. Gorgiss. Translated by E. M. Cope, M.A. 8vo. 7*.

Philebus. Translated by P. A. Paley, M.A. Small 8vo. 4*.

Theetetus. TranslatedbyP.A.Paley,M.A. Small 8 vo, 4b.

Analysis and Index of the Dialogues. By Br. Bay. Post

8to. 6s.
Reddenda Reddita : Passages from English Poetry, with a Latin

Vane Translation. By F. B. Gretton. Grown 8ro. 6s.
SabrinsB Corolla in hortulis Eegi© Soholie Salopiensisoontexuerunt

tree viri floribnB legendis. Editio tertia. 8vo. 8s. 6d.
Sertum Oarthnslannm Floribus trium Seonlornm Contextum. By

W.H.Brown. 8ro. 14s.
Theocritus. In English Terse, by C. S. Calverley, M.A. Crown

8ro. [ Ntw Edition preparing.

Translations into English and Latin. By C. S. Calverley, M.A.

Pott 8to. 7s. 6d.
By B. C. Jebb, M.A. ; H. Jackson, MA.., and W. E. Currey,

M.A. Grown 8ro. 8s.

into Greek and Latin Terse. By B. C. Jebb. 4to. cloth



gilt. 10i.6d.

Between Whiles. Translations by B. H. Kennedy. 2nd Edition
revised. Grown 8vo. 6s.



Digitized by



Google



George Sett and Sons*



REFERENCE VOLUMES.

A Latin Grammar. By Albert Harkness. Post 8vo. 6*.

By T. H. Key, M.A. 6th Thousand. Poet 8vo. 8s.

A Short Latin Grammar for Schools. By T. H. Key, M.A.,

F.R.8. 14th Edition. Post8ro. 8*. 6d.

A Guide to the Choice of Olassioal Books. By J. B. Mayor, M.A.

Revised Edition. Crown 8 vo. 8s.
The Theatre of the Greeks. By J. W. Donaldson, D.D. 8th
- Edition. PostSvo. 5s.
Xeightley's Mythology of Greece and Italy. 4th Edition. 5s.

A Dictionary of Latin and Greek Quotations. By H. T. Biley.

Post8ro. 5c With Index Verborum, 6s.
A History of Roman Literature. By W. B. Teuffel, Professor at

the University of Tubingen. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 2 vol*. Demy 8 yo. 2U.
Student's Guide to the University of Cambridge. 4th Edition

revised. Foap. 8vo. Part 1, 2s. 6d. ; Parts 2 to 6, Is. each.



CLASSICAL TABLES.

Latin Accidence. By the Bey. P. Frost, M.A. 1*.

Latin Versification. Is.

Notabilia QusBdam; or the Principal Tenses of most of the
Irregular Greek Verbs and Elementary Greek, Latin, and French (km-
atruotion. New Edition. Is.

Richmond Rules for the Ovidian Distich, &o. By J. Tate,

M.A. u.
The Principles of Latin Syntax. Is.

Greek Verbs. A Catalogue of "Verbs, Irregular and Defective; their
leading formations, tenses, and inflexions, with Paradigms for conjugation,
Rules for formation of tenses, Ac. &o. By J. S. Baird, T.O.D. 2s. 6d.

Greek Accents (Notes on). By A. Barry, D.D. New Edition. Is.

Homeric Dialect Its Leading Forms and Peculiarities. By J. 8.

Baird, T.O.D. New Edition, by W. G. Rutherford. Is.
Greek Accidence. By the Rev. P. Frost, M.A. New Edition. Is.



CAMBRIDGE MATHEMATICAL SERIES.

Whitworth's Choioe and Ohanoe. 3rd Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

McDowell's Exercises on Euclid and in Modern Geometry.

3rd Edition. 6s.
Vyvyan's Trigonometry. 8s. 6d. [Just published.

Taylor's Geometry of Oonios. Elementary. 8rd Edition. 4s. 6d.
Aldis's Solid Geometry. 3rd Edition. 6s.
Garnett's Elementary Dynamics. 2nd Edition. 6s.

Heat, an Elementary Treatise. 2nd Edition. 3s. 6d.

Walton's Elementary Mechanics (Problems in). 2nd Edition. 6s.



Digitized by



Google



^M



Educational Works.



CAMBRIDGE SCHOOL AND COLLEGE
TEXT-BOOKS.

A Series of Elementary Treatises for the use of Students in the
Universities, Schools, and Candidates for the Public
Examinations, Fcap. Quo.
Arithmetic. By Rev.G.Elsee, Mji. Foap. 8va 10th Edit. 8*.6d.
Algebra. By the Rev. G. Elsee, MJL 6th Edit. 4s.
Arithmetic. By A. Wrigley, ALA. 3*. 6<L
A Progressive Course of Examples. With Answers. By

J. Watson, M.A. 5th Edition. 2*.6d,
Algebra. Progressive Course of Examples. By Rev. W. F.

M'Miohael, M.A., and R.Pro\rde Smith, M.A. 2nd Edition. 3s. 6U With

Answers. 4s.6tt.
Plane Astronomy, An Introduction to. By P. T. Main, M.A.

4th Edition. 4s.
Conic Sections treated Geometrically. By W. H. Besant, 1£A.

4th Edition. 4s. 6d. Solution to the Examples. 4s.
Elementary Conio Sections treated Geometrically. By W. H.

Besant, M. A [In the Prm.

Statics, Elementary. By Rev. H. Goedwin, D.D. 2nd Edit. 8*.
Hydrostatics, Elementary. By W. H. Besant, M.A. 10th Edit. 4s.
Mensuration, An Elementary Treatise on. By B.T. Moore, M.A. 6s.
Newton's Prinoipia, The First Three Sections of, with an Appen-
dix; and the Ninth and Eleventh Sections. By J. H. Brans, M.A- 5th

Edition, hy P. T. Main, M.A. 4«.
Trigonometry, Elementary. By T. P. Hudson, M.A. 8s. 6d.
Optics, GeometricaL With Answers. By W. S. Aldis, M.A. 8s. &Z.
Analytical Geometry for Schools. By T. G.Yyvyan. 8rd Edit. 4s. 6(2.

Greek Testament, Companion to the. By A. C. Barrett, AM.

4th Edition, revised. Foap. 8vo. 5s.
Book of Common Prayer, An Historical and Explanatory Treatise

on the. By W. Q. Humphry, B.D. 6th Edition. Foap. 8ro. 4s. 6d.
Musio, Text-book ol By H. C. Banister. 9th Edit, revised. 5s.

' Concise History of. By Rev. H. G. Bonavia Hunt, B. Mus.
Oxon. 5th Edition revised. 8s. 6d.



ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA.

See foregoing Series.



GEOMETRY AND EUCLID.

Text-Book of Geometry. By T. S. Aldis, MA, Small 8vo.

4s.6d. Partl.20.6d. Part IL 2s.
The Elements of Euolid. By H. J. Hose. Fcap. 8vo. is. 6d.

Exercises separately, Is.
The First Six Books, with Commentary hy Dr. Lardner.

10th Edition. 8ro. 6s.

The First Two Books explained to Beginners. ByC.P.

Mason, B.A. 2nd Edition. Foap 8ro. 2s. 6d.



Digitized by



Google



Ghorge Bell and Sons*



The Enunciations and Figures to Euclid's Elements. By Bev.
J. Brasse, D.D. New Edition. Foap.8ro. Is. On Cards, in case, 6c 64.
Without the Figures, Od.

Exercises on Euclid and In Modern Geometry. By J. McDowell,

B.A. Grown 8ro. 3rd Edition revised. 6s.
Geometrical Conic Sections. By W. H. Besant, M.A. 4th Edit.

4a. 6d. Solution to the Examples. 4s.
Elementary Oeometrioal Oonio Sections. By W. H. Besant,

M.A. ilnihsprem.

Elementary Geometry of Conlos. By C. Taylor, D.D. 3rd Edit.

8vo. 4s. 6d.

An Introduction to Ancient and Modern Geometry of Conies.

By C. Taylor, M.A. 8ro. 15s.

Solutions of Geometrical Problems, proposed at St. John's
College from 1890 to 1846. By T. Gaskin, M JL 8ro. 12..

TRIGONOMETRY.

Trigonometry, Introduction to Plane. By Bev. T. G. Vyvyan,

Charterhouse. Cr. 8ro. 3s. 6d.
Elementary Trigonometry. By T. P. Hudson, M.A. 8#. 6d.

An Elementary Treatise on Mensuration. By B. T. Moore,
M.A. 5s.



ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY
AND DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS.

An Introduction to Analytical Plane Geometry. By W. P.

Tnrnbnll, M.A. 8vo. 12s.

Problems on the Principles of Plane. Co-ordinate Geometry.

By W. Walton, M. A. 8vo. 16s.
Trilinear Co-ordinates, and Modern Analytical Geometry of

Two Dimensions. By W. A. Wnitworth, M.A. 8ro. 16s.
An Elementary Treatise on Solid Geometry. By W. S. Aldis,

M.A. 2nd Edition revised. 8vo. 8s.
Elementary Treatise on the Differential Calculus. By M.

O'Brien, M.A. 8vo. 10s. 6d.

EUiptio Functions, Elementary Treatise on. By A. Cayley, M.A.
Demy 8to. 15i.



MECHANICS & NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.

Statics, Elementary. By H. Goodwin, DJ>. Foap. 8va 2nd
Edition. 8s. «

Dynamics, A Treatise on Elementary. By W. Garnett, M.A*
2nd Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

Elementary Mechanics, Problems in. By W. Walton, ftLA. New

Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

Theoretical Mechanics, Problems in. By W. Walton. 2nd Edit
revised and enlarged. Demy 8vo. 16s.



Digitized by



Google



Educational Works.



Hydrostatics. By W.H. Besant, M.A. Feap.dro. 10th Edition, 4#.

Hydromechanics, A Treatise on. By W. H. Besant, MA. 8vo.

New Edition revised. 10s. 6d.
Dynamios of a Partiole, A Treatise on the. By W. H. Besant, M.A.

[Preparing.
Optica, Geometrical. By W. S. Aldis, M.A. Fcap. 8vo. 8*. 6d.

Double Refraotion, A Chapter on Freeners Theory of. By W. S.
Aldis, M.A. 8vo. 2*.

Heat, An Elementary Treatise on. By W. Garnett, M.A. Crown
8ro. 2nd Edition revised. 8s. 6d.

Newton's Princlpia, The Firat Three Sections of, with an Appen-
dix ; and the Ninth and Eleventh Sections. By J. H. Brans, M.A. 5th
Edition. Edited by P. T. Main, M.A. 4s.

Astronomy, An Introduction to Plane. By P. T. Main, M.A.

Fcap. 8vo. cloth. 4s.
Astronomy, Practical and Spherical. By R. Main, M.A. 8vo. 14*.

Astronomy, Elementary Chapters on, from the 'Astronomic
Physique* of Biot. By H. Goodwin, D.D. 8vo. Ss. 6d,

Pure Mathematics and Natural Philosophy, A Compendium of
Facts and Formula in. By G. B. Smalley. 2nd Edition, revised by
J. McDowell, M.A. Fcap. 8vo. Ss. 6d.

Elementary Course of Mathematics. By H. Goodwin, D.D.

fith Edition. 8ro. 16s.
Problems and Examples, adapted to the ' Elementary Course of

Mathematics.' 3rd Edition. 8ro. 5s.
Solutions of Goodwin's Collection of Problems and Examples.

By W. W. Hntt» M.A. 3rd Edition, revised and enlarged. 8yo. 9s.
Pure Mathematics, Elementary Examples in. By J. Taylor. 8vo.

7$.6d.
Mechanics of Construction. With numerous Examples. By

8. Penwick, F.B.A.8. 8vo. 12s.
Pure and Applied Calculation, Notes on the Principles of. By

Bey. J. Challis, M.A Demy 870. 15s.
Physios, The Mathematical Principle of. By Bev. J. Challis, M.A.

Demy 8vo. 5s.



TECHNOLOGICAL HANDBOOKS.

Edited by H. Trueman Wood, Secretary of the
Society of Arts.

1. Dyeing and Tissue Printing. By W. Crookes, F.B.S.

[fa the press,

2. Iron and Steel. By Prof. A. E. Huntington, of King's College.

[Preparing.

8. Cotton Manufacture. By Richard Marsden, Esq., of Man-
chester. [Preparing.

4. Telegraphs and Telephones. By W. H. Preece, F.B.S.

[Preparing.

5. Glass Manufacture. By Henry Chance, M.A. ; H. Powell, B.A. ;

and John Hopkinson, M.A, LL.D., F.B.S. Zn the press.



Digitized by



Google



10 George Bell and Sons'

HISTORY, TOPOGRAPHY, &o.

Borne and the Campagna. By B. Bun, MJL With 86 En-
gravings and 26 Maps and Plana With Appendix. 4to. 81.3c

Old Rome. A Handbook for Travellers. By R. Burn, M.A.
With Maps and Plans. Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d,

Modern Europe. By Dr. T. H. Dyer. 2nd Edition, revised and
oontinued. 5 Tola. Demy 8vo. 21. 12s. 6d.

The History of the Kings of Borne. ByDr.T.RDyer. 8vo. 16*.

The History of Pompeii: its Buildings and Antiquities. By
T. H. Dyer. 3rd Edition* brought down to 1874. Poet 8vo. 7a 6d.

Ancient Athens: its History, Topography, and Remains. By
T.H.Dyer. Super-royal 8vo. Cloth. 11. 5a

The Decline of the Roman Republic By G. Long. 5 vols.
8vo. 14a each.

A History of England during the Early and Middle Ages. By

C. H. Pearson, MJL. 2nd Edition revised and enlarged. 8vo. VoL L
16a Vol. n. 14a

Historical Maps of England. By 0. H. Pearson. Folio. 2nd
Edition revised. 81a 6d.

History of England, 1800-15. By Harriet Martineau, with new
and copious Index. 1 vol. 8a 6d.

History of the Thirty Years' Peace, 1816-46. By Harriet Mar-
tineau. 4 vols. 8a 6«L each.

A Praotloal Synopsis of English History. By A. Bowes. 4th
Edition. 8vo. 2a

Student's Text-Book of English and General History. By

D. Beale. Grown 8vo. 8a 6d.

Lives of the Queens of England. By A. Strickland. Library
" Edition, 8 vols. 7a 6d. each. Cheaper Edition, 6 vols. 5a each. Abridged
Edition, 1 vol. 6«. 6d.

Eginhard's Life of Earl the Great (Charlemagne). Translated
with Notes, by W. Glaister, M.A., B.O.L. Crown 8vo. 4a 6d.

Outlines of Indian History. By A. W. Hughes. Small post
8vo. 8a 6d.

The Elements of General History. By Prof. Tytler. New
Edition, brought down to 1874. Small post 8vo. 3a 6d.

ATLASEa

An Atlas of Classical Geography. 24 Maps. By W. Hughes
and G. Long, M.A. Kew Edition. Imperial 8vo. 12s. 6d.

A Grammar-Sohool Atlas of Glassloal Geography. Ten Maps

selected from the above. New Edition. Imperial 8vo. 5a

First Glassloal Maps. By the Rev. J. Tate, M.A. 8rd Edition.
Imperial 8vo. 7a 6cL

Standard Library Atlas of Classical Geography. Imp. 8vo. 7*. to.



Digitized by



Google



Educational Works. 11



PHILOLOGY.

WEBSTER'S DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LAN-
GUAGE. With Dr. Mann's Etymology. 1 toL. 1628 Pages, 3000 Illus.
trations. 21a With Appendices ana 70 additional pages of Illustra-
tions, 1919 Pages, 81s. 6d.
"Tsa bbst practical English Dictionary vzt AST.'— Quarterly Review, 1878.
Prospectuses, with specimen pages, post free on application.
New Dictionary of the English Language. Combining Explan-
ation with Etymology, and copiously illustrated by Quotations from the
best Authorities. By Dr. Richardson. New Edition, with a Supplement.
2 toIs. 4to. 41. 14s. 6d.; half russia, 51. 15s. 6&; russia, 61 12a Supplement
separately. 4to. 12s.

Andro. Edit, without the Quotations, 15a; half russia, 20s.; russia, 24c.

Supplementary English Glossary. Containing 12 ,000 Words and

Meanings occurring in English Literature, not found in any other

Dictionary. By T. L. O. Dayies. Demy 870. 16*.
Dictionary of Corrupted "Words. By Rev. A. S. Palmer. [j n the press.
Brief History of the English Language. By Prof. James Hadley,

LL.D., Yale College. Fcap. 8to. Is.
The Elements of the English Language. By E. Adams, Ph.D.

15th Edition. Post8ro. 4a6<L
Philological Essays. By T. H. Key, M.A., F.B.S. 8vo. 10s. 64.

Language, Its Origin and Development. By T. H. Key, MJL,
F.B.S. 8to. 14s.

Synonyms and Antonyms of the English Language. By Arch-
deacon Smith. 2nd Edition. Post8vo. 5s.

Synonyms Discriminated. By Archdeacon Smith. Demy8vo. 16s.

Bible English. By T. L. O. Davies. 5s.

The Queen's English. A Manual of Idiom and Usage. By the
late Dean Alford. 5th Edition. Fcap. 8ro. 5s.

Etymological Glossary of nearly 2500 English Words de-
rixed from the Greek. By the Rot. E. J. Boyoe. Fcap. 8vo. 3s. 6d.

A Syriao Grammar. By G. Phillips, D.D. 3rd Edition, enlarged.
8to. 7a 6d.

A Crrammar of the Arabic Language. By Rev. W. J. Beau-
mont, M.A. 12mo. 7s.



DIVINITY, MORAL PHILOSOPHY, &c.

Novum Te8tamentum Grsaoum, Textus Stephanici, 1550. By
F. H. Serrrener, AM., LL.D. New Edition. 16mo. 4s. 6d. Also on
Writing Paper, with Wide Margin. Half-bound. 12a

By the same Author.
Codes BezsB dantabrigiensls. 4to. 26s.
A Pull Collation of the Codex Sinaitious with the Beoeived Text

of the New Testament, with Critical Introduction. 2nd Edition, revised.

Fcap. 8vo. 5s.
A Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament.

With Forty Facsimiles from Ancient Manuscripts. 2nd Edition. 8ro. 16a
Oz Lectures on the Text of the New Testament For English

Readers. Grown 8ro. 8a



Digitized by



Google



12 George Bell and Sons 9

The New Testament for Bmgllah Readers. By the late H. Alford,
D.D. Vol. I. Part I. 3rd Edit 12s. Vol. I. Part II. Sod Edit. 10s. 6d.
VoL EL Part 1. 2nd Edit. Ids. Vol. U. Part II. 2nd Edit. 1*.

The Greek Testament. By the late H. Alford, DJ). VoL 1. 6th
Edit. 11. 8s. Vol. II. 6th Edit. 11 4s. Vol. III. 5th Edit. 18s. Vol. IV.
Part L 4th Mit. 18s. Vol. IV. Part H. 4th Edit. 14s. Vol. IV. 11. 12s.

Companion to the Greek Testament By A. 0. Barrett, HA.
4th Edition, revised. Fcap. 8ro. 5s.

The Book of Psalms. A New Translation, with Introductions, <fec.
By the Very Rev. J. J. Stewart Perowne, D.D. 8vo. VoL L 4th Edition,
16$. VoL II. 4th Edit. 16s.

Abridged for Schools. 3rd Edition. Grown 8vo. 10#. 64.

History of the Articles of Religion. By C. H. Hardwick. 3rd
Edition. Post8vo. 5s.

History of the Creeds. By J. B. Lumby, D.D. 2nd Edition,
drown 8vo. 7s. 64.

Pearson on the Greed. Carefully printed from an early edition.
With Analysis and Index by E. Watford, M.A. Post8vo. 5s.

An Historical and Explanatory Treatise on the Book of
Common Prayer. By Rev. W. €k Humphry, B.D. 6th Edition, enlarged.
Small post 8vo. 4s. 6d.

The New Table of Lessons Explained. By Bey. W. G. Humphry,
B.D. Foap. Is. 6d.

A Commentary on the Gospels for the Sundays and other Holy
Days of the Christian Year. By Bev. W. Denton. A.H. Kew Edition.
8 vols. 8vo. 54s. Sold separately.

Commentary on the Epistles for the Sundays and other Holy
Days of the Christian Year. By Bev. W. Denton, A.M. 2 vsla. 36*. Sold
separately.

Commentary on the Acts. By Bev. W. Denton, A.M. Vol. L
8vo. 18s. YoLH. 14s.

Notes on the Oateohism. By Bev. Canon Barry, D J). 6th Edit.

Foap. 2a.
Gateohetloal Hints and Helps. By Bev. E. J. Boyoe, MA. 4th

Edition, revised. Foap. 2s. 6d.

Examination Papers on Religious Instruction. By Bev. E. J.

Boyoe. Sewed. Is. 6d.

Church Teaching for the Church's Children, An Exposition
of the Oateohism. By the Bev. F. W. Harper. So;, foap. 2s.

The Winton Church Oateohist Questions and Answers on the
Teaching; of the Church Oateohism. By the late Bev. J. S. B. Monsell,
LL.D. 3rd Edition, doth, 3s.; or in Four Farts, sewed.

The Church Teacher's Manual of Christian Instruction. By
Bev. M. F. Sadler. 21st Thousand. 2s. 6d.

Short Explanation of the Epistles and Gospels of the Chris-
tian Year, with Questions. Boyal 82mo. 2s. 6cL; calf, 4s. 6d.

Butter's Analogy of Religion; with Introduction and Index by
Bev. Dr. Steere. New Edition. Foap. 8s. 64.

' Three Sermons on Human Nature, and Dissertation on

Virtue. By W. Whewell, D.D. 4th Edition. Foap, 8vo. 2s.6cL



Digitized by



Google



Educational Works. 13



Lecture* on the History of Moral Philosophy in England. By
W. Whewell, D.D. Crown 8ro. 8s.

Kent's Commentary on Internationa] Law. By J. T. Abdy,

LL.D. Hew and Cheap Edition. Crown 8ro. 10s. 6d.
A Manual of the Roman Civil Law. By G. Leapingwell, LL J).
8to. 12s.



FOREIGN CLASSICS.

A series for use in, Schools, with English Notes, grammatical and

explanatory, and renderings of difficult idiomatic expressions,

Fcap. &vo.

Soulier's 'Wallenstein. By Dr. A. Bnchheim. 3rd Edit. 6s.(ta.
Or the Lager and Piocoloxnini, 3s. 6d. Wallenstein'g Tod, 8s. 6d.

Maid of Orleans. By Dr. W. Wagner. 8s. 6d.

Maria Stuart By V. Eastner. 8*.

Ooethe's Hermann and Dorothea. By E. Bell, M.A., and

B. Wolf el. 2s. 6d.
German Ballads, from Uhland, Goethe, and Schiller. By 0. L.

Bielefeld. 3rd Edition. 3s. 6d.
Charles X3X, par Voltaire. By L. Direy. 4th Edition. 3s. 6d.
Aventures de Telemaque, par Fenelon. By C. J. Delille. 2nd

Edition. 4s. 6d.
Select Fables of La Fontaine. By F. E. A. Gasc. 14th Edition. 8s.
Piodola, by X.B. Saintine. By Dr.Dubuo. 11th Thousand. 3s. 6d.



FRENCH CLASS-BOOKS.

Twenty Lessons In Frenoh. With Vocabulary, giving the Pro-
nunciation. By W. Brebner. Poet 8vo. 4s.

French Grammar for Public Schools. By Bey. A. C. Clapin, M.A.
Foap. 6ro. 9th Edition, revised. 2s. 6d.

French Primer. By Bev. A. C. Clapin, M.A. Fcap. 8vo. 4th Edit.
is.

Primer of Frenoh Philology. By Bey. A. G. Clapin. Fcap. 8yo. Is.

Le Nouveau Tresor; or, French Student's Companion. By
. H.B.S. lethEdition. Fcap. 8ro. 3s.6d.

F. E. A. GASC'S FKENCH COUBSE.
First Frenoh Book. Fcap 8yo. 76th Thousand. Is. 6d.
Second Frenoh Book. 87th Thousand. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6<J.
Key to First and Second French Books. Fcap. 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Frenoh Fables for Beginners, in Prose, with Index. 14th Thousand.

^12mo. 8s.
Select Fables of La Fontaine. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 8s.
Hlstoires Amnsantes et Instructives. With Notes. 14th Thou-
sand. Foap. 8ro. 2s. 6<L



Digitized by



Google



14 George Bell and Sons'

Practical Guide to Modern French Conversation. 12th Thou-
sand. Foap. 8vo. 2b. 6oL
French Poetry for the Toting. With Notes. 4th Edition. Foap.

8vo. 2e.
Materials for French Prose Composition ; or, Selections from

the beet English Prose Writers. 15th Thousand. Foap. 8vo. 4*. 6A.

Key, 68.
Prosateurs Contemporains. With Notes. 8vo. 6th Edition,

revised. 5s.
Le Petit Compagnon; a French Talk-Book for Little Children.

10th Thousand. 16mo. 2i. 6d.
An Improved Modern Pocket Dictionary of the French and

English Languages. 30th Thousand, with Additions. 16mo. doth. 4s.

Also in 2 vols., in neat leatherette, 5s.
Modern Frenoh-English and English-French Dictionary. 2nd

Edition, revised. In 1 vol. 12s. Qd. (formerly 2 vols. 25s.)

GOMBEBT'S FBENOH DRAMA.

Being a Selection of the best Tragedies and Comedies of Mofiere,
Baoine, Corneille, and Voltaire. With Arguments and Notes by A.
Qombert. New Edition, revised by P. B. A Gaso. Foap. 8vo. Is. each;

8ewed » **• OOHTfflTTS.

Mounts :— Le Misanthrope. L* Avars. Le Bourgeois QentDhomme. Le
Tartoffe. Le Malade Imaginaire. Los Femmes Savantes. Lea Fourberiet
de Soapin. Les Preoeuses Ridicules. L'Boole dee Femmes. L'Eoole dee
Maris. Le Meaeoin malgre* Lui.

IUcot :— Phedre. Esther. Athalie. Iphigenle. Les Flaideurs. La
Thebalde ; or, Les Freres Ennemis. Andromaque. Brltannious.

P. Ooekxillx :— Lo Old. Horaoe. Oinna. Polyeuote.

VOLTAIBB : — Zaire.



GERMAN CLASS-BOOKS.

Materials for German Prose Composition. . By Dr Bnohhehn.

7th Edition Foap. 4s. 6d. Key, 8s.
A German Grammar for Public Schools. By the Rev. A. C.

Clapin and F. Holl Mailer. 2nd Edition. Foap. 2s. 6d.
Kotzebue's Der Gefangene. With Notes by Dr. W. Stromberg. It.



ENGLISH CLASS-BOOKS.

A Brief History of the English Language, By Prof. Jas. Hadley,

LL.D., or Yale College. Foap. 8vo. la
The Elements of the English Language. By E. Adams, PhJ>.

18th Edition. Post8vo. 4s. 60.
The Rudiments of English Grammar and Analysis. By

B. Adams, Ph.D. 8th Edition. Foap. 8vo. 2s.

By C. P. Mason, Fellow of Univ. Coll. London.
First Notions of Grammar for Young Learners. Foap. 8vo.
10th Thousand. Cloth. 8&.

First Steps in English Grammar for Junior Classes. Demy

18mo. New Edition. Is.



Digitized by



Google



Educational Works. 15

Outlines of English Grammar for the use of Junior Glasses.
28th Thousand. Crown 8vo. 2s.

English Grammar, including the Principles of Grammatical
Analysis. 24th Edition. 77th Thousand. Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d.

A Shorter English Grammar, with copious Exercises. 8th Thou-
sand. Grown 8vo. 8s. Qd,

English Grammar Praotioe, being the Exercises separately. Is.

Edited for Middle- Class Examinations.

With Notes on the Analysis and Parsing, and Explanatory Remarks.

Milton's Paradise Lost, Book I. With Life. 3rd Edit. Post8yo.

2s.
Book II. With Life. 2nd Edit. Post 8vo. 2s.

Bookm. With Life. Post8vo. 2s.

Goldsmith's Deserted Village. With Life. Post8vo. Is. 64.

Cowper's Task, Book n. With Life. Post8vo. 2s.

Thomson's Spring. With Life. Post8yo. 2s.

Winter. With Life. Post 8vo. 2s.



Practioal Hints on Teaching. By Bev. J. Menet, M.A. 5th Edit.
Grown 8vo. cloth, 2a. 6cL j paper, 2s.

Test Lessons in Dictation. 2nd Edition. Paper coyer, Is. 6<f.

Questions for Examinations in English Literature. By Bey.
W. W. Skeat, Prof, of Anglo-Saxon at Cambridge University. 2s. 6d.

Drawing Copies. By P. H. Delamotte. Oblong 8vo. 12s. Sold

also in parts at Is. each.
Poetry for the School-room. New Edition. Fcap. 8yo. Is. 64.

Geographical Text-Book; a Practical Geography. By M. E. S.
12mo. 2a.

The Blank Maps done up separately , 4to. 2*. coloured.

Loudon's (Mrs.) Entertaining Naturalist New Edition. Bevised

by W.S. Dallas, F.L.S. 5s.
Handbook of Botany. New Edition, greatly enlarged by

D. Wooster. Poap. 2s. 6d. «.

The Botanist's Pocket-Book- With a copious Index. By W. B.
* Hayward. 3rd Edit, revised. Crown 8vo. Cloth limp. 4s. Sd.

Experimental Chemistry, founded on the Work of Dr. Stockhardt.
By 0. W. Heaton. Post 8vo. 5s.

Double Entry Elucidated. By B. W. Foster. 12th Edit. 4to.

3s. 6d.

A New Manual of Book-keeping. By P. Crellin, Accountant.
Grown 8vo. 8s. 6d.



Digitized by



Google



16 George Bell and Sons 9 Educational Works.

Picture School-Books. In Simple Language, with numerous
Illustrations. Royal 16mo.

School Primer. 6d.— Sohool Reader. By J. TUleard. U— Poetry Book
for Schools. ' la.— The Life of Joseph, la.— The Scripture Parables. Br the
Rev. J. B. Clarke, la.— The Scripture Miracles. By the Ber. J. B. Clarke.
Is.— The New Testament History. By the Bev. J. G. Wood, M.A. la.— The
Old Testament History. By the Bev. J. G. Wood, M.A. la.— The Story of
~ an's Pilgrim's Progress, la.— The Life of Christopher Columbus. By
lOrompton. Is.— l^he Life of Martin Luther. By Sarah Orompton. la.



BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS.

In 8 vols. Limp doth, Qd. each.
The Oat and the Hon: Sam and his Dog Bed-leg; Bob and Tom Lee; A

Wreck The New-born Lamb ; Rosewood Box ; Poor Fan ; Wise Dog- The

Three Monkeys Story of a Oat, told by Herself The Blind Boy ; The Mute

Girl ; A New Tale of Babes in a Wood The Deyand the Knight ; The New

Bank-note ; The Royal Visit ; A King's Walk on a Winter's Day Queen Bee

and Busy Bee Gull's Orag, a Story of the Sea.

First Book of Geography. By C. A. Johns, la.



BELL'S READING-BOOKS.

FOR 80HOOL8 AND PAROCHIAL LIBRARIES.

The popularity which the 'Books for Young Readers* hare attained is
a sufficient proof that teachers and pupils alike approve of the use of inter-
osting stories, with a simple plot in place of the dry combination of letters and
syllables, making' no impression on the mind, of which elementary reading-
books generally consist.

The Publishers hare therefore thought it advisable to extend the application
of this principle to books adapted for more advanced readers.

Now Ready. Post &vo. Strongly bound.

Masterman Ready. By Captain Marryat, R.N. la. tid.

The Settlers in Canada. By Captain Marryat, R.N. la. 6&

Parables from Nature. (Selected.) By Mrs. Gatty. la.

Friends In Fur and Feathers. By Gwynfryn. la.

Robinson Crusoe, la. &£

Andersen's Danish Tales. (Selected.) By E. Bell, M.A. la.

Souther's Life of Nelson. (Abridged.) la.

Grimm's German Tales. (Selected.) ByE. Bell, MJL la.

Life of the Duke of Wellington, with Maps and Plans, la.

Marie ; or, Glimpses of Life In France. By A. B. Ellis, la.

Poetry for Boys. By D. Monro, la.

Xdgeworth's Tales ; a Selection, la.

Great Englishmen ; Short Lives for Young Children, la.

Others in Preparation.



LONDON:
Printed by SnuvavwATS fr Sobs, Tower Street, Upper St. Martin's Lane.



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN



DATE DUE


Digitized by



Google



iiiiilitiiiiiiiii

T9015 02451 2520


JsL.



DO NOT REMOVE

OR
MUTILATE CARD



m
