Letters on the Equality of the Sexes, and the Condition of Woman (Sarah Grimké, 1838)
==========================================================
Sarah Grimké's letters: the abolitionist-feminist argument for the equality of the sexes — a founding document of American feminism. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/lettersonequali00grimgoog).

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

introduction of Mohammedism into Java, 
women often held the highest offices of government ; and 
when the chief of a district dies, it is even now not uncom- 
mon for the widow to retain the authority that belonged to 
her deceased husband.* 

Other instances might be adduced to prove 
I that, there is no natural inferiority in woman. 
Not that I approve of woman's holding the 
reins of government over man. I maintain 
that they are equal, and that God never invest- 
ed fallen man with unlimited power over his fel- 
low man ; and I rejoice that circumstances have 
prevented woman from being more deeply in- 
volved in the guilt which appears to be insepa- 
rable from political affairs. The few instances 
which I have mentioned prove that intellect is 
, not sexed ; and doubtless if woman had not 
t almost universally been depressed and degraded, 
^i the page of history would have exhibited as 
f many eminent statesmen and politicians among 
women as men. We are much in the situation 
^ of the slave. Man has asserted and assumed 
'-. authority over us. He has, by virtue of his 
t power, deprived us of the advantages of im* 
^ provement which he has lavishly bestowed 
upon himself, and then, after having done all 
\ he can to take from us the means of proving 
our equality, and our capability of mental culti- 
vation, he throws upon us the burden of proof 
that God created man and woman equal, and en- 
dowed them, without any reference to sex, with 
3 

34 

intelligence and responsibilities, as rational and 
accountable beings. Hence in Hindostan, even 
women of the higher classes are forbidden-la 
read or write; because the Hindoos think-it 
would inevitably spoil them for domestic Ufej, 
and assuredly bring some great misfortune upon 
them. May we not trace to the same feeling, 
the disadvantages under which women labor 
even in this country, for want of an education, 
which would call into exercise the powers of 
her mind, and fortify her soul with those 
great moral principles by which she would be 
qualified to fill every department in social^ 
domestic and religious life with dignity ? 

In Hindostan, the evidence of women is not 
received in a court of justice. 

In Burmah, their testimony is not deemed 
equal to that of a man, and they are not allowed 
to ascend the steps of a court of justice, but are 
obliged to give their testimony outside of the 
building. 

In Siberia, women are no I allowed to step 
across the foot-prints of men, or reindeer ; they 
are not allowed to eat with men, or to partake 
of particular dainties. Among many tribes, 
they seem to be regarded as impure, unholy 
beings. 

* The Mohammedan law forbids pigs, dogs, women and 
other impure animals to enter a mosque ', and the hour of 
prayers must not be proclaimed by a female, a madman, a 
drunkard; or a decrepit person.* 

Here I am reminded of the resemblance be- 
tween the situation of women in heathen and 
Mohammedan countries, and our brethren and 
sisters of color in this Christian land, where 

35 

they are despised and cast out as though they 
were unclean. And on precisely the same 
ground, because they are said to be inferior. 

The treatment of women as wives is almost 
uniformly the same in all heathen countries. 

The ancient Lydians are the only exception 
that I have met with, and the origin of their 
peculiar customs is so much obscured by fable, 
that it is difficult to ascertain the truth. Proba- 
bly they arose from some great benefit conferred 
on the state by women. 

Among the Druses who reside in the moun- 
tains of the Anti Libanus, a wife is often di- 
vorced on the slightest pretext. If she ask her 
husband's permission to go out, and he says, — 
• Go,' without adding * but come back again,' she 
is divorced. 

In Siberia, it is considered a wife's duty to 
obey the most capricious and unreasonable de- 
mands of her husband, without one word of 
expostulation or inquiry. If her master be 
dissatisfied with the most trifling particular in 
her conduct, he tears the cap or veil from her 
head, and this constitutes a divorce. 

A Persian woman, under the dominion of the 
kindest master, is treated much in the same 
manner as a favorite animal. To vary her 
personal graces for his pleasure, is the sole end 
and aim of her existence. As moral or intel- 
lectual beings, it would be better for them to be 
among the dead than the living. The mother 
instructs her daughter in all the voluptuous co- 
quetry, by which she herself acquired precarious 
ascendency over her absolute master ; but all 
that is truly estimable in female character is 
utterly neglected. 

Hence we find women extravagantly fond of 

36 

adorning their persons. Regarded as instru- 
ments of pleasure, they have been degraded 
into mere animals, and have found their own 
gratification principally in the indulgence of 
personal vanity, because their external charms 
procured for them, at least a temporary ascen- 
dency over those, who held in their hands the 
reins of government. A few instances must 
suffice, or I shall exceed the limits I have pre- 
scribed to myself in this letter. 

During the magnificent prosperity of Israel, 
marriages were conducted with great pomp; 
and with the progress of luxury and refinement, 
women became expensive, rather than profitable 
in a pecuniary point of view. Hence probably 
arose the custom of wealthy parents giving a 
handsome dowry with their daughters. On the 
day of the nuptials, the bride was conducted by 
her female relations to the bath, where she was 
anointed with the choicest perfumes, her hair 
perfumed and braided, her eyebrows deepened 
with black powder, and the tips of her fingers 
tinged with rose color. She was then arrayed 
in a marriage robe of brilliant color ; the girdle 
and bracelets were more or less costly. 

Notwithstanding the Chinese women have no 
opportunity to rival each other in the conquest 
of hearts, they are nevertheless very fond of 
ornaments. Bunches of silver or gilt flowers 
are always interspersed among their ringlets, 
and someties they wear the Chinese phoenix 
made of silver gilt. It moves with the slight- 
est motion of the wearer, and the spreading tail 
forms a glittering aigrette on the middle of the 
head, and the wings wave over the front. Yet 
a Chinese ballad says, — The pearls and precious 
stones, the silk and gold with which a coquette 

37 

so studiously bedecks herself, are a transparent 
varnish which makes all her defects the more 
apparent. ^ 

The Moorish women have generally a great 
passion for ornament. They decorate their 
persons with heavy gold ear-rings, necklaces of 
amber, coral and gold ; gold bracelets ; gold 
chains and silver bells for the ankles ; rings on 
the fingers, &c. &c. The poorer class wear 
glass beads around the head, and curl the hair 
in large ringlets. Men are proud of having 
their wives handsomely dressed. 

The Moors are not peculiar in this fancy. 
Christian men still admire women who adorn 
their persons to gratify the lust of the eye and 
the pride of life. Women, says a Brahminical 
expositor, are characterized by an inordinate 
love of jewels, fine clothes, &c. &c. I cannot 
cleny this charge, but it is only one among 
many instances, wherein men have reproached 
us with those very faults and vices which their 
own treatment has engendered. Is it any 
matter of surprise that women, when unnat- 
urally deprived of the means of cultivating 
their minds, of objects which would elevate 
and refine their passions and • affections, should 
seek gratification in the toys and the trifles 
which now too generally engage their atten- 
tion ? 

I cannot close this, without acknowledging 
the assistance and information I have derived, 
and shall continue to derive on this part of my 
subject, from a valuable work entitled * Condi- 
tion of Women, by Lydia M Child.' It is 
worth the perusal of every one who is interest- 
ed in the subject. 

Thine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Saeah M. Grimke. 

LETTER VII. * 

CONDITION IN SOME PARTS OF EUROPE AND 

AMERICA. 

Brookline, 8th Mo., 22d, 1837. 

Dear Sisteji, — I now come to the consider- 
ation of the condition of woman in Europe. — 
In this portion of the world, she does not ap< 
pear to have been as uniformly or as deeply de 
based, as in Eastern countries ; yet we shal 
find little in her history which can yield us sat 
isfaction, when we regard the high station eh< 
was designed to occupy as a morcU and inteL 
lectual being. 

In Greece, if we may judge from what Eos 
tathius says, * women should keep within doors 
and there talk,' — we may conclude, that ii 
general their occupations were chiefly domestic 
Thucydides also declares, that *she was th< 
best woman, of whom the least was said, eithe 
of good or of harm.' The heathen philoso 
phers doubtless wished to keep woman in he 
* appropriate sphere ;' and we find our clerics 
brethren of the present day re-echoing thes 
pagan sentiments, and endeavoring to drive wo 
man from the field of moral labor and intellect 
ual culture, to occupy her talents in the pursui 

30 

of those employments which will enahle her to 
regale the palate of her lord with the delica- 
cies of the table, and in every possible way 
minister to his animal comfort and gratification. 
In my humble opinion, woman has long enough 
subserved the interests of man ; and in the 
spirit of self-sacrifice, submitted almost without 
remonstrance to his oppression ; and now that 
her attention is solicited to' the subject of her 
rights, her privileges and her duties, I would 
entreat her to double her diligence in the per- 
formance of all her obligations as a loife, a mo" 
ther, a sister, and a daughter. Let us remem- 
ber that our claim to stand on perfect equality 
with our brethren, can only be substantiated by 
a scrupulous attention to our domestic duties, as 
well as by aiding in the great work of moral 
reformation — a work which is now calling for j 
The energies and consecrated powers of every \ 
man and .woman who desires to see the Re- 
deemer's kingdom established on earth. That 
man must indeed be narrow minded, and can 
have but a poor conception of the power of 
moral truth on the female heart, who supposes 
that a correct view of her own rights can make 
woman less solicitous to fill v/p every department 
of duty. If it should have this effect, it must 
be because she has not taken a comprehensive 
view of the whole subject. 

In the history of Rome, we find a little spot 
of sunshine in the valley where woman has 
been destined to live, unable from her lowly sit- 
uation to take an expansive view of that field 
of moral and mental improvement, which she 
should have been busy in cultivating. 

* In the earliest and best days of Rome, the first magis- 
trates and generals of armies ploughed their own fields, and 

40 

threshed their own grain. Integrity, industry and simplici* 
ty, were the prevailing virtues of the times; and the char- 
acter of woman was, as it always must be, graduated in a 
degree by that of man. Columella says, Roman husbands^ 
having completed the labors of tlie day, entered their housei 
free from till care, and there enjoyed perfect repose. Therd 
reigned union and concord and industry, supported by mu- 
tual affections. The most beautiful woman depended fot 
distinction on her economy and endeavors to assist in crown- 
ing her husband's diligence with prosperity. All was in 
common between them ; nothing was thought to belong mor^ 
to one than another. The wife by her assiduity and activi' 
ty within doors, equalled and seconded the industry and la* 
bor of her hustand.* 

In the then state of the world, we may con- 
clude from this description, that woman enjoy- 
ed as much happiness as was consistent with 
that comparatively unimproved condition of our 
species ; but now a new and vast sphere of use- 
fulness is opened to her, and she is pressed by 
surrounding circumstances to come up to the 
help of the Lord against the giant sins which 
desolate our beloved country. Shall woman 
shrink from duty in this exigency, and retiring 
within her own domestic circle, delight her- 
self in the abundance of her own selfish enjoy- 
ments. Shall she rejoice in lier home, her hus- 
band, her children, and forget her brethren and 
sisters in bondage, who know not what it is to 
call a spot of earth their own, whose hus- 
bands and wives are torn from them by relent- 
less tyrants, and whose children are snatch- 
ed from their arms by their unfeeling task-mas- 
ters, whenever interest, or convenience, tempts 
them to this sacrilegious act ? Shall woman 
disregard the situation of thousands of her fel- 
low creatures, who are the victims of intem- 
perance and licentiousness, and. retreating to 
the privacy of her own comfortable home, be 
satisfied that her whole duty is performed, when 

41 

she can exhibit * her children well clad and 
smiling, and her table neatly spread with whole- 
some provisions V Shall she, because * her 
house is her home,^ refuse her aid and her sym- 
pathy to the down trodden slave, to the poor 
unhappy outcasts who are deprived of those 
blessings which she so highly prizes ? Did 
God give her those blessings to steel her heart 
to the sufferings of her fellow creatures ? Did 
he grant her the possession of husband and 
chi^ren, to dry up the fountains of feeling for 
those who know not the consolations of tender- 
ness and reciprocal affection ? Ah no ! for ev- 
ery such blessing, God demands a grateful 
heart ; and woman must be recreant to her du- 
ty, if she can quietly sit down in the enjoy- 
ments of her own domestic circle, and not exert 
herself to procure the same happiness for 
others. 

But it is said woman has a mighty weapon 
in secret prayer. She has, I acknowledge, in 
common toith Tuan ; but the woman who prays 
in sincerity for the regeneration of this guilty 
world, will accompany her prayers by her la- 
hors. A friend of mine remarked—* I was sit- 
ting in my chamber, weeping over the miseries 
of the slave, and putting up my petitions for 
his deliverance from bondage ; when in the 
midst of my meditations, it occurred to me that 
my tears, unaided by effort, could never melt 
the chain of the slave. I must be up and do- 
ing.' She is now an active abolitionist — her 
prayers and her works go hand in hand. 

I am here reminded of what a slave once 
said to his master, a Methodist minister. The 
filaveholder inquired, * How did you like mj 

42 

sermon to-day V * Very good, master, 
did not preach me free.' 

Oh, my sisters, suffer me to entreat 
assert your privileges, and to perform y 
ties as moral beings. Be not dismayed 
ridicule of man ; it is a weapon worthy 
little minds, and is employed by those v 
that they cannot convince our judgmei 
not alarmed at contumely, or scorn ; w 
expect this. I pray that we may : 
with forbearance and love ; and that nothi 
drive us from the performance of our h 
holy duties. Let us * cease from man, 
breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is 1 
accounted of?' and press forward in all tl 
moral enterprises of the age, leaning i 
the arm of our Beloved. 

But I must return to the subject I coi 
ed with, viz. the condition of woman 
rope. 

•The northern nations bore a general resem 
each otiter. War and hunting were considered 
honorable occupations fur men, and all other em 
were left to women and slaves. Even the Visigot) 
ooaats of Spain, left their fields and flocks to ih 
women. The people who inhabit the vast extent 
try between the Black sea and the North sea, ar 
into various distinct races. The women are gene 
industrious ; even in their walks, they carry a port 
taff, and spin every step of the way. Boih Cro: 
Walachian women perform ail the agricultural ope 
addition to their own domestic concerns.' 

Speaking of the Morlachian women, '. 
tis says, ^ Being treated like beasts of 
and expected to endure submissively ev( 
cies of hardship, they naturally beeoir 
dirty and careless in their habits.' 

The Cossack women afford a contrasl 
disgusting picture* They are very clea 

43 

industrious, and in the absence of their hus« 
bands, supply their places by taking charge of 
all their usual occupations, in addition to their 
own. It is rare for a Cossack woman not to 
know some trade^ such as dyeing cloth, tanning 
leather, &c. 

The condition of Polish and Russian serfs 
in modern times is about the same. The Pol- 
ish women have scarcely clothing enough for 
decency, and they are subjected to great hard- 
ships and privations. * In Russia, women have 
been seen paving the streets, and performing 
other similar drudgery. In Finland, they work 
like beasts of burden, and may be seen for 
hours in snow water, up to the middle, tugging 
at* boats and sledges.' 

In Flanders and in France, women are en- 
gaged in performing laborious tasks ; and even 
in England, it is not unusual to see them scrap- 
ing up manure from the streets with their hands, 
and gathering it into baskets. 

In Greece, even now the women plough and 
carry heavy burdens, while the lordly master 
of the family may be seen walking before them 
without any incumbrance-'*^ 

*Since the preceding lf»tters were in type, I have met 
with the followrng account in a French work entitled * De 
1' education des meres de famille on de la civilization dii 
Genre Humain par lesfeminea,' printed at Brussels in 1837- 
*Tbe periodicals have lately published the following circum- 
stance from the journal of an English pfeysician, who travel- 
led in the East. He visit«d a slave market, whei'c he saw 
about twenty Greek women half naked, lying on tlie ground 
waiting for a purchaser. One of them attracted the atten- 
tion of an old Turk. The barbarian examined her should- 
«crs, her legs, her ears, h^r mouth, her ueck, with the minu- 
test care, just as a horse is examined, and during the inspec- 
tion, the merchant 4)raised the beauty of ber eyes* the ele- 

^^ 

44 

Generally speaking, however, there is mudi 
more comparative equality of labor between 
the sexes in Europe than among the Orientak 

I shall close this lettei: with a brief survey o( 
the condition of women among the Aborigmo 
of America. 

* Before America was settled by Europeans, it was ialiab 
ited by Indian tribes, which greatly resembled each othc 
in the treatment of their women. Every tiling, except wa 
and hunting, was considered beneath the dignity of man^ 
During Ions and wearisome marches, women were^ oblig* 
to carry children, provisions and hammocks on their aiiMl 
ders ; they had the sole care of the horses and dogs, ei 
wood, pitched the tents, raised the com, and made the ck^ 
ing. When the husband killed game, he left it by a trea i 
the forest, returned home, and sent his wife several miles i 
search of it. In most of the tribes, women were not alloa 
ad to eat and drink witli men, but stood and served thea 
and then ate what they left.' 

The following affecting anecdote may givt 
some idea of the sufierings of these women : 

' Father Joseph reproved a female savage for destroyiBj 
her infant danghter. She replied, ** I wisn my mother ha 
thus prevented the manifold sufferings I have endured. Cob 
sider, father, our deplorable situation. Our husbands go os 
to hunt ; we are dracged along with one infant at onr breast 
and another in a basket. Though tired with k>ng walkiof 
we are not allowed to sleep when we return, but must labo 
all night in grinding maize and making chica for tbeoi.- 
Thev get drunk and beat us, draw us by the hair of th 
head, and tread us under foot. Would to God my moths 
had put me under ground the moment I was born." * 

gaace of her shape, and other perfections ; he protested tba 
the poor girl was but thirteen years of age, &c. After i 
severe scrutiny and some dispute about the price, she wa 
sold body and soul for 1875 francs. The soul, it is true, ws 
accounted of little value in the bargain. The unfortunat 
creature, half fainting in the arms of her mother, implore 
help in the most touching accents, but it availed nothing- 
This infernal scene passed in Europe in 1829, only 60 
leagues from Paris and Loudon, the two rapitals of the ho 
man species, and at the time in which I write, it is th 
living history of two thirds of the inhabitants of the earth. 

45 

In Greenland, the situation of woman is 
equally deplorable. The men hunt bears and 
catch seals ; but when they have towed their 
booty to land, they would consider it a disgrace 
to help the women drag it home, or skin and 
dress it. They often stand and look idly on, 
while their wives are staggering beneath the 
load that almost bends them to the earth. The 
women are cooks, butchers, masons, curriers, 
shoemakers and tailors. They will manage a 
boat in the roughest seas, and will often push 
off from the shore in the midst of a storm, that 
would make the hardiest European sailor trem- 
ble. 

The page of history teems with woman's 
wrongs, and it is wet with woman's tears. — 
For the sake of my degraded sex every where, ; 
and for the sake of my brethren, who suffer ":< 
just iM proportion as they place woman lower 
in the scale of creation than man, lower than / 
her Creator placed her, I entreat my sisters to • 
arise in all the majesty of moral power, in all 
the dignity of immortal beings, and plant them- 
selves, side by side, on the platform of human 
rights, with man, to whom they were designed 
to be companions, equals and helpers in every 
good word and work. 

Thine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Sarah M. Grimke. 

LETTER VIII. 

ON THE CONDITION OP WOMEN IN THE UNITE] 

STATES. 

Brookliney 1837, 

My dear Sister, — I have now taken a brii 
survey of the condition of woman in varioii 
parts of the world. I regret that my time hfl 
been so much occupied by other things, that 
have been unable to bestow that attention- upo 
the subject which it merits, and that my coi 
stant change of place has prevented me froi 
having access to books j which might probaU 
have assisted me in this part of my work, 
hope that the principles I have asserted wi 
claim the attention of some of my sex, wh 
may be able to bring into view, more thorougl 
ly than I have done, the situation and degradi 
tion of woman. I shall now proceed to mak 
a few remarks on the condition of women i 
my own country. 

During the early part of my life, my lot wc 
cast among the butterflies of the fashiondbi 
world ; and of this class of women, I am coi 
strained to say, both from experience and obse: 
vation, that their education is miserably def 
cient ; that they are taught to regard marriag 
as the one thing needful, the only avenue t 

47 

ction ; hence to attract the notice and 
the attentions of men, hy their external 
Qs, is the chief business of fashionable 
They seldom think that men will be al- 
by intellectual acquirements, because they 
that where any mental superiority exists, 
man is generally shunned and regarded as 
ing out of her * appropriate sphere,' which, 
3ir view, is to dress, to dance, to set out to 
est possible advantage her person, to read 
ovels which inundate the press, and which 
ore to destrey her character as a rational 
lire, than any thing else. Fashionable 
3n regard themselves, and are regarded by 
as pretty toys or as mere instruments of 
are ; and the vacuity of mind, the heart- 
ess, the frivolity which is the necessary re- 
ef this false and debasing estimate of 
3n, can only be fully understood by those 
have mingled in the folly and wickedness 
shionable life ; and who have been called 

such pursuits by the voice of the Lord 
3, inviting their weary and heavy laden souk 
me unto Him and learn of Him, that they 
find something worthy of their immortal 
:, and their intellectual powers ; that they 
learn the high and holy purposes of their 
ion, and consecrate themselves unto the ser- 
of God ; and not, as is now the case, to the 
lure of man. 
lere is another and much more numerous 

in this country, who are withdrawn by 
ation or circumstances from the circle of 
onable amusements, but who are brought 
ith the dangerous and absurd idea, that 
'iage is a kind of preferment ; and that to 
)le to keep their husband's house, and ren- 

(• 

48 

der his situation comfortable, is the end of h< 
being. Much that she does and says and thin) 
is done in reference to this situation ; and to 1 
married is too often held up to the view of gii 
as the sine qua non of human happiness andh 
man existence. For this purpose more than f 
any other,! verily believe the majority of girls a 
trained. This is demonstrated by the imperfecta 
ucation which is bestowed upon them,and the 1 
tie pains taken to cultivate their minds, after th< 
leave school, by the little time allowed them f 
reading, and by the idea being constantly inculc 
ted, that although all household concerns shou 
be attended to with scrupulous punctuality 
particular seasons, the improvement 'of the 
intellectual capacities is only a secondary ,Qp 
sideration, and may serve as an occupation 
fill up the odds and ends of time. In rnc 
families, it is considered a matter of far mo 
consequence to call a girl off from ma 
ing a pie, or a pudding, than to interra 
her whilst engaged in her studies. Th 
mode of training necessarily exalts, in the 
view, the animal above the intellectual ai 
spiritual nature, and teaches women to rega 
themselves as a kind of machinery, necessa: 
to keep the domestic engine in order, but of 1 
tie value as the intelligent companions of me 
Let no one think, from these remarks, that 
regard a knowledge of housewifery as benea 
the acquisition of women. Far from it: lb 
lieve that a complete knowledge of househo 
affairs is an indispensable requisite in a womar 
education, — that by the mistress of a famil 
whether married or single, doing her duty tho 
oughly and understandingly, the happiness 
the family is increased to an incalculable degre 
OS well as a vast amount of time and mom 

49 

saved. All I complain of is, that our education 
consists so almost exclusively in culinary and 
other manual operations. I do long to see the 
time, when it virill no longer be necessary for 
women to expend so many precious hours in 
furnishing * a well spread table,' but that their 
husbands will forego some of their accustomed 
indulgences in this way, and encourage their 
wives to devote some portion of their time to 
mental cultivation, even at the expense of hav- 
ing lo dine sometimes on baked potatoes, or 
bread and butter. 

I believe the sentiment expressed by the 
author of * Live and let Live,' is true : 

' Other things being equal, a woman of the highest mental 
endowments will always be the best housekeeper, lor do- 
mestic economy, is a science that brings into action the 
-qualities of the mind, as well as the graces of the heart. 
\ quick perception, judgment, discrimination, decision and 
order are high attributes of mind, and are all in daily exer- 
cise in the well ordering of a family. If a sensible woman, 
an intellectual woman, a woman of genius, is not a good 
housewife, it is not because she is either, or all ot those, but 
because there is some deficiency in her character, or some 
omission of duly which should make her very humble, in- 
stead of her indulging in any secret self-complacency on ac- 
count of a certain superiority, which onlv aggravates her 
fault.' 

The influence of women over the minds and 
character of children of both sexes, is allowed 
to be far greater than that of men. This being 
the case by the very ordering of nature, women 
should be prepared by education for the per- 
formance of their sacred duties as mothers and 
as sisters. A late American writer,^ speak- 
ing on this subject, says in reference to an arti- 
cle in the Westminster Review : 

* Thomas S. Grimke. 
4 

r ■?■ 

50 

* I agree entirely with the writer in the high estiimtt 
which he places on female education, and have long since 
been satisfied, ihat the subject not only merits, but impair 
ously demands a thorough reconsideration. The whole 
scheme must, in my opinion, be reconstructed. The great 
elements of usefulness and duty are too little attended to. 
Women ought, in ray view of the subject, to approach to the 
best education now given to men, (I except matliematics and 
the classics,) far more I believe than has ever yet been at- 
tempted. Give me a host of educated, pious mothers and 
listers, and I will do more to revolutionize a country, in 
moral and religious taste, in manners and in social virtoes 
and intellectual cultivation, than I can possibly do in doiiUo 
or treble the time, with a similar host of educated men. I 
cannot but think that the miserable condition of the great 
body of the people in all ancient communities, is to be ac- 
crikied in a very great degree to the degradation of womeu.' 

There is another way in which the general 
opinion, that women are inferior to men, is man- 
ifested, that bears with tremendous effect on the 
laboring class, and indeed on almost all who are 
obliged to earn a subsistence, whether it be by 
mental or physical exertion — I allude to the 
disproportionate value set on the time and labor 
of men and of women. A man who is engaged 
in teaching, can always, I believe, command a 
higher price for tuition than a woman— even 
when he teaches the same branches, and is not 
in any respect superior to the woman. This I 
know is the case in boarding and other schools 
with which I have been acquainted, and it is so 
in every occupation in which the sexes engage 
indiscriminately. As for example, in tailoring, 
a man has twice, or three times as much for 
making a waistcoast or pantaloons as a woman, 
although the work done by each may be equal- 
ly good. In those employments which are pe- 
culiar to women, their time is estimated at only 
half the value of that of men. A woman who 
goes out to wash, works as hard in proportion 
as a wood sawyer, or a coal heaver, but she is 

51 

not generally able to make more than half as 
much by a day's work. The low remuneration 
which women receive for their work, has claim- 
ed the attention of a few philanthropists, and I 
hope it will continue to do so until some remedy 
is applied for this enormous evil. I have known 
a widow, left with four or five children, to pro- 
vide for, unable to leave home because her help- 
less babes demand her attention, compelled to 
earn a scanty subsistence, by making coarse 
shirts at 12 1-2 cents a piece, or by taking in 
washing, for which she was paid by some 
wealthy persons 12 1-2 cents per dozen. All 
these things evince the low estimation in which 
woman is held. There is yet another and more 
discustrous consequence arising from this un- 
scriptural notion — women being educated, from 
earhest childhood, to regard themselves as infe- 
nor creatures, have not that self-respect which 
conscious equality would engender, and hence 
when their virtue is assailed, they yield to 
temptation with facility, under the idea that it 
rather exalts than debases them, to be connect- 
ed with a superior being. 

There is another class of women in this coun- 
try, to whom I cannot refer, without feelings of 
the deepest shame and sorrow. I allude to our 
female slaves. Our southern cities are whelmed 
beneath a tide of pollution ; the virtue of female 
slaves is wholly at the mercy of irresponsible 
tyrants, and women are bought and sold in our 
slave markets, to gratify the brutal lust of those 
who bear the name of Christians. In our slave 
States, if amid all her degradation and igno- 
rance, a woman desires to preserve her virtue 
unsullied, she is either bribed or whipped into 
compliance, or if she dares resist her seducer. 

her life by the laws of some of the slave Statet 
iTiay be, and has actually been sacriticed to the 
fury of disappointed passion. Where suck 
iaus do not exist, the power which is necessfr 
riiy vested in the master over his property, leavet 
the defenceless slave entirely at his mercy, and 
the sufferings of some females on this account 
both physical and mental, are intense. Mr. 
Gholsoii, in the House of Delegates of Virginia, 
in 1S32, said, ' He really had been under the 
iiiiprcs^ion that he owned his slaves. He had 
lately purchased four women and ten children, 
in whom he thought he had obtained a great 
bargain ; for he supposed they were his own 
property, as were his brood maresJ' But even 
if any laws existed in the United Stales, as in 
Athens formerly, for the protection of female 
slaves, they would be null and void, because the 
cviilence of a colored person is not admitted 
against a white, in any of our Courts of Justice 
in the slave States. * In Athens, if a i'emale 
slave had cause to complain of any want of re- 
spect to the laws of modesty, she could seek 
the protection of the temple, and demand a 
change of owners ; and such appeals were nev- 
er discountenanced, or neglected by the luagis- 
trate.' In Christian America, the slave has no 
refuire from unbridled cruelty and lust. 

S. A. Forrall, speaking of the state of morals 
at the South, says, * Negresses when young and 
likely, are often employed by the planter, or his 
friends, to administer to their sensual desires. 
Tills frequently is a matter of speculation, for 
if the ollspring, a mulatto, be a handsome fe- 
male, 800 or 1000 dollars may be obtained for 
her in the New Orleans market. It is an oc- 
currence of no uncommon nature to see a Chris- 

63 

rian father sell his own daughter, and the hroth- 
er his own sister.' The following is copied by 
the N. Y. Evening Star from the Picayune, a 
paper published in New Orleans. *A very 
beautiful girl, belonging to the estate of John 
French, a deceased gambler at New Orleans, 
was sold a few days since for the round sum of 
$7,000. An ugly-looking bachelor named 
Gouch, a member of the Council of one of the 
Mncipalities, was the purchaser. The girl is 
a brunette ; remarkable for her beauty and in- 
telligence, and there was considerable conten- 
tion, who should be the purchaser. She was, 
however, persuaded to accept Gouch, he having 
made her princely promises.' I will add but 
one more from the numerous testimonies re- 
specting the degradation of female slaves, and 
the licentiousness of the South. It is from the 
Circular of the Kentucky Union, for the moral 
and religious improvement of the colored race. 
' To the female character among our black pop- 
ulation, we cannot allude but with feelings of 
the bitterest shame. A similar condition of 
moral pollution and utter disregard of a pure 
and virtuous reputation, is to be found only 
witkout the pale of Christendom. That such 
I state of society should exist in a Christian 
nation, claiming to be the most enlightened 
upon earth, without calling forth any particular 
%ttention to its existence, though ever before 
our eyes and in our families, is a moral phe- 
nomenon at once unaccountable and disgrace- 
ful.' Nor does the colored woman suffer alone : 
:he moral purity of the white woman is deeply 
contaminated. In the daily habit of seeing the 
virtue of her enslaved sister sacrificed without 
hesitancy or remorse, she looks upon the crimes 

Vv 

H 

of seduction and illicit intercourse without hoi 
ror, and although not personally involved in th 
guilt, she loses that value for innocence in he 
own, as well as the other sex, which is one c 
the strongest safeguards to virtue. She live 
in habitual intercourse with men, whom sh 
knows to be polluted by licentiousness, and ofte 
is she compelled to witness in her own domet 
tic circle, those disgusting and heart-sickenin 
jealousies and strifes which disgraced and dii 
tracted the family of Abraham. In addition t 
all this, the female slaves suffer every specie 
of degradation and cruelty, which the moi 
wanton barbarity can inflict ; they are indecen 
ly divested of their clothing, sometimes tied u 
and severely whipped, sometimes prostrated o 
the earth, while their naked bodies are torn b 
the scorpion lash. 

* The whip on woman's shrinking flesh ! 

Our soil yet reddening with the stains 
Caught from her scourging warm and fresh.' 

Can any American woman look at these seem 
of shocking licentiousness and cruelty, and fol 
her hands in apathy ,and say, * I have nothing 1 
do with slavery ' ? She cannot and be guiltles 
I cannot close this letter, without saying 
few words on the benefits to be derived by mei 
as well as women, from the opinions I advoca 
relative to the equality of the sexes. Man 
women are now supported, in idleness and e: 
travagance, by the industry of their husband 
fathers, or brothers, who are compelled to tc 
out their existence, at the counting house, or i 
the printing office, or some other laborious o 
cupation, while the wife and daughters and si 
ters take no part in the support of the famil 
and appear to think that their sole business 

65 

to spend the hard bought earnings of their male 
friends. I deeply regret such a state of things, 
because I believe that if women felt their re- 
sponsibility, for the support of themselves, or 
their families it would add strength and dignity 
to their characters, and teach them more true 
sympathy for their husbands, than is now gen- 
erally manifested, — a sympathy which would be 
exhibited by actions as well as words. Our 
brethren may reject my doctrine, because it 
runs counter to common opinions, and because 
it wounds their pride ; but I believe they would 
be * partakers of the benefit ' resulting from the 
Equality of the Sexes, and would find that 
woman, as their equal, was unspeakably more 
valuable than woman as their inferior, both as 
a moral and an intellectual being. 

Thine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Sarah M. Grimke. 

LETTER IX. 

HEROISM OP WOMEN — WOMEN IN AUTHORITY. 

Brookline, Stk Mo. 25th, 1837. 

My Dear Sister, — It seems necessary to 
glance at the conduct of women under circum- 
stances which place them in juxtaposition with 
men, although I regard it as entirely unimpor- 
tant in proving the moral equality of the sexes ; 
because I condemn, in both, the exercise of that 
brute force which is as contrary to the law of 
God in men as in women ; still, as a part of our 
history, I shall notice some instances of courage 
exhibited by females. 

*Phiiippa, wife of Edward III., was the prin- 
cipal cause of the victory gained over the Scots 
at Neville Cross. In the absence of her hus- 
band, she rode among the troops, and exhorted 
them to " be of good courage." ' Jane, Coun- 
tess of Mountfort, and a contemporary of Phi- 
lippa, likewise possessed a great share of phy- 
sical courage. The history of Joan of Arc is 
too familiar to need repetition. During the 
reign of James II. a singular instance of female 
intrepidity occurred in Scotland. Sir John 
Cochrane being condemned to be hung, his \ 
daughter twice disguised herself, and robbed \ 
the mail that brought his death warrant. In 

A 

67 

he mean time, his pardon was obtained from 
the King. Instances might be multiplied, but 
it is unnecessary. I shall therefore close these 
proofs of female courage with one more fact. 

* During the revolutionary war, the women shar- 
ed in the patriotism and bravery of the men. 
Several individuals carried their enthusiasm so 
far as to enter the army, where they faced all 
the perils and fatigues of the camp, until the 
close of the war.' 

When I view my countrywomen in the char- 
acter of soldiers, or even behold them loading 
fire arms and moulding bullets for their breth- 
ren to destroy men's lives, I, cannot refrain a 
sigh. I cannot but contrast their conduct at 
that solemn crisis with the conduct of those 
women who followed their Lord and Master 
with unresisting submission, to Calvary's Mount. 
With the precepts and example of a crucified 
Redeemer, who, in that sublime precept, * Resist 
not evil,' has interdicted to his disciples all war 
and all violence, and taught us that the spirit 
of retaliation for injuries, whether in the camp, 
or at the fire-side, is wholly at variance with 
the peaceful religion he came to promulgate. 
How little do we comprehend that simple truth, 

* By this shall all men know that ye are my 
disciples, if ye have love one to another J* 

Women have sometimes distincruished them- 
selves in a way more consistent with their 
duties as moral beings. During the war be- 
tween the Romans and the Sabines, the Sabine 
women who had been carried oflT by the Ro- 
mans, repaired to the Sabine camp, dressed in 
deep mourning, with their little ones in their 
arms, to soften, if possible, the feelings of their 
parents. They knelt at the feet of their rela- 

f 

58 

lives ; and when Hersilia, the wife of Romuluj 
described the kindness of their husbands, an 
their unwillingness to be separated from then 
their fathers yielded to their entreaties, and a 
alliance was soon agreed upon. In consequenc 
of this important service, peculiar privilege 
were conferred on women by the Romans 
Brutus said of his wife, * I must not answc 
Portia in the words of Hector, " Mind you 
wheel, and to your maids give law," for in coi 
rage, activity and concern for her country 
freedom, she is inferior to none of us.' Aftc 
the fatal battle of Can nee, the Roman wome 
consecrated all their ornaments to the service < 
the state. But when the triumvirs attempte 
to tax them for the expenses of carrying on 
civil war, they resisted the innovation. The 
chose Hortensia for their speaker, and went i 
a body to the market-place to expostulate wit 
the magistrates. The triumvirs wished to driv 
them away, but they were compelled to yiel 
to the wishes of the people, and give the wome 
a hearing. Hortensia pleaded so well the cans 
of her sisters, virho resolved that they would nc 
voluntarily aid in a civil war^ that the numbe 
of women taxed was reduced from 1400 t 
400. 

In the wars of the Guelphs and the Ghibbe 
lines, the emperor Conrad refused all terms o 
capitulation to the garrison of Winnisberg, tu 
he granted the request of the women to pas 
out in safety with such of their effects as the] 
could carry themselves. Accordingly, they is 
sued from the besieged city, each bearing or 
her shoulders a husband, son, father, or brother 
They passed unmolested through the enemy'f 
camp, which rung with acclamations of ap 
plause. 

59 

During our struggle for independence, the 
women were as exemplarj'^ as the men in vari- 
ous instances of self-denial : they refused every 
article of decoration for their persons ; foreign 
elegances were laid aside, and they cheerfully 
abstained from luxuries for their tables. 

English history presents many instances of 
women exercising prerogatives now denied 
them. In an action at law, it has been deter- 
mined that an unmarried woman, having a free- 
Hold, might vote for members of Parliament ; 
md it is recorded that lady Packington returned 
two. Lady Broughton was keeper of the gate- 
house prison. And in a much later period, a 
woman was appointed governor of the house of 
correction at Chelmsford, by order of the court. 
In the reign of George II. the minister of Clerk- 
en well was chosen by a majority of women. 
The office of grand chamberlain in 1822 was 
filled by two women ; and that of clerk of the 
crown, in the court of king's bench, .has been 
granted to a female. The celebrated Anne, 
countess of Pembroke, held the hereditary 
office of sheriff of Westmoreland, and exer- 
cised it in person, sitting on the bench with the 
judges. 

I need hardly advert to the names of Eliza- 
beth of England, Maria Theresa of Germany, 
Catharine of Russia, and Isabella of Spain, to 
prove that women are capable of swaying the 
sceptre of royalty. The page of history proves 
incontestibly, not only that they are as well 
qualified to do so as men, but that there has 
been a comparatively greater proportion of good 
queens, than of good kings ; women who have 
purchased their celebrity by individual strength 
of character. 

r . 

60 

I mention these women only to prove tha 
^' intellect is not sexed; that strength of mind ii 
) not sexed ; and that our views about the dutiei 
/ of men and the duties of women, the sphere o 
/ man and the sphere of woman, are mere arbi 
'; trary opinions, differing in different ages and 
'>, countries, and dependant .solely on the will and 
judgment of erring mortals. 

As moral and responsible beings, men and 
women have the same sphere of action, and the 
same duties devolve upon both ; but no one can 
doubt that the duties of each vary according tc 
circumstances ; that a father and a mother, a 
husband and a wife, have sacred obligations 
resting on them, which cannot possibly belong 
to those who do not sustain these relations. 
But these duties and responsibilities do not 
attach to them as men and as women, but as 
parents, husbands, and wives. 

Thine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Sarah M. Grimkb. 

LETTER X. 

INTELLLECT OF WOMAN. 

Brookline, 8th Mo. 1837. 

My Dear Sister, — It will scarcely be de- 
nied, I presume, that, as a generalfrule, men do 
not desire the improvement of women. There 
are few instances of men who are magnanimous 
enough to be entirely willing that women should 
know more than themselves, on any subjects 
except dress and cookery; and, indeed, this 
necessarily flows from their assumption of supe- 
riority. As they have determined that Jehovah 
has placed woman on a lower platform than 
man, they of course wish to keep her there ; 
and hence the noble faculties of our minds are 
crushed, and our reasoning powers are almost 
wholly uncultivated. 

A writer in the time of Charles I. says — 
* She that knoweth how to compound a pud- 
ding, is more 'desirable than she who skilfully 
compounded a poem. A female poet I mislike 
at all times.' Within the last century, it has 
been gravely asserted that, * chemistry enough 
to keep the pot boiling, and geography enough 
to know the location of the different rooms in 
her house, is learning sufficient for a woman.' 
Byron, who was too sensual to conceive of a 

62 

pure and perfect companionship be 
sexes, would limit a woman's library 
and cookery book. I have myself he 
who knew for themselves the value o 
tual culture, say they cared very 1 
wife who could not make a pudding, 
with contempt at the ardent thirst for k 
exhibited by some women. 

But all this is miserable vrit and wc 
sophy. It exhibits that passion for t 
cation of a pampered appetite, which i 
those who claim to be so far above us, 
justly be placed on a par with the pol 
slaveholder, who says that men will 
slaves, if they are not permitted to 
read. 

In spite, however, of the obstacles i 
pede the progress of women towards 
of high mental cultivation for which 
tor prepared her, the tendency toward 
versal dissemination of knowledge hi 
influence on their destinies ; and in a 
few have surmounted every hindra 
proved, beyond dispute, that they ha" 
equal to their brethren. 

Cornelia, the daughter of Scipio i 
was distinguished for virtue, learning 
sense. She wrote and spoke with ui 
elegance and purity. Cicero and Q 
bestow high praise upon her letters, 
eloquence of her children was attribut 
careful superintendence. This remin 
a remark made by my brother, Th 
Grimke, when speaking of the 'flftpo 
women being well educated, that * 
»en would never make educated wo 
educated women would make educat 

ii: 

63 

[ believe the sentiment is correct, because if the 
wealth of latent intellect among women was 
fully evolved and improved, they would rejoice 
;o communicate to their sons all their own 
aiowledge, and inspire them with desires to 
irink from the fountain of literature. 

I pass over many interesting proofs of the 
ntellectual powers of women ; but I must not 
)mit glancing at the age of chivalry, which has 
)een compared to a golden thread running 
hrough the dark ages. During this remark- 
ible era, women who, before this period, had 
)een subject to every species of oppression and 
leglect, were suddenly elevated into deities, 
md worshipped with a mad fanaticism. It is 
lot improbable, however, that even the absur- 
lities of chivalry were beneficial to women, as 
t raised them from that extreme degradation 
which they had been condemned, and pre- 
pared the way for them to be permitted to enjoy 
ome scattered rays from the sun of science and 
iterature. As the age of knight-errantry de- 
lined, men began to take pride in learning, 
,nd women shared the advantages which this 
hange produced. * Women preached in public, 
upported controversies, published and defended 
heses, filled the chairs of philosophy and law, 
larangued the popes in Latin, wrote Greek and 
ead Hebrew. Nuns wrote poetry, women of 
ank became divines, and young girls publicly 
xhorted Christian princes to take up arms for 
lie recovery of the holy sepulchre. Hypatia, 
aughter of Theon of Alexandria, succeeded 
er father in the government of the Platonic 
chool, and filled with reputation a seat, where 
lany celebrated philosophers had taught. The 
eople regarded her as an oracle, and ' magis 

64 

trates consulted her in all important case 

No reproach was ever uttered against the pe 

feet purity of her manners. She was unei 

barrassed in large assemblies of men, becau 

their admiration was tempered with the m< 

scrupulous respect. In the 13th century, 

young lady of Bologna pronounced a ta 

oration at the age of twenty-three. At tweni 

six, she took the degree of doctor of laws, a 

began publicly to expound Justinian. At thir 

she was elevated to a professor's chair, a 

taught the law to a crowd of scholars from 

nations. Italy produced many learned a 

gifted women, among whom, perhaps none v 

more celeBrated than Victoria Colonna, Maw 

ioness of Pescara. In Spain, Isabella of Ros< 

converted Jews by her eloquent preaching;' a 

in England the names of many women, fr< 

Lady Jane Gray down to Harriet Martinei 

are familiar to every reader of history. Of t 

last mentioned authoress, Lord Brougham ss 

that her writings on political economy w< 

doing more good than those of any man 

England. .There is a contemporary of Han 

Martineau, who has recently rendered valua! 

services to her country. She presented a n 

morial to Parliament, stating the danfferc 

parts of the coast, where light-houses wc 

needed, and at her sugf^estion, several w( 

erected. She keeps a life-boat and sailors 

her pay, and has been the means of savi 

many lives. Although she has been depriv 

of the use of her limbs since early chiidhoj 

yet even when the storm is unusually seve 

she* goes herself on the beach in her carria| 

that she may be sure her men perform th 

duty. She understands several languages, a 

65 

w engaged in writing a work on the North- 
anguages of Europe. *In Germany, the 
ence of women on literature is considerable, 
^h less obvious than in some other coun- 
Literary families frequently meet at each 
's houses, and learned and intelligent wo- 
are often the brightest ornaments of these 
l1 circles.' France has produced many dis- 
lished women, whose names are familiar 
ery lover of literature. And I believe it is 
eded universally, that Madame de Stael 
intellectually the greatest woman that ever 
'; The United States have produced sev- 
female writers, some of whom have talents 
e highest order. But women, even in this 
republic, do not enjoy all the intellectual 
ntages of men, although there is a percep- 
improvement within the last ten or twenty 
s ; and I trust there is a desire awakened in 
sisters for solid acquirements, which will 
ate them to their * appropriate sphere,' and 
lie them to ' adorn the doctrine of God our 
our in all things.' 
hine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Sar^^h M. Grimke. 

LETTER XL 

DRESS OF WOMEN. 

Brooklhie, 9th Mo., 1837. 

My Dear Sister, — When I view woman as 
an immortaf being, travelling through this world 
to that city whose builder and maker is God, — 
when I contemplate her in all the sublimity of 
her spiritual existence, bearing the image and 
superscription of Jehovah, emanating from Him 
and partaking of his nature, and destined, if 
she fulfils her duty, to dwell with him through 
the endless ages of eternity, — I mourn that she 
has lived so far below her privileges and her 
obligations, as a rational and accountable crea- 
ture ; and I ardently long to behold her occupy- 
ing that sphere in which I believe her Creator 
designed her to move. 

Woman, in all ages and countries, has been 
the scoff and the jest of her lordly master. If 
she attempted, like him, to improve her mind, 
she was ridiculed as pedantic, and driven from 
the temple of science and literature by coarse 
attacks and vulgar sarcasms. If she yielded to 
the pressure of circumstances, and sought relief 
from the monotony of existence by resorting to 
the theatre and the ball-room, by ornamenting 
her person with flowers and with jewels, while 

67 

her mind was empty and her heart desolate ; 
she was still the mark at which wit and satire 
and cruelty levelled their arrows. 

* Woman/ says Adam Clarke, * has been in- 
vidiously defined, an animal of dress. How 
long will they permit themselves to be thus de- 
graded V I have been an attentive observer of 
my sex, and I am constrained to believe that 
the passion for dress, which so generally char- 
acterizes them, is one cause why there so is 
little of that solid improvement and weight of 
character which might be acquired under almost 
any circumstances, if the mind were not occu- 
pied by the love of admiration, arjd the desire 
to gratify personal vanity. I have already ad- 
duced some instances to prove the inordinate 
love of dress, which is exhibited by women in 
a state of heathenism ; I shall, therefore, con- 
fine myself now to what are called Christian 
countres ; only remarking that previous to the 
introQUction of Christianity into the Roman 
empire, the extravagance of apparel had arisen 
to an unprecedented height. * Jewels, expen- 
sive embroidery, and delicious perfumes, were 
used in great profusion by those who could 
afford them.' The holy religion of Jesus 
Christ came in at this period, and stript luxury 
. and wealth of all their false attractions. * Wo- 
men of the noblest and wealthiest families, 
surrounded by the seductive allurements of 
worldly pleasure, renounced them all. Undis- 
mayed by severe edicts against the new religion, 
they appeared before the magistrates, and by 
pronouncing the simple words, " I am a Chris- 
tian," calmly resigned themselves to imprison- 
ment, ignominy and death.' Could such women 
have had their minds occupied by the foolish 

68 

vanity of ornamental apparel ? No ! Chris- 
tianity struck at the root of all sin, and conse- 
quently we find the early Christians could not 
fight, or swear, or wear costly clothing. Cave, 
in his work entitled 'Primitive Christianity,' 
has some interesting remarks on this subject, 
showing that simplicity of dress was not then 
esteemed an unimportant part of Christianity. 

Very soon, however, when the fire of perse- 
cution was no longer blazing, pagan customs 
became interwoven with Christianity. The 
professors of the religion of a self-denying Lord, 
whose kingdom was not of this world, began 
to use the sword, to return railing for railing, 
to take oaths, to mingle heathen forms and cer- 
emonies with Christian worship, to engraft on 
the beautiful simplicity of piety, the feasts and 
observances which were usual at heathen festi- 
vals in honor of the gods, and to adorn their 
persons with rich and ornamental apparel. 
And now if we look at Christendom, there is 
scarcely a vestige of that religion, which the 
Redeemer of men came to promulgate. The 
Christian world is much in the situation of the 
Jewish nation, when the babe of Bethlehem 
was born, full of outside observances, which 
they substitute for mercy and love, for self- 
denial and good works, rigid in the performance 
of religious duties, but ready, if the Lord Jesus 
came amongst them and judged them by their 
fruits, as he did the Pharisees forroerly, to 
crucify him as a slanderer. Indeed, I believe 
the remark of a late author is perfectly cor- 
rect: 

* Strange as it may wem, yet I do not hesitate to declare 
my belief that it is easier to make Pa^an nations Christiaos, 
than to reform Christian communities and fashion tbeai 

69 

anew, after the pure and simple standard of the gospel. 
Cast your eye over Christian countries, and see what a mul* 
titude of causes combine to resist and impair the influence 
of Christian institutions. Behold the conformity of Chris- 
tians to the world, in its prodigal pleasures and frivolous 
amusements, in its corrupt opinions and sentiments, of false 
honor. Behold the wide spread ignorance and degrading 
superstition; the power of prejudice and the authority of 
custom; the unchristian character of our syfitems of educa- 
tion ; and the dread of the frowns and ridicule of the world, 
and we discover at once a ho<>t of more formidable enemies 
to the progress of true religion in Christian, than in heathen 
lands.' 

But I must proceed to examine what is the 
state of professing Christendom, as regards th^ 
subject of this letter. A few words will suffice. 
The habits and employments of fashionable 
circles are nearly the same throughout Chris- 
tian communities. The fashion of dress, which 
varies more rapidly than the changing seasons, 
is still, as it has been from time immemorial, 
an all-absorbing object of interest. The simple 
cobbler of Agawam, who wrote in Massachu- 
setts as early as 1647, speaking of women, 
says, 

' It is no narvel ^hey wear drailes on the hinder part of 
their heads, havins nothing, as it seems, in the fore part, 
but a few squirrels' brains to help them frisk from one fashion 
to another.' 

It must, however, be conceded, that although 
there are too many women who merit this severe 
reprehension, there is a numerous class whose 
improvement of mind and devotion to the cause 
of humanity justly entitle them to our respect 
and admiration. One of the most striking 
characteristics of modern times, is the tendency 
toward a universal dissemination of knowledge 
in all Protestant communities. But the charac- 
ter of woman has been elevated more by par- 

70 

ticipating in the great moral enterprises of the 
day, than by anything else. It would astonish 
us if we could see at a glance all the labor, the 
patience, the industry, the fortitude which wo- 
man has exhibited, in carrying on the causes of 
Moral Reform, Anti-Slavery, &c. Still, even 
these noble and ennobling pursuits have not 
destroyed personal vanity. Many of those who 
are engaged in these great and glorious refor- 
mations, watch with eager interest, the ever 
varying freaks of the goddess of fashion, and 
are not exceeded by the butterflies of the ball- 
room in their love of curls, artificial flowers, 
embroidery and gay apparel. Many a woman 
will ply her needle with ceaseless industry, to 
obtain money to forward a favorite benevolent 
scheme, while at the same time she will expend 
on useless articles of dress, more than Jreble 
the sum which she procures by the employment 
of her needle, and which she might throw into 
the Lord's treasury, and leave herself leisure 
to cultivate her mind, and to mingle among the 
poor and the afflicted more than she can possi- 
bly do now. 

I feel exceedingly solicitous to draw the at- 
tention of my sisters to this subject. I know 
that it is called trifling, and much is said about 
dressing fashionably, and elegantly, and becom- 
ingly, without thinking about it. This I do 
not believe can be done. If we indulge our 
fancy in the chameleon caprices of fashion, or 
in wearing ornamental and extravagant apparel, 
the mind must be in no small degree engaged 
in the gratification of personal vanity. 

Lest any one may suppose from my being a 
Quaker, that I should like to see a uniform 
dress adopted, I will say, that I have no par- 

72 

is, God created me neither a Wrd nor a 
flower ; and I aspire to something more than 
a rosemblance to them. Besides, the gaudy 
colors in which birds and flowers are arrayed, 
create in them no feelings of vanity ; but as 
human beings, we are susceptible of these pas- 
sions, which are nurtured and strengthened by 
such adornments. ' Well,' I am often asked, 
* where is the limitation V This it is not my 
business to decide. Every woman, as Judson 
remarks, can best settle this on her knees before 
God. He has commanded her not to be con- 
formed to this world, but to be transformed by 
the renewing of her mind, that she may know 
what is the good and acceptable and perfect 
will of God. He made the dress of the Jew- 
ish women the subject of special denunciation 
by his prophet — Is. 3. 16 — 26; yet the chains 
and the bracelets, the rings and the ear-rings, 
and the changeable suits of apparel, are still 
worn by Christian women. He has command- 
ed them, through his apostles, not to adorn 
themselves with broidered hair, or gold, or 
pearls, or costly array. Not to let their adorn- 
ing be the * outward adorning of plaiting the 
hair, or of wearing of gold, or of putting on of 
apparel, but let it be the hidden man of the 
heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the 
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is 
in the sight of God of great price ; ' yet we 
disregard these solemn admonitions. May we 
not form some correct estimate of dress, by ask- 
ing ourselves how we should feel, if we saw 
ministers of the gospel rise to address an audi- 
ence with ear-rings dangling from their ears, 
glittering rings on their fingers, and a wreath 
of artificial flowers on their brow, and the rest 

71 

tiality for their peculiar costume, except so far as 
I find it simple and convenient ; and I have not 
the remotest desire to see it worn, where one 
more commodious can be substituted. But I 
do believe one of the chief obstacles in the way 
of woman's elevation to the same platform of 
human rights, and moral dignity, and intellect- 
ual improvement, with her brother, on which 
God placed her, and where he designed her to 
act her part as an immortal creature, is her love 
of dress. * It has been observed,' says Scott, 
' that foppery and extravagance as to dress in 
men are most emphatically condemned by the 
apostle's silence on the subject, for this intima- 
ted that surely they could be under no tempta- 
tion to such a childish vanity.' But even those 
men who are superior to such a childish vanity 
in themselves, are, nevertheless, ever ready to 
encourage it in women. They know that so 
long as we submit to be dressed like dolls, we 
never can rise to the stations of duty and use- 
fulness from which they desire to exclude us ; 
and they are willing to grant us paltry indul- 
gences, which forward their own design of 
keeping us out of our appropriate sphere, while 
they deprive us of essential rights. 

To me it appears beneath the dignity of wo- 
man to bedeck herself in gewgaws and trinkets, 
in ribbons and laces, to gratify the eye of man. 
I believe, furthermore, that we owe a solemn 
duty to the poor. Many a woman, in what is 
called humble life, spends nearly all her earn- 
ings in dress, because she wants to be as well 
attired as her employer. It is often argued that, 
as the birds and the flowers are gaily adorned 
by nature's hand, there can be no sin in wo- 
man's ornamenting her person. My reply 

73 

of their apparel in keeping ? If it would be 
wrong for a minister, it is wrong for every pro- 
fessing Christian. God makes no distinction 
between the moral and religious duties of min- 
isters and people. We are bound to be * a cho- 
sen generation, a royal priesthood, a peculiar 
people, a holy nation; that we should show 
forth the praises of him who hath called us out 
of darkness into his marvellous light.' 

Thine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Sabah M. Grimke. 

LETTER XIL 

l£GAh DISABILITIES OF WOMEN. 

Concord, 9th Mo., 6th, 1837. 

My Dear Sister, — There are few things 
which present greater obstacles to the improve- 
ment and elevation of woman to her appropriate 
sphere of usefulness and duty, than the laws 
which have been enacted to destroy her inde- 
pendence^ and crush her individuality ; laws 
which, although they are framed for her gov- 
ernment, she has had no voice in establishing, 
and which rob her of some of her essential 
rights. Woman has no political existence. 
With the single exception of presenting a peti- 
tion to the legislative body, she is a cipher in 
the nation ; or, if not actually so in representa- 
tive governments, she is only counted, like thf 
slaves of the South, to swell the number of 
law-makers who form decrees for her gov- 
ernment, with little reference to her benefit, 
except so far as her good may promote 
their owm. I am not sufficiently acquainted 
with the laws respecting women on the conti- 
nent of Europe, to say anything about them. 
But Prof. Pollen, in his essay on * The Cause 
of Preedom in our Country,' says, * Woman, •' 
though fully possessed of that rational and 

J 

75 

moral nature which is the foundation of all 
rights, enjoys amongst us fewer legal rights 
than under the civil law of continental Europe.* 
I shall confine myself to the laws of our coun- 
try. These laws hear with peculiar rigor on 
married women. Blackstone, in the chapter 
entitled * Of husband and wife,* says : — 

* By marriaf^e, tlie husband and wife are one person in 

law ; that is, the very being, or legal existence of the 

woman is suspended during the marriage, or at least is in- 

corjl^raled and consolidated into that of the husband tinder 

'whose wing, protection and cover she performs everything.' 

* For this reason, a man cannot grant anything to his wife« 

or enter into covenant with hei*; for the grant would be to 

suppose her separate existence, and to covenant with her 

would be to covenant with himself; and therefore it is also 

generally true, that all compacts made between hu«l)and and 

wife when single, are voided by the intermarriage. A woman 

indeed maybe attorney for her husband, but that implies no 

■eparation from, but i« rather a represeatatioa o^ her love.' 

Here now, the very being of a woman, like 
that of a slave, is absorbed in her master. All 
contracts made with her, like those made with 
slaves by their owners, are a mere nullity. 
Our kind defenders have legislated away almost 
all our legal rights, and in the true spirit of 
such injustice and oppression, have kept us in 
ignorance of those very laws by which we are 
governed. They have persuaded us, that we 
have no right to investigate the laws, and that, 
if we did, we could not comprehend them; 
they alone are capable of understanding the 
mysteries of Blackstone, &c. But they are not 
backward to make us feel the practical opera- 
tion of their power over our actions. 

* The husband is bouixl to provide his wife with neces- 
saries by law. as much as himself; and if she contracts debts 
for them, he is obliged to pay for them; but for anvthiog be- 
Aides necessaries, he is not chargeable.' 

76 

Yet a man may spend the property he hai 
acquired by marriage at the ale-house, the gam 
bling table, or in any other way that he pleases 
Many instances of this kind have come to in^ 
knowledge ; and women, who have brougb 
their husbands handsome fortunes, have b«Bi 
left, in consequence of the wasteful and disso 
lute habits of their husbands, in straitened cir 
cumstances, and compelled to toil for the suppoi 
of their families. 

* If the wife be indebted before marriage, the husband i 
bound afterwardfl to pay the debt ; fur he has adopted be 
and her circumstances together.' 

The wife's property is, I believe, equally lia 
ble for her husband's debts contracted befon 
marriage. 

* If the wife be injured in her person or property, she tm 
bring no action for redress without her hu8band*8 cooeur 
rence, and his name as well as her own : neither caa sbt b 
sued, without making her husband a defendant.' 

This law that * a wife can bring no action, 
&c., is similar to the law respecting slaves 
* A slave cannot bring a suit against his mastei 
or any other person, for an injury — his master 
must bring it.' So if any damages are recov 
ered for an injury committed on a wife, tli< 
husband pockets it ; in the case of the slave, th< 
master does the same. 

« 

< In criminal prosecutions, the wife may be indicted a* 
punished separately, unless there be evidence of ceercioi 
from the fact that the offence was committed in the presencf 
or by the command of her husband. A wife is excused froH 

punishment for theft committed in the presence, or by tK 
command of her husband.' 

It would be difficult to frame a law bettei 
calculated to destroy the responsibility of womai 
as a moral being, or a free agent. Her hu» 

77 

band is supposed to possess unlimited control 
over her ; and if she can offer the flimsy excuse 
that he bade her steal, she may break the eighth 
commandment with impunity, as far as human 
laws are concerned. 

' Our lawy in general, considers rnan and wife as one per- 
son ; vet there are some instances in which she is separately 
considered, as inferior to him and acting by his compulsion. 
Therefore, all deeds executed, and acts done by her during 
her coverture (i. e. marriage,) are void, except it \ie a fine, 
or like matter of record, in which case she roust be solely 
and secretly examined, to learn if her act be voluntary.' 

Such a law speaks volumes of the abuse of 
that power which men have vested in their own 
hands. Still the private examination of a wifp, 
to know whether she accedes to the disposition 
of property made by her husband is, in most 
cases, a mere form ; a wife dares not do what 
will be disagreeable to one who is, in his own 
estimation, her superior, and who makes her 
feel, in the privacy of domestic life, that she 
has thwarted him. With respect to the nullity 
of deeds or acts done by a wife, I will mention 
one circumstance. A respectable woman bor- 
rowed of a female friend a sum of money to re- 
lieve her son from some distressing pecuniary 
embarrassment. Her husband was from home, 
and she assured the lender, that as soon as he 
returned, he would gratefully discharge the debt. 
She gave her note, and the lender, entirely ig- 
norant of the law that a man is not obliged to 
discharge such a debt, actually borrowed the 
money, and lent it to the distressed and weep- 
ing mother. The father returned home, refused 
to pay the debt, and the person who had loaned 
the money was obliged to pay both principal 
and interest to the friend who lent it to her. 
Women should certainly know the laws by 

78 

which they are governed, and from which they 
frequently suffer ; yet they are kept in igno- 
rance, nearly as profound, of their legal rights, 
and of the legislative enactments which are 
to regulate their actions, as slaves. 

' The husband, by tbe old law, might gUe bis wife mode- 
rate correction, as be is to answer for lier misliehavior. 
The law tluHight it reasonable to entrust biiii with this 
power of restraining her by domestic cliastisement. The 
couru of law will still permit a busliand to restrain a wife 
of her liberty, in case of any gross misbehavior.' 

What a mortifying proof this law afibrds, of 
the estimation in which woman is held! She 
is placed completely in the hands of a being 
subject like herself to the outbursts of passion, 
and therefore unworthy to be trusted with pow- 
er. Perhaps I may be told respecting this law, 
that it is a dead letter, as I am sometimes told 
about the slave laws ; but this is not true in 
either case. The slaveholder does kill his slave 
by mo.derate correction, as the law allows ; and 
many a husband, among the poor, exercises the 
right given him by the law, of degrading 
woman by personal chastisement. And among 
the higher ranks, if actual imprisonment is not 
resorted to, women are not unfrequently restrain- 
ed of the liberty of going to places of worship 
by irreligious husbands, and of doing many 
other things about which, as moral and respon- 
sible beings, they should be the sole judges. 
Such laws remind me of the reply of some lit- 
tle girls at a children's meeting held recently at 
Ipswich. The lecturer told them that God had 
created four orders of beings with which he 
had made us acquainted through the Bible. 
The first was angels, the second was man> 

79 

the third heasts ; and now, children, what is the 
fourth ? After a pause, several girls replied, 

* WOMEN.' 

* A woman'fl personal property by marriage becomes ab* 
solutely der husband's, which, at his death, he may leaTe 
entirely away fcoxa her.' 

And farther, all the avails of her labor are 
absolutely in the power of her husband. All 
that she acquires by her industry is his ; so 
that she cannot, with her own honest earnings, 
become the legal purchaser of any property. 
If she expends her money for articles of furni- 
ture, to contribute to the comfort of her family, 
they are liable to be seized for her husband's 
debts : and I know an instance of a woman, 
who by labor and economy had scraped togeth- 
er a little maintenance for herself and a do-little 
husband, who was left, at his death, by virtue 
of his last will and testament, to be supported 
by charity. I knew another woman, who by 
great industry had acquired a little money which 
she deposited in a bank for safe keeping. She 
had saved this pittance whilst able to work, in 
hopes that when age or sickness disqualified her 
for exertion, she might have something to ren- 
der life comfortable, without being a burden to 
her friends. Her husband, a worthless, idle 
man, discovered this hid treasure, drew her lit- 
tle stock from the bank, and expended it all in 
extravagance and vicious indulgence. I know 
of another woman, who married without the 
least idea that she was surrendering her rights 
to all her personal property. Accordingly, she 
went to the bank as usual to draw her divi- 
dends, and the person who paid her the money, 
and to whom she was personally known as an 

80 

owner of shares in that hank, remarking the 
change in her signature, withdrew the money, 
informing her that if she were married, she hid 
no longer a right to draw her dividends withoat 
an order from her hushand. It appeared that 
she intended having a little fund for private 
use, and had not even told her husband that she 
owned this stock, and she was not a little cha- 
grined, when she found that it was not at her 
disposal. I think she was wrong to conceal the 
circumstance. The relation of husband and 
wife is too near and sacred to admit of secrecy 
about money matters, unless positive necessity 
demands it ; and I can see no excuse for any 
woman entering into a marriage engagement 
with a design to keep her husband ignorant that 
' she was possessed of property. If she was nn- 
; willing to give up her property to his disposal, 
• she had infinitely better have remained single. 
The laws above cited are not very unlike the 
slave laws of Louisiana. 

' All that a slave pomesseft belong! to bia master ; be pos- 
sesses nothing of bis own, except what bis master chooees he 
should possess.' 

* By the marriage, the husband is absolutely master of the 
profits of the wife^s lands during the covertore, and if he 
Das had a living child, and survives the wife, be retains the 
whole of those lands, if they are estates of inheritance, dar- 
ing his life ; but the wife is entitled only to one third if she 
survives, out of the husband's estates of inheritance. But 
this she has, whether she has bad a child or not.* * With 
regard to the property of women, there is taxation without 
representation ; for they pay taxes without having the liber- 
ty of voting for representatives.' 

And this taxation, without representation, be 
it remembered, was the cause of our Revolu- 
tionary war, a grievance so heavy, that it was 
thought necessary to purchase exemption from 

81 

it at ari immense expense of blood and treasure, 
yet the daughters of New England, as well as 
of all the other States of this free Republic, are 
safiering a similar injustice — ^but for one, I had 
rather we should suffer any injustice or oppres- 
sion, than that my sex should nave any voice in 
the political affairs of the nation. 

The laws I have quoted, are, I believe, the 
laws of Massachusetts, and, with few excep- 
tions, of all the States in this Union. * In 
Louisiana and Missouri, and possibly, in some 
o&er southern States, a woman not only has 
half her husband's property by right at his 
death, but may always be considered as pos- 
sessed of half his gains during his life ; hav- 
ing at all times power to bequeath that amount.' 
That the laws wnich have generally been adopt- 
ed in the United States, for the government of 
women, have been framed almost entirely for 
the exclusive benefit of men, and with a design 
to oppress women, by depriving them of all 
control over their property, is too manifest to be 
denied. Some liberal and enlightened men, I 
know, regret the existence of these laws ; and I 
quote with pleasure an extract from Harriet 
Martineau's Society in America, as a proof of 
the assertion. * A liberal ' minded lawyer of 
Boston, told me that his advice to testators al- 
ways is to leave the largest possible amount to 
the widow, subject to the condition of her leav- 
ing it to the children ; but that it is with shame 
that he reflects that any woman should owe that 
to his professional advice, which the law should 
have secured to her as a right.' I have known 
a few instances where men have left their whole 
property to their wives, when they have died, 
leaving only minor children ; but I have known 

6 

82 

more instances of * the friend and helper of 
many years, being portioned ^ like a salaried 
domestic/ instead of having a comfortable inde- 
pendence secured to her, while the childiea 
were amply provided for. 

As these abuses do exist, and women sufier 
intensely from them, our brethren are called 
upon in this enlightened age, by every senti- 
ment of honor, religion and justice, to repeal 
these unjust and unequal laws, and restore to 
woman those rights which they have wrested 
from her. Such laws approximate too nearly 
to the laws enacted by slaveholders for the gov- 
ernment of their slaves, and must tend to de- 
base and depress the mind of that being, whom 
God created as a help meet for man, or ' helper 
like unto himself,' and designed to be his equal 
and his companion. Until such laws are an- 
nulled, woman never can occupy that exalted 
station for which she was intended by her Ma- 
ker. And just in proportion as they are prac- 
tically disregarded, which is the case to some 
extent, just so far is woman assuming that in- 
dependence and nobility of character which she 
ought to exhibit. 

The various laws which I have transcribed, 
leave women very little more liberty, or power, 
in some respects, than the slave. ' A slave,' 
says the civil code of Louisiana, * is one who 
is in the power of a master, to whom he be- 
longs. He can possess nothing, nor acquire 
anything, but what must belong to his master.' 
I do not wish by any means to intimate that the 
condition of free women can be compared to 
that of slaves in suffering, or in degradation ; 
still, I believe the laws which deprive married 
, women of their rights and privileges, have a 

83 

tendency to lessen them in their own estimation /' 
lis moral and responsible beings, and that their • 
being made by civil law inferior to their hus- I 
bands, has a debasing and mischievous effect ( 
upon them, teaching them practically the fatal i 
lesson to look unto man for protection and in- , 
dulgence. 

Ecclesiastical bodies, I believe, without ex- . 
ception, follow the example of legislative assera-s 
blies, in excluding woman from any participa- k 
lion in forming the discipline by which she is ) 
governed. The men frame the laws, and, with \ 
few exceptions, claim to execute them on both ) 
sexes. In ecclesiastical, as well as civil courts, v^ 
woman is tried and condemned, not by a jury / 
of her peers, but by beings, who regard them- ' 
selves as her superiors in the scale of creation. ' 
Although looked upon as an inferior, when con-' 
sidered as an intellectual being, woman is pun- / 
ished with the same severity as man, when she [ 
is guilty of moral offences. Her condition re- / 
sembles, in some measure, that of the slave, 
who, while he is denied the advantages of his 
more enlightened master, is treated with even 
greater rigor of the law. Hoping that in the 
various reformations of the day, women may 
be relieved from some of their legal disabilities, 
I remain. 

Thine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Sarah M. Grimke. 

LETTER XIII. 

BELATIOM OF HUSBAND AND WIFE. 

Brookline, 9th Mo., 1837. 

Mt Dear Sister, — Perhaps some persons 
may wonder that I should attempt to throw out 
my views on the important subject of marriage, 
and may conclude that I am altogether disqual- 
ified for the task, because I lack experience. 
However, I shall not undertake to settle the Spe- 
cific duties of husbands and wives, but only^to 
exhibit opinions based on the word of God, and 
formed from a little knowledge of human na- 
ture, and close observation of the working of 
generally received notions respecting the do- 
minion of man over woman. 

When Jehovah ushered into existence man, 
created in his own image, he instituted marriage 
as a part of paradisaical happiness : it was a 
divine ordination, not a civil contract. God es- 
tablished it, and man, except by special permis- 
sion, has no right to annul it. There can be no 
doubt that the creation of Eve perfected the 
happiness of Adam ; hence, our all -wise and 
merciful Father made her as he made Adam, 
in his own image after his likeness, crowned 
her with glory and honor, and placed in her 
hand, as well as in his, the sceptre of dominion 

85 

over the whole lower creation. Where thefe -^ 
was perfect equality, and the same ability to ^ 
receive and comprehend divine truth, and to 
obey divine injunctions, there could be no su- ';; 
periority. If God had placed Eve under the 
guardianship of Adam, after having endowed ( 
her, as richly as him, with moral perceptions, { 
intellectual faculties, and spiritual apprehen* j 
sions, he would at once have interposed a falli- I 
ble being between her and her Maker. He j 
could not, in simple consistency with himself, > 
have done this ; for the Bible teems with in- > 
structions not to put any confidence in man. 

The passage on which the generally received 
opinion, that husbands are invested by divine 
command with authority over their wives, as I 
have remarked in a previous letter, is a predic- 
tion ; and I am confirmed in this belief, because 
the same language is used to Gain respecting 
Abel. The text is obscure ; but on a comparison 
of it with subsequent events, it appears to me 
that it was a prophecy of the dominion which 
Cain would usurp over his brother, and which 
issued in the murder of Abel. It could not 
allude to any thing but physical dominion, be- 
cause Gain had already exhibited those evil 
passions which subsequently led him .to become 
an assassin. 

I have already shown, that man has exercis- 
ed the most unlimited and brutal power over 
woman, in the peculiar chafacter of husband, — 
a word in most countries synonymous with ty- 
rant. I shall not, therefore, adduce any further 
proofs of the fulfilment of that prophecy, * He 
will rule over thee,' from the history of heathen 
nations, but just glance at the condition of 

86 

\vt>man in the relation of wife in Christian 
countries. 

* Previotis to the introduction of the religion 
of Jesus Christ, the state of society was wretch- 
edly diseased. The relation of the sexes to 
each other had hecome so gross in it& manifest- 
ed forms, that it was difficult to perceive the 
pure conservative principle in its inward es- 
sence.' Christianity came in, at this juncture, 
with its hallowed influence, and has without 
doubt tended to lighten the yoke of bondage, to 
purify the manners, and give the spiritual in 
some degree an empire over the animal nature. 
Still, that state which was designed by God to 
increase the happiness of woman as well as 
man, often proves the means of lessening her 
comfort, and degrading her into the mere mai- 
chine of another's convenience and pleasure. 
Woman, instead of being elevated by her union 
with man, which might be expected from an al- 
liance with a superior being, is in reality low- 
ered. She generally loses her individuality, 
her independent character, her moral being. 
She becomes absorbed into him, and henceforth 
is looked at, and acts through the medium of 
her husband. 

In the wealthy classes of society, and those 
who are in comfortable circumstances, women 
are exempt from great corporeal exertion, and 
are protected by public opinion, and by the 
genial influence of Christianity, from much 
physical ill treatment. Still, there is a vast 
amount of secret suffering endured, from the 
forced submission of women to the opinions and 
whims of their husbands. Hence they are fre- 
quently driven to use deception, to compass 
their ends. They are early taught that to ap- 

87 

pear to yield, is the only way to crovern. Mis- 
erable sophism ! I deprecate such sentiments, 
as being peculiarly hostile to the dignity of 
woman. If she submits, let her do it openly, 
honorably, not to gain her point, but as a mat- 
ter of Christian duty. But let her beware how 
she permits her husband to be her conscience- 
keeper. On all moral and religious subjects, 
she is bound to think and to act for herself. 
Where confidence and love exist, a wife will 
naturally converse with her husband as with 
her dearest friend, on all that interests her 
heart, and there will be a perfectly free inter- 
change of sentiment ; but she is no more bound 
to be governed by his judgment^ than he is by 
hers. They are standing on the same platform 
of human nghts, are equally under the govern- 
ment of God, and accountable to him, and him 
alone. 

I have sometimes been astonished and griev- 
ed at the servitude of women, and at the little 
idea many of them seem to have of their own 
moral existence and responsibilities. A woman 
who is asked to sign a petition for the abolition 
of slavery in the District of Columbia, or to 
join a society for the purpose of carrying for- 
ward the annihilation of American slavery, or , 
any other great reformation, not unfrequently 
replies, * My husband does not approve of it.' 
She merges her rights and her duties in her 
husband, and thus virtually chooses him for a 
savior and a king, and rejects Christ as her 
Ruler and Redeemer. I know some women 
are very glad of so convenient a pretext to 
shield themselves from the performance of duty ; 
but there are others, who, under a mistaken 
view of their obligations as wives, submit con- 

I 

88 

scientiously to this species of oppression, and 
go mourning on their way, for want of that 
holy fortitude, which would enable them to 
fulfil their duties as moral and responsible be- 
ings, without reference to poor fallen man. 0_ 
that woman may arise in her dignity as an im- 
mortal creature, and speak, think and act as 
unto God, and not unto man ! 

There is, perhaps, less bondage of mind 
among the poorer classes, because their sphere 
of duty is more contracted, and they are de- 
prived of the means of intellectual culture, and 
of the opportunity of exercising their judgement, 
on many moral subjects of deep interest and of 
vital importance. Authority is called into ex- 
ercise by resistance, and hence there will be 
mental bondage only in proportion as the facul- 
ties of mind are evolved, and woman feels her- 
self as a rational and intellifirent being, on a 
footing with man. But women, among the 
lowest classes of society, so far as my observa- 
tion has extended, suffer intensely from the 
brutality of their husbands. Duty as well as 
inclination has led me, for many years, into the 
abodes of poverty and sorrow, and I have been 
amazed at the treatment which women receive 
at the hands of those, who arrogate to them- 
selves the epithet of protectors. Brute force, 
the law of violence, rules to a great extent in 
the poor man's domicil ; and woman is little 
more than his drudge. They are less under 
the supervision of public opinion, less under the 
restraints of education, and unaided or unbias- 
ed by the refinements of polished society. Re- 
ligion, wherever it exists, supplies the place of 
all these ; but the real cause of woman's de- 

f gradation and suffering in married life is to be ^ 
bund in the erroneous notion of her inferiority ^ 
to man ; and never will she be rightly regard- ; 
ed by herself, or others, until this opinion, so 
derogatory to the wisdom and mercy of God, ■ 
is exploded, and woman arises in all the ma« 
jesty of her womanhood, to claim those rights '; 
which are inseparable from her existence as an n 
immortal, intelligent and responsible being. 

Independent of the fact, that Jehovah could 
not, consistently with his character as the King, 
the Lawgiver, and the Judge of his people, 
give the reins of government over woman into 
the hands of man, I find that all his commands, 
all his moral laws, are addressed to women as 
well as to men. When he assembled Israel at 
the foot of Mount Sinai, to issue his command- 
ments, we may reasonably suppose he gave all 
the precepts, which he considered necessary for 
the government of moral beings. Hence we 
find that God says, — ' Honor thy father and thy 
mother,' and he enforces this command by se- 
vere penalties upon those who transgress it : 
' He that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall 
surely be put to death ' — * He that curseth his 
father, or his mother, shall surely be put to 
death ' — Ex. 21 : 15, 17. But in the deca- 
logue, there is no direction given to women to 
obey their husbands : both are commanded to 
have no other God but Jehovah, and not to bow 
down, or serve any other. When the Lord 
Jesus delivered his sermon on the Mount, full 
of the practical precepts of religion, he did not 
issue any command to wives to obey their hus- 
bands. When he is speaking on the subject of 
divorce, Mark 16: 11, 12, he places men and 
women on the same gound. And the Apostle, 

90 

1st Cor. 7 : 12, 13, speaking of ihe duties of 
the Corinthian wives and husbands, who had 
embraced Christianity, to their unconverted 
partners, points out the same path to both, al- 
though our translators have made a distinction. 

* Let him not put her away,' 12 — * Let her not 
leave him,' 13— is precisely the same in the 
original. If man is constituted the governor of 
woman, he must be her God ; and the senti« 
ment expressed to me lately, by a married man, 
18 perfectly correct : * In my opinion,' said he, 
' the greatest excellence to which a married 
woman can attain, is to worship her husband/ 
He was a professor of religion — his wife a love- 
ly and intelligent woman. He only spoke out 
what thousands think and act. Women are in- 
debted to Milton for giving to this false notion, 

• confinhation strong as proof of holy writ' 
His Eve is embellished with every personal 
grace, to gratify the eye of her admiring hus- 
band ; but he seems to have furnished the 
mother of mankind with just intelligence enough 
to comprehend her supposed inferiority to Adam, 
and to yield unresisting submission to her lord 
and master. Milton puts into Eve's mouth the 
following address to Adam : 

* My author and dliposer, what thon bidfit. 
Unargued I obey; so God ordains — 
God 18 thy law, thou mine : to know no more. 
Is woman's happiest knowledge and her praise.' 

This much admired sentimental nonsense is 
fraught with absurdity and wickedness. If it 
were true, the commandment of Jehovah should 
have run thus : Man shall have no other gods 
before me, and woman shall have no other gods 
before man. 

91 

The principal support of the dogma of wo- 
man's inferiority, and consequent submission to 
her husband, is found in some passages of* 
Paul's epistles. .1 shall proceed to examine 
those passages, premising 1st, that the antiquity 
of the opinions based on the false construction 
of those passages, has no weight with me : 
they are the opinions of interested judges, and 
I have no particular reverence for them, merely 
because the*y have been regarded with venera- 
tion from ^neration to generation. So far 
from this being the case, I examine any opin- 
ions of centuries standing, with as much free- 
dom, and investigate them with as much care, 
as if they were of yesterday. I was educated 
to think for myself, and it is a privilege I shall 
always claim to exercise. 2d. Notwithstand- 
ing my full belief, that the apostle Paul's testi- 
mony, respecting himself, is true, * I was not a 
whit behind the chiefest of the apostles,' yet I 
believe his mind was under the influence of 
Jewish prejudices respecting women, just as 
Peter's and the apostles were about the un- 
cleanness of the Gentiles. * The Jews,' says 
Clarke, * would not suffer a woman to read in 
the synagogue, although a servant, or even a 
child, had this permission.' When I see Paul 
shaving his head for a vow, and offering sacri- 
fices, and circumcising Timothy, to accommo- 
date himself to the prepossessions of his coun- 
trymen, I do not cjDnceive that I derogate in the 
least from his character as an inspired apostle, 
to suppose that he may have been imbued with 
the prevalent prejudices against women. 

In 1st Cor. 11:3, after praising the Corin- 
thian converts, because they kept the 'ordi- 
nances,' or ' traditions,' as the margin reads, the 

92 

apostle says, * I would have you know, that the 
head of every man is Christ, and the head oi 
^he woman is the man ; and the head of Christ 
is God.* Eph. 5: 23, is a parallel pavsage. 
* For the hushand is the head of the wife, even 
as Christ is the head of the Church.' The 
apostle closes his remarks on this subject, hv 
observing, ' This is a great mystery, but I speak 
concerning Christ and the Church.' I shall 
pass over this with simply remarking, that God 
and Christ are one. ' I and my Father are 
one,' and there can be no inferiority where 
there is no divisibility. The commentaries on 
this and similar texts, afford a striking illustra- 
tion of the ideas which men entertain of their 
own superiority) I shall subjoin Henry's re- 
marks on 1st (5or. li : 5, as a specimen : ' To 
understand this text, it must be observed, that 
it was a signification either of shame, or sub- 
jection, for persons to be veiled, or covered in 
Eastern countries ; contrary to the custom of 
ours, where the being bare-headed betokens 
subjection, and being covered supeiiority and 
dominion ; and this will help us the better to 
understand the reason on which he grounds his 
reprehension, ' Every man praying, &;c.di8bon* 
oreth his head,' i. e. Christ, the head of every 
man, by appearing in a habit unsuitable to the 
rank in which God had placed him. The wo- 
man, on the other hand, that prays, &c. dishon- 
oreth her head, i. e. the man. She appears in 
the dress of her superior ^ and throws off the 
token of her subjection ; she might with equal 
decency cut her hair short, or cut it off, the 
common dress of the man in that age. Anoth- 
er reason against this conduct was, that the man 
is the image and glory of God^ the representa- 

93 

live of that glorious dominion and headship 
which God has over the world. It is the man 
who is set at the head of this lower creation, 
and therein bears the resemblance of God. 
The woman, on the other hand, is the glory of 
the man : she is his representative. Not but she 
has dominion over the inferior creatures, and 
she is a partaker of human nature, and so far is 
God's representative too, but it is at second 
band. She is the image of God, inasmuch as 
she is the image of the man. The man was 
first made, and made head of the creation here 
below, and therein the image of the divine do- 
minion ; and the woman was made out of the 
man, and shone with a reflection of his glory, 
being made superior to the other creatures here 
below, but in subjection to her husband, and de- 
riving that honor from him^ out of whom she 
was made. The woman was made for the man 
to be his help meet, and not the man for the 
woman. She was, naturally, therefore, made 
subject to him, because made for him, for his 

USE AND HELP AND COMFORT.' 

We see in the above quotation, what degrad- 
ing views even good men entertain of women. 
Pity the Psalmist had not thrown a little light 
on this subject, when he was paraphrasing the 
account of man's creation. * Thou hast made 
him a little lower than the angels, and hast 
crowned him with glory and honor. Thou 
madest him to have dominion over the works of 
thy hands ; thou hast put all things under his 
feet.' Surely if woman had been placed below 
man, and was to shine only by a lustre borrow- 
ed from him, we should have some clear evi- 
dence of it in the sacred volume. Henry puts 
her exactly on a level with the beasts ; they 

94 

were made for the use, help and comfort of 
man ; and according to this commentator, this 
was the whole end and design of the creation 
of woman. The idea that man, as roan is su- 
perior to woman, involves an ahsurdity 80 gross, 
that I really wonder how any man of reflection 
can receive it as of divine origin ; and I can only 
account for it, hy that passion for supremacy, 
which characterizes man as a corrupt and fall- 
en creature. If it he true that he is more ex- 
cellent than she, as man, independent of his 
moral and intellectual powers, then erery man 
is superior by virtue of his manship, to every 
woman. The man who sinks his moral capac- 
ities and spiritual powers in his sensual appe- 
tites, is still, as a man, simply by the con- j 
formation of his body, a more dignified be- | 
ing, than the woman whose intellectual powers 
are highly cultivated, and whose approximation 
to the character of Jesus Christ is exhibited in 
a blameless life and conversation. 

But it is strenuously urged by those, who are 
anxious to maintain their usurped authority, 
that wives are, in various passages of the New 
Testament, commanded to obey their husbands. 
Let us examine these texts. 

Eph. 5, 22. 'Wives, submit yourselves unto y«ar owi 
bosbRiHls as unto the Lord.* * As the church is subject unto 
Christ, so 1st the wives be to their own husbands in atery 
thing.' 

* Col. 3, 18. Wives, submit yourselves unto yonr own hat- 
bands, as it is fit in the Lord.' 

1st Pet. 8, 2. < Likewise ye wives, be in subfectioo to 
your own husbands; that it any obey not the word, they 
may also without the word be won by the conversation of 
the wives.' 

Accompanying all these difections to wife** 
are commands to husbands. 

95 

Eph. 5> 25. ' Husbands, love your wives even as Christ 
loved the Church, and gave himself for it.' 'So ought men 
to love their wives as their own bodies. He that lovelh bis 
wife, loveth himself.' ' 

Col. 3, 19. ' Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter 
against them.* ^ 

1st Pet. 3» 7. ' Likewise ye husbandsj dwell with them 
according to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife as unto 
the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace 
of liie.' 

I may just remark, in relation to the expres- 
sion * weaker vessel,' that the word in the orig- 
inal has no reference to intellect : it refers to 
physical weakness merely. 

The apostles were writing to Christian con- 
verts, and laying down rules for their conduct 
towards their unconverted consorts. It no doubt 
frequently happened, that a husband or a wife 
would embrace Christianity, while their com- 
panions clung to heathenism, and husbands 
might be tempted to dislike and despise those, 
who pertinaciously adhered to their pagan su- 
perstitions. And wives who, when they were 
pagans, submitted as a matter of course to their 
heathen husbands, might be tempted knowing 
that they were superior as moral and religious 
characters, to assert that superiority, by paying 
less deference to them than heretofore. Let us 
examine the context of these passages, and see 
what are the grounds of the directions here 
given to husbands and wives. The whole 
epistle to the Ephesians breathes a spirit of love. 
The apostle beseeches the converts to walk 
worthy of the vocation wherewith they are 
called, with all lowliness and meekness, with 
long suffering, forbearing one another in love. 
The verse preceding 5, 22, is * SUBMITTING 
YOURSELVES ONE TO ANOTHER IN 
THE FEAR OF GOD.' Colossians 3, from 

11 to 17, contains similar injunctions. The 
17th verse says, ' Whatsoever ye do in word, 
or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord 
Jesus.' Peter, after drawing a most touching 
picture of Christ's suflerings for us, and remind- 
ing the Christians, that he had left us an exam- 
ple that we should follow his steps, * who did 
no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth,* 
exhorts wives to he in suhjection, &c. 

From an attentive consideration of these pas- 
sages, and of those in which the same words 
*suhmit,' * subjection,' aroused, I cannot but he* 
lieve that the apostles designed to recommend 
tb wives, as they did to subjects and to servants, 
to carry out the holy principle laid down by 
Jesus Christ, * Resist not evil.' And this with- 
out in the least acknowledging the right of the 
governors, masters, or husbands, to exercise the 
authority they claimed. The recognition of 
the existence of evils does not involve approba- 
tion of them. God tells the Israelites, he gave 
them a king in his wrath, but nevertheless as 
they chose to have a king, he laid down direc- 
tions for the conduct of that king, and had him 
anointed to reign over them. According to the 
generally received meaning of the passages I 
have quoted, they directly- contravene the laws 
of God, as given in various parts of the Bible. 
Now I must understand the sacred Scriptures 
as harmonizing with themselves, or I cannot 
receive them as the word of God. The com- 
mentators on these passages exalt man to the 
station of a Deity in relation to woman. Clarke 
says, * As the Lord Christ is the head, or gov- 
ernor of the church, and the head of the man, 
so is the man the head, or governor of the wo- 
man. This is God's ordinance, and should not 

97 

be transgressed. * As unto the Lord.* The 
word church seems necessarily to be understood 
here : that is, act under the authority of your 
husbands, as the church acts under the author- 
ity of Christ. As the church submits to the 
Lord, so let wives submit to their husbands.' 
Henry goes even further — * For the husband is 
the head of the wife. The metaphor is taken 
from the head in the natural body, which being 
the seat of reason, of wisdom and of knowledge, 
and the fountain of sense and motion, is more 
excellent than the rest of the body.' Now if 
God ordained man the governor of woman, he 
must be able to save her, and to answer in her 
stead for all those sins which she commits by 
his direction. Awful responsibility. Do hus- 
bands feel able and willing to bear it ? And 
what becomes of the solemn affirmation of Je- 
hovah? * Hear this, all ye people, give ear all 
ye inhabitants of the world, both low and high, 
rich and poor.' * None can by any means re- 
deem his brother, or give to God a ransom for 
him, for the redemption of the soul is precious, 
and man cannot accomplish it.' — French Bible. 

Thine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Sarah M. Grimke. 

LETTER XIV. 

MINISTRY OF WOMEN. 

Brookline, 9th Mo. 1837. 

My Dear Sister, — According to the princi- 
ple which I have laid down, that man and wo- 
man were created equal, and endowed by their 
beneficent Creator with the same intellectual 
powers and the same moral responsibilities, and 
that consequently whatever is morally right for 
a man to do, is morally right for a woman to 
do, it follows as a necessary corollary, that if it 
is the duty of man to preach the unsearchable 
riches of Christ, it is the duty also of woman. 

I am aware, that I haVe the prejudices of 
education and custom to combat, both in my 
own and the other sex, as well as * the traditions 
of men,' which are taught for the command- 
ments of God. I feel that I have no sectarian 
views to advance ; for although among the 
Quakers, Methodists, and Christians, women 
are permitted to preach the glad tidings of peace 
and salvation, yet I know of no religious body, 
who entertain the Scripture doctrine of the 
perfect equality of man and woman, which is 
the fundamental principle of my argument in 
favor of the ministry of women. I wish sim- 

99 

ply to throw my views before thee. If they 
are based on the immutable foundation of truth, 
they cannot be overthrown by unkind insinua- 
tions, bitter sarcasms, unchristian imputations, 
or contemptuous ridicule. These are weapons 
which are unworthy of a good cause. If I am 
mistaken, as truth only can prevail, my suppos- 
ed errors will soon vanish before her beams ; 
but I am persuaded that woman is not filling the 
high and holy station which God allotted to 
her, and that in consequence of her having 
been driven from her * appropriate sphere,' both 
herself and her brethren have suffered an in- 
finity of evils. 

Before I proceed to prove, that wonjian is 
bound to preach the gospel, I will examine the 
ministry under the Old Testament dispensa- 
tion. Those who were called to this office were 
known under various names. Enoch, who 
prophesied, is designated as walking with God. 
Noah is called a preacher of righteousness. 
They were denominated men of God, seers, 
prophets, but they all had the same great work 
to perform, viz. to turn sinners from tlie error of 
their ways. This ministry existed previous to 
the institution of the Jewish priesthood, and 
continued after its abolition. It has nothing to 
do vnth the priesthood. It was rarely, as far as 
the Bible informs us, exercised by those of the 
tribe of Levi, and was common to all the people, 
women as well as men. It differed essentially 
from the priesthood, because there was no com- 
pensation received for calling the people to re- 
pentance. Such a thing as paying a prophet 
for preaching the truth of God is not even men- 
tioned. They were called of Jehovah to go 
forth in his name, one from his plough, another 

100 

from gathering of sycamore fruit, &c. &c. Lei 
us for a moment imagine Jeremiah, when God 
says to him, * Gird up thy loins, and arise and 
speak unto the people all that I command ihee,' 
replying to Jehovah, * I will preach repentance 
to the people, if they will give me gold, hut if 
they will not pay me for the truth, then let them 
perish in their sins.' Now, this is virtually the 
language of the ministers of the present day; 
and I believe the secret of the exclusion of wo- 
men from the ministerial office is, that that 
office has been converted into one of emolu- 
ment, of honor, and of power. Any attentive 
observer cannot fail to perceive, that as far as 
possible, all such offices are reserved by men 
for themselves. 

The common error that Christian ministers 
are the successors of the priests, is founded in 
mistake. In the particular directions given to 
Moses to consecrate Aaron and his sons to the 
office of the priesthood, their duties are clearly 
defined : see Ex. 28th, 29th and 30th chap. 
There is no commission to Aaron to preach to 
the people ; his business was to offer sacrifice. 
Now why were sacrifices instituted? They 
were types of that one great sacrifice, which in 
the fulness of time was offered up through the 
eternal Spirit 'j^'ithout spot to God. Christ as- 
sumed the office of priest ; he * offered him- 
self,' and by so doing, abolished forever the or- 
der of the priesthood, as well as the sacrifices 
which the priests were ordained to offer.''*' 

* I cannot enter fully into this part of my subject. It i** 
liowe?er, one of great importance, and I recommend tboM 
who wish to examine it, to read * The Book of the Priest- 
hood,' by an English Dissenter, and Beverly's 'View of the 
Present State of the Visible Church of Christ.' They are 
both masterly productions. 

101 

But it may be inquired, whether the priests 
were not to teach the people. As far as I can 
discover from the Bible, they were simply com- 
manded to read the law to the people. There 
was no other copy that we know of, until the 
time of the kings, who were to write out a copy 
for their own use. As it was deposited in the 
ark, the priests were required, * When all Israel 
is come to appear before the Lord thy God in 
the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read 
this law before all Israel in their hearing. 
Gather the people together, men, women, and 
children, that they may hear,' Deut. 31 : 9 — 
33. See also Lev. 10: 11, Deut. 33: 10, 2d 
Chr. 17 : 7 — 9, and numerous other passagies. 
When God is enumerating the means he has 
used to call his people to repentance, he never, 
as far as I can discover, speaks of sending his 
priests to warn them ; but in various passages 
we find language similar to this : * Since the day 
that your fathers came forth out of the land of 
Egypt unto this day, I have even sent unto you 
all my servants, the prophets, daily rising up 
early and sending them. Yet they hearkened 
not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but harden- 
de their neck ; they did worse than their fath- 
ers.' Jer. 7 : 25, 26. See also, 25 : 4. 2 Chr. 
36 : 15. and parallel: passages. God says. Is. 
9: 15, 16. * The prophet that teacheth lies, he 
is the tail ; for the leaders of this people cause 
them to err.' The distinction between priests 
and prophets is evident from their being men- 
tioned as two classes. * The prophets prophesy 
falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means,' 
Jer. 5 : 31. See also, Ch. 2 : 8. S :1— 10. and 
many others. 

That women were called to the prophetic 

102 

office, I believe is universally admitted. 1 
Deborah and Huldah were prophetesses, 
judgments of the Lord are denounced b} 
kiel on false prophetesses, as "well as 
prophets. And if Christian ministers are 
apprehend, successors of the prophets, an 
of the priests, then of course, women are 
called to that office as well as men, because 
has no where withdrawn from them the p 
lege of doing what is the great businesi 
preachers, viz. to point the penitent sinne. 
the Redeemer. * Behold the Lamb of G 
which taketh away the sins of the world.' 

It is often triumphantly inquired, why, 
men and women are on an equality, are i 
women as conspicuous in the Bible as mei 
I do not intend to assign a reason, but I thn 
one may readily be found in the fact, that fro< 
the days of Eve to the present time, the aii 
of man has been to crush her. He has accoir 
plished this work in various ways ; sometime 
oy brute force, sometimes by making her sul 
servient to his worst passions, sometimes b 
treating her as a doll, and while he exclude 
from her mind the light of knowledge, decke 
her person with gewgaws and frippery whic 
he scorned for himself, thus endeavoring t 
render her like unto a painted sepulchre. 

It is truly marvellous that any woman ca 
rise above the pressure of circumstances whic 
combine to crush her. Nothing can strengthe 
her to do this in the character of a preacher < 
righteousness, but a call from Jehovah himsel 
And when the voice of God penetrates the de€ 
recesses of her heart, and commands her to g 
and cry in the ears of tlie people, she is read 
to exclaim, * Ah, Lord God, behold I cann< 

103 

speak, for I am a woman.' I have known wo- 
men in diflferent religious societies, who have 
felt like the prophet. * His word was in my 
heart as a burning fire shut up in my benes, 
and I was weary with forbearing.' But they 
have not dared to open their lips, and have en- 
dured all the intensity of suffering, produced by 
disobedience to God, rather than encounter 
heartless ridicule and injurious suspicions. I 
rejoice that we have been the oppressed, rather 
than the oppressors. God thus rrnpared his 
people for deliverance from outwar i bondage ; 
and I hope our sorrows have prepared us to ful- 
fil our high and holy duties, whether public or 
private, with humility and meekness ; and that 
suffering has imparted fortitude to endure trials, ( 
which assuredly await us in the attempt to sun- 
der those chains witif which man has bound us, 
galling to the spirit, though unseen by the eye. 

Surely there is nothing either astonishing or 
novel in the gifts of the Spirit behig bestowed . 
on woman : nothing astonishing, because there 
is no respect of persons with God ; the soul of 
the woman in his sight is as the soul of the 
man, and both are alike capable of the influence 
of the Holy Spirit. Nothing novel, because, as 
has been already shown, in the sacred records 
there are found examples of women, as well as 
of men, exercising the gift of prophecy. 

We attach to the word prophecy, the exclu- 
sive meaning of foretelling future events, but 
this is certainly a mistake ; for the apostle Paul 
defines it to be * speaking to edification, exhor- 
tation and comfort.' And there appears no 
possible reason, why women should not do this 
as well as men. At the time that the Bible 
was translated into English, the meaning of the 

104 

word prophecy, was delivering a message from 
God, whether it was to predict future events, or 
to warn the people of the consequences of sin. 
Governor Winthrop, of Massachusetts, men- 
tions in a letter, that the minister being absent, 

he went to, to prophecy to the people. 

Before I proceed to prove that women, under 
the Christian dispensation, were anointed of the 
Holy Ghost to preach, or prophecy, I will men- 
tion Anna, the (last) prophetess under the Jew- 
ish dispensation. * She departed not from the 
temple, but served God with fasting and prayers 
night and day.* And coming into the temple, 
while Simeon was yet speaking to Mary, with 
the infant Savior in his arms, * spake of Christ 
to all them that looked for redemption in Jeru- 
salem.' Blackwall, a learned English critic, in 
his work entitled, * Sacr^ Classics,' says, in 
reference to this passage, Luke 2 ; 37 — * Ac- 
cording to the original reading, the sense will 
be, that the devout Anna, who attended in the 
temple, both night and day, spoke of the Mes- 
siah to all the inhabitants of that city, who 
constantly worshipped there, and who prepared 
themselves for the worthy reception of that di- 
vine person, whom they expected at this time. 
And 'tis certain, that other devout Jews, not in- 
habitants of Jerusalem, frequently repaired to 
the temple-worship, and might, at this remark- 
able time, and several others, hear this admira- 
ble woman discourse upon the blessed advent 
of the Redeemer. A various reading has Israel 
instead of Jerusalem, which expresses that re- 
ligious Jews, from distant places, came thither 
to divine offices, and would with high pleasure 
hear the discourses of this great prophetess, so 
famed for her extraordinary piety and valuable 

105 

talents, upon the most important and desirable 
subject.' 

I shall now examine the testimony of the 
Bible on this point, after the ascension of our 
Lord, beginning with the glorious effusion of 
the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost. I 
presume it will not be denied, that women, as 
well as men, were at that time filled with the 
Holy Ghost, because it is expressly stated, that 
women were among those who continued in 
prayer and supplication, waiting for the fulfil- 
ment of the promise, that they should be endu- 
ed with power from on high. * When the day 
of Pentecost was fully come, they were all 
with one accord in one place. And there ap- 
peared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, 
and it sat upon each of them ; and they were 
all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to 
speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave 
them utterance.' Peter savs, in reference to 
<his miracle, * This is that which was spoken 
by the prophet Joel. And it shall come to pass 
in the last days, said God, I will pour out my 
Spirit upon all flesh ; and your sons and your 
daughters shall prophesy — and on my servants 
and on my hand-maidens, I will pour out in 
those days of my Spirit, and they shall proph- 
esy.' There is not the least intimation that 
this was a spasmodic influence which was soon 
to cease. The men and women are classed to- 
gether ; and if the power to preach the gospel 
was a supernatural and short-lived impulse in 
women, then it was equally so in men. But 
we are told, those were the days of miracles. 
I grant it; but the men, equally with the wo- 
men, were the subjects of this marvellous ful- 
filment of prophecy, and of course, if women 

106 

have lost the gift of prophesying, so have men. 
We are also gravely told, that if a woman pre- 
tends to inspiration, and thereupon grounds the 
right to plead the cause of a crucified Redeem- 
er in public, she will be believed when she 
shows credentials from heaven, i. e. when she 
works a miracle. I replvi if this be necessary 
to prove her right to preach the gospel, then I 
demand of my brethren to show me their cre- 
dentials ; else I cannot receive their ministrvi 
by their own showing. John Newton has just- 
ly said, that no power but that which created a 
world, can make a minister of the gospel ; and 
man may task his ingenuity to the utmost, to 
prove that this power is not exercised on wo- 
men as well as men. He cannot do it until he 
has first disclaimed that simple, but all compre- 
hensive truth, * in Christ Jesus there is neither 
male nor female.' 

Women then, according to the Bible, were, 
under the New Testament dispensation, as well 
as the Old, the recipients of the gift of proph- 
ecy. That this is no sectarian view may be 
proved by the following extracts. The first I 
shall offer is from Stratton's *Book of the 
Priesthood.* 

• While they were assemhled in the upper room to wait 
for the blessing, in numl)er about one hundred and twenty, 
they receired the miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit's 
grace ; they became the channels through which its more 
ordinary, but not less saving streams flowed to three thona- 
«nd persons in one day. The whole company of the assem- 
bled disciples, male and female, young and old, were all 
filled with tlie Huly Ghost, and began to speak with other 
tongues ns the Spirit gave them utterance. They all con- 
tributed in producing thai impression upon the assembled 
multitude, which Peter was instrumental in ad?aDcing to it* 
decisive results.' 

107 

Scott, in his commentary on this passage, 
says — 

* At the inine time, there appeared the form of tongueg 
divided at the tip and resemhlinfj^ fire; one of which rested 
on each of the whole company.' • They sat on every one 
present, as the original determines. At the time of these 
extraordinary appearances, the whole company were abun- 
dantly replenished with the gifts and graces of the Holy 
Spirit, so that they began to speak with other tongues.' 

Henry in his notes confirms this : 

* It seems evident to me that not the twelve apostles only, 
but all the one hundred and twenty disciples were filled with 
the Holy Ghost alike at this time, — all the seventy disciples, 
who were apostolical men and employed in the same work, 
and ail the rest too that were to preach the gospel, (or it is 
said expressly, Cph. 4: 8 — 12: 'When Christ ascended up 
on high, (which refers to this) he gave gifts unto men.' The 
all here must refer to the all that were together.' 

I need hardly remark that man is a generic 
term, including both sexes. 

Let us now examine whether women actual- 
ly exercised the office of minister, under the 
gospel dispensation. Philip had four daughters, 
who prophesied or preached. Paul calls Pris- 
cilla, as well as Aquila, his helpers ; or, as in 
the Greek, his fellow laborers'^ in Christ Jesus. 
Divers other passages might be adduced to 
prove that women continued to be preachers, 
and that many of them filled this dignified sta- 
tion. 

We learn also from ecclesiastical history, 
that female ministers suffered martyrdom in the 
early ages of the Christian church. In ancient 
councils, mention is made of deaconesses ; and 
in an edition of the New Testament, printed in 
1574, a woman is spoken of as minister of a 

* Rom. 16 : 3, compare Gr. text of v. 21, 2. Cor. 8 : 
23; Phil. 2: 25; 1 Thes. 3: 2. 

106 

charch. The same word, which, in oor com- 
inon translation, is now rendered a servant of 
the church, in speaking of Phehe, Rom. 16 : 1, 
is rendered minister, Eph. 6 : 21, when applied 
to Tychicus. A minister, with whom 1 had 
lately the pleasure of conversing, remarked, 
* My rule is to expound scripture by scripture, 
and I cannot deny the ministry of women, be- 
cause the apostle says, * help those women who 
labored with me in the gospel.' He certainly 
meant something more than pouring out tea for 
him.' 

In the 11th Ch. of 1 Cor., Paul gives direc- 
tions to women and men how they should ap- 
pear when they prophesy, or pray in public as- 
semblies. It IS evident that the design of the 
apostle, in this and the three succeeding chap- 
ters, is to rectify certain abuses which had crept 
into the Christian church. He therefore ad- 
monishes women to pray with their heads cov- 
ered, because, according to the fashion of that 
day, it was considered immodest and immoral 
to do otherwise. He says, * that were all one 
as if she were shaven ; ' and shaving the head 
was a disgraceful punishment that was inflict- 
ed on women of bad character. 

< These things/ says Scott, * tke apostle stated as dcceiu 
and prui)cr, but if any of tlie Corinthian teachers inclined 
to excite contention about tWm, he would only add, t. 16, 
that he an^f his bretliren knew of no such custom as preraiU 
•d among thetn, nor was there any such in the churches of 
God which had been planted by the other apostles.' 

John Locke, whilst engaged in writing his 
notes on the Epistles of St. Paul, was at a 
meeting where two women preached. After 
hearing them, he became convinced of their 
commission to publish the gospeU and thereupon 

109 

altered his notes on the 11th Ch. 1 Cor. in fa- 
vor of women's preaching. He says, — 

* This about women seeming as difficult a passage as most 
in St. PruI*8 Epistles, I crave leave to premise some few 
considerations. It is plain that this covering the head ia 
women is restrained to some peculiar actions which they 
performed in the assembly, expressed by the words praying, 
prophesying, which, whatever they signify, must have the 
same meaning applied to women in the 5th verse, tliat they 
have when applied to men in the 4th, &c. The next thing 
to be considered is, what is here to be understood by pray- 
ing and prophesying. And that seems to me the performing 
of some public action in the assembly, by some one person 
which was for that time peculiar to that person, and whilst 
it lasted, the rest of the assembly silently assisted. As to 
prophesying, the apostle in express words tells us, Ch. 14: 
3, 12, that it was speaking in the assembly. The same is 
evident as to praying, that the apostle means by it publicly 
with an audible voice, ch. 14 : 19.' 

In a letter to these two women, Rebecca Col- 
lier and Rachel Bracken, which accompanied a 
little testimony of his regard, he says, 

* I admire no converse like that of Christian freedom; 
and I fear no bondnge like that of pride and prejudice. I 
now see that acquaintance by wight cannot reach the height 
of enjoyment, which arquamtance by knowledge arrives 
unto. Outward hearing may misguide us, but internal knoW' 
ledge cannot err.' * Women, indeed, had tiie honor of first 
publishing the resurrection of the Ood of love — whv not 
again the resurrection of the spirit of love 1 And let all the 
disciples of Christ rejoice therein, as doth your partner, 
John Locke.' 

See ' The Friend,' a periodical published in 
Philadelphia. 

Adam Clarke's comment on 1 Cor. 11 : 5, is 
similar to Locke's : 

« Whatever be the meaning of praying and prophesying 
in respect to the man, they have precisely the same mean- 
ing in respect to the woman. So that some women at least, 
as well as some men, might speak to others to edification 
and exhortation and comfort. And this kinW of prophesy- 
ing, or teaching, was predicted by Joel 2 : 28, and referred 

110 

to by Peter ; and had tliere not been such glHs bestowed on 
women, the prophesy could not have had its fulfilment.' 

In the autobiography of Adam Clarke, there 
is an interesting account of his hearing Mary 
Sewall and another female minister preach, and 
he acknowledges that such was the power ac- 
companying their ministry, that though he had 
been prejudiced against w^omen's preaching, he 
could not but confess that these women were 
anointed for the office. 

But there are certain passages in the Epistles 
of St. Paul, which seem to be of doubtful in- 
terpretation ; at which we cannot much marvel, 
seeing that his brother Peter says, there are 
some things in them hard to be understood. 
Most commentators, having their m.inds preoc- 
cupied with the prejudices of education, aflbrd 
little aid ; they rather tend to darken the text 
by the multitude of words. One of these pas- 
sages occurs in 1 Cor. 14. I have already re- 
marked, that this chapter, with several of the 
preceding, was evidently designed to correct 
abuses which had crept into the assemblies of 
Christians in Corinth. Hence we find that the 
men were commanded to be silent, as well as the 
women, when they were guilty of any thing 
which deserved reprehension. The apostle 
says, * If there be no interpreter, let him keep 
silence in the church.' The men were doubt- 
less in the practice of speaking in unknown 
tongues, when there was no interpreter present ; 
and Paul reproves them, because this kind of 
preaching conveyed no instruction to the peo- 
ple. Again he says, * If any thing be revealed 
to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his 
peace.' We may infer from this, that two men 

HI 

♦ 

sometimes attempted to speak at the same time, 
and the apostle rebukes them,and adds, * Ye may 
ALL prophesy one by one, for God is not the au- 
thor of confusion, but of peace.' He then pro- 
ceeds to notice the disorderly conduct of the 
women, who were guilty of other improprieties. 
They were probably in the habit of asking 
questions, on any points of doctrine which they 
wished more thoroughly explained. This cus- 
tom was common among the men in the Jewish 
synagogues, after the pattern of which, the 
meetings of the early Christians were in all 
probability conducted. And the Christian wo- 
men, presuming on the liberty which they en- 
joyed under the new religion, interrupted the 
assembly, by asking questions. The apostle 
disapproved of this, because it disturbed the so- 
lemnity of the meeting : he therefore admon- 
ishes the women to keep silence in the church- 
es. That the apostle did not allude to preaching 
is manifest, because he tells them, * If they will 
learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at 
home.' Now a person endowed with a gift in 
the ministry, does not ask questions in the pub- 
lic exercise of that gift, for the purpose of gain- 
ing information : she is instructing others. 
Moreover, the apostle, in closing his remarks 
on this subject, says, * Wherefore, brethren, (a 
generic term, applying equally to men and wo- 
men,) covet to prophesy, and forbid not to speak 
with tongues. Let all things be done decently 
and in order.' 

Clarke, on the passage, * Let women keep si- 
Jence in the churches,' says : 

* This was a Jewish ordinance. Women were not per- 
fliiued to teach in the assemblies, or even to ask questions 
The rabbins taught that a woman should know nothing ba 

112 

the age of her distmff; nnd th« saying of Rabbi K1 lexer u 
worthy of remark and execration: 'Let the words of the 
law be burned, rather thao that they should be delivered by 
women.* 

Are there not many of our Christian breth- 
ren, whose hostility to the ministry of women 
is as bitter as was that of Rabbi Eliezer, and 
who would rather let souls perish, than that the 
truths of the gospel should be delivered by 
women ? 

* This,* says Clarke, ' was their condition till the time of 
the gospel, when, according to the ^prediction of Joel, the 
Spirit of God was to be poured out on the women afe well as 
the men, that they might prophesy, that is, teach. And that 
they did prophesy, or teach, is evident from what the apos- 
tie says, ch. 11 : 5, where he lays down rules to regulate this 
part of their conduct while ministering in the church. But 
does not what the apostle says here, let your women keep si- 
lence in the churches, contradict that statement, and sliow 
tliat the words in cb. 11, should be understood in another 
sense 1 for here it is expressly said, that they should keep 
silence in the churches, for it was not permitted to a woman 
to speak. Both places seem perfectlv consistent. It is ev- 
ident from the context, that the apostle refers here to asking 
questions, and what we call dictating in the assemblies.' 

The Other passage on which the opinion, that 
women are not called to the ministry, is found- 
ed, is 1 Tim. 2d ch. The apostle speaks of 
the duty of prayer and supplication, mentions 
his own ordination as a preacher, and then 
adds, * I will, therefore, that men pray every- 
where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and 
doubting. In like manner also, that women 
adorn themselves in modest apparel,' &;c. I 
shall here premise, that as the punctuation and 
division into chapters and verses is no part of 
the original arrangement, they cannot deter- 
mine the sense of a passage. Indeed, every at- 
tentive reader of the Bible must observe, that 
the injudicious separation of sentences often 

113 

destroys their meaning and their beauty. Jo- 
seph John Gurney, whose skill as a biblical 
critic is well known in England, commenting 
on this passage, says, 

* It is worded in a manner somewhat obscure ; but ap- 
pears to be best construed according to the opinion of va- 
rious commentators (See Pool's Synopsis) as conve>ing an 
injunction, that women as well as men should pray every- 
where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubling. 
1 Tim. 2 : 8, 9. * 1 will therefore that men pray everywhere* 
&c. ; likewise also the women in a modest dress.' (Com- 
pare 1 Cor. 11 : 5.) * I would have them adorn themselves 
with shamefacedness and sobriety.* ' 

I have no doubt this is the true meaning of 
the text, and that the translators would never 
have thought of altering it had they not been 
under the influence of educational prejudice. 
The apostle proceeds to exhort the women, who 
thus publicly made intercession to God, not to 
adorn themselves with braided hair, or gold, or 
pearls, or costly array, but (which becometh 
women professing godliness) with good works.* 
The word in this verse translated * professing,' 
would be more properly rendered preaching 
godliness, or enjoining piety to the gods, or 
conducting public worship. After describing 
the duty of female ministers about their appar- 
el, the apostle proceeds to correct some impro- 
prieties which probably prevailed in the Ephe- 
sian church, similar to those which he had re- 
proved among the Corinthian converts. He 
says, 'Let the women learn in silence with 
all subjection ; but I suffer not a woman to 
teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but 
to be in silence,' or quietness. Here again it is 
evident that the women, of whom he was 
speaking, were admonished to learn in silence, 
which could not refer to their public rainistra- 

8 

114 

tions to others. The verb to teach, verse 12, is 
one of very general import, and may iu this 

Slace more properly be rendered dictate. It is 
ighly probable that women who had long been 
in bondage, when set free by Christianity from 
the restraints imposed upon them by Jewish 
traditions and heathen customs, run into an ex- 
treme in their public assemblies, and interrupted 
the religious services by frequent interrogations, 
which they could have had answered as satis- 
factorily at home. 

On a candid examination and comparison of 
the passages which I have endeavored to ex- 
plain, viz., 1 Cor. chaps. 11 and 14, and 1 Tim. 
2, 8 — 12. I think we must be compelled to 
adopt one of two conclusions ; either that the 
apostle grossly contradicts himself on a subject 
of great practical importance, and that the ful- 
filment of the prophecy of Joel was a shameful 
infringement of decency and order; or that the 
directions given to women, not to speak, or to 
teach in the congregations, had reference to 
some local and peculiar customs, which were 
then common in religious assemblies, and which 
the apostle thought inconsistent with the pur- 
pose for which they were met together. No 
one, I suppose, will hesitate which of these two 
conclusions to adopt. The subject is one of 
vital importance. That it may claim the calm 
and prayerful attention of Christians, is the de- 
sire of 

Thine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Sarah M. Grimke. 

LETTER XV. 

MAN EQUALLY GUILTY WITH WOMAN IN THE 

FALL. 

Uxbridge, lOth Mo. 20tk, 1837. 

My Dear Sister, — It is said that * modern 
Jewish women light a lamp every Friday even- 
ing, half an hour before sunset, which is the 
beginning of their Sabbath, in remembrance of 
their original mother, who first extinguished the 
lamp of righteousness, — to remind them of their 
obligation to rekindle it.' I am one of those 
who always admit, to its fullest extent, the pop- 
ular charge, that woman brought sin into the 
world. I accept it as a powerful reason, why 
woman is bound to labor with double diligence, 
for the regeneration of that world she has been 
instrumental in ruining. 

But, although I do not repel the imputation, 
I shall notice some passages in the sacred 
Scriptures, where this transaction is mentioned, 
which prove, I think, the identity and equality 
of man and woman, and that there is no differ- 
ence in their guilt in the view of that God who 
searcheth the heart and trieth the reins of the 
children of men. In Is. 43 : 27, we find the 
following passage — * Thy first father hath sin- 

116 

ned, and thy teachers have transgressed against 
me' — which is synonymous with Rom. 5: 12. 

* Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the 
world, and death by sin, &c.' Here man and 
woman are included under one term, and no 
distinction is made in their criminality. The 
circumstances of the fall are again referred to 
in 2 Cor. 11 : 3 — * But I fear lest, by any means, 
as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtil- 
ity, so your mind should be beguiled from the 
simplicity that is in Christ.' Again, 1st Tim. 
2 : 14 — * Adam was not deceived; but the wo- 
man being deceived^ was in the transgression.' 
Now, whether the fact, that Eve was beguiled 
and deceived, is a proof that her crime was of 
deeper dye than Adam's, who was not deceiv- 
ed, but was fully aware of the consequences of 
sharing in her transgression, I shall leave the 
candid reader to determine. 

• My present object is to show, that, as woman 
is charged with all the sin that exists in the 
world, it is her solemn duty to labor for its ex- 
tinction ; and that this she can never do effect- 
ually and extensively, until her mind is disen- 
thralled of those shackles which have been riv- 
eted upon her by a * corrupt public opinion, and 
a perverted interpretation of the holy Scrip- 
tures.^ Woman must feel that she is the equal, 
and is designed to be the fellow laborer of her 
brother, or she will be studying to find out the 
imaginary line which separates the sexes, and 
divides the duties of men and women into two 
distinct classes, a separation not even hinted at 

. in the Bible, where we are expressly told, 

* there is neither male nor female, for ye are all 
one in Christ Jesus.' 

My views on this subject are so much better 

117 

embodied in the language of a living author 
than I can express ihem, that I quote the pas- 
sage entire : * Woman's rights and man's rights 
are both contained in the same charter, and held 
by the same tenure. All rights spring out of 
the moral nature : they are both the root and 
the offspring of responsibilities. The physical 
constitution is the mere instrument of the mor- 
al nature ; sex is a mere incident of this con- 
stitution, a provision necessary to this form 
of existence; its only design, r;.,t to give, nor 
to take away, nor in any resp. t to modify or 
even touch rights or responsibiliti^ s in any sense, 
except so far as the peculiar officrs of each sex 
may afford less or more opportu.uty and ability 
for the exercise of rights, and the discharge of 
responsibilities ; but merely to continue and en- 
large the human department of God's govern- 
ment. Consequently, I know nothing of man's 
rights, or womanh rights ; human rights are all 
that I recognise. The doctrine, that the sex of 
the body presides over and administers upon the 
rights and responsibilities of the moral, immor- 
tal nature, is to my mind a doctrine kindred to 
blasphemy, when seen in its intrinsic nature. 
It breaks up utterly the relations of the tw^o na- 
tures, and reverses their functions ; exalting the 
animal nature into a monarch, and humbling 
the moral into a slave ; making the former a 
proprietor, and the latter its property.' 

To perform our duties, we must comprehend 
our rights and responsibilities; and it is because 
we do not understand, that we now fall so far 
short in the discharge of our obligations. Un- 
accustomed to think for ourselves, and to search 
the sacred volume, to see how far we are living 
up to the design of Jehovah in our creation, we 

( 

118 

have rested satisfied with the sphere marked 
out for us by man, never detecting the fallacy 
of that reasoning which forbids woman to exer- 
cise some of her noblest faculties, and stamps 
with the reproach of indelicacy those actions by 
which women were formerly dignified and ex- 
alted in the church. 

I should not mention this subject again, if it 
were not to point out to my sisters what seems 
to me an irresistible conclusion from the literal 
interpretation of St. Paul, without reference to 
the context, and the peculiar circumstances and 
abuses which drew forth the expressions, *I 
suffer not a woman to teach ' — * Let your wo- 
men keep silence in the church,' i. e. congrega- 
tion. It is manifest, that if the apostle meant 
what his words imply, when taken in the strict- 
est sense, then women have no right to teach 
Sabbath or day schools, or to open their lips to 
sing in the assemblies of the people ; yet young 
and delicate women are engaged in all these 
offices; they are expressly trained to exhibit 
themselves, and raise their voices to a high 
pitch in the choirs of our places of worship. I 
do not intend to sit in judgment on my sisters 
for doing these things ; I only want them to 
see, that they are as really infringing a suppos* 
ed divine command, by instructing their pupils 
in the Sabbath or day schools, and by singing 
in the congregation, as if they were engaged in 
preaching the unsearchable riches of Christ to 
a lost and perishing world. Why, then, are we 
permitted to break this injunction in some points, 
and so seduously warned not to overstep the 
bounds set for us by our brethren in another ? 
Simply, as I believe, because in the one case 
we subserve their views and their interests, and 

119 

act in subordination to them; whilst in the 
other, we come in contact with their interests, 
and claim to he on an equality with them in the 
highest and most importa,nt trust ever commit- 
ted to man, namely, the ministry of the word. 
It is manifest, that if women were permitted to 
be ministers of the gospel, as they unquestion- 
ably were in the primitive ages of the Christian 
church, it would interfere materially with the 
present organized system of spiritual power and 
ecclesiastical authority, which is now vested 
solely in the hands of men. It would either 
show that all the paraphernalia of theological 
seminaries, &c. &c. to prepare men to become 
evangelists, is wholly unnecessary, or it would 
create a necessity for similar institutions in or- 
der to prepare women for the same office ; and 
this would be an encroachment on that learning, 
which our hind brethren have so ungenerously 
monopolized. I do not ask any one to believe 
my statements, or adopt my conclusions, because, 
they are mine ; but I do earnestly entreat my 
sisters to lay aside their prejudices, and exam- 
ine these subjects for themselves, regardless of 
the * traditions of men,' because they are inti- 
mately connected with their duty and their use- 
fulness in the present important crisis. 

All who know any thing of the present sys- 
tem of benevolent and religious operations, 
know that women are performing an important 
part in them, in subserviency to men, who guide 
our labors, and are often the recipients of those 
benefits of education we toil to confer, and 
which we rejoice they can enjoy, although it is 
their mandate which deprives us of the same 
advantages. Now, whether our brethren have 
defrauded us intentionally, or unintentionally, 

120 

the wrong we suffer is equally the same. For 
years, they have been spurring ns up to the 
performance of our duties. The immense use- 
fulness and the vast influence of woman have 
been eulogized and called into exercise, and 
many a blessing has been lavished upon us, and 
many a prayer put up for us, because we have 
labored by day and by night to clothe and feed 
and educate young men, whilst our own bodies 
sometimes suffer for want of comfortable gar- 
ments, and our minds are left in almost utter 
destitution of that improvement which we are 
toiling to bestow upon the brethren. 

' Full many a gem of purest rny serene, 
The d<irk unfaihomed caves of ocean bear ; 

Full many a dower is born to bUiih unseen 
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.* 

If the sewing societies, the avails of whose 
industry are now expended in supporting and 
educating young men for the ministry, were to 
withdraw their contributions to these objects, 
and give them where they are more needed^ to 
the advancement of their own sex in useful 
learning, the next generation might furnish 
suflicie^nt proof, that in intelligence and ability 
to master the whole circle of sciences, woman 
is not inferior to man ; and instead of a sensible 
woman being regarded as she now is, is a lusses 
naturae, they would be quite as common as sen- 
sible men. I confess, considering the high 
claim men in this country make to great polite- 
ness and deference to women, it does seem a 
little extraordinary that we should be urged to 
work for the brethren. I should suppose it 
would be more in character with * the generous 
promptings of chivalry, and the poetry of ro- 
mantic gallantry,' for which Catherine E. 

121 

Beecher gives them credit, for them to form so- 
cieties to educate their sisters, seeing our infe- 
rior capacities require more cultivation to bring 
them into use, and qualify us to be helps meet 
for them. However, though I think this would 
be but a just return for all our past kindnesses 
in this way, I should be willing to balance our 
accounts, and begin a new course. Henceforth, 
let the benefit be reciprocated, or else let each 
sex provide for the education of their own poor, 
whose talents ought to be rescued from the ob- 
livion of ignorance. Sure I am, the your\g 
men who are now benefitted by the handy work 
of their sisters, will not be less honorable if they 
occupy half their time in earning enough to pay 
for their own education, instead of depending 
on the industry of women, who not unfrequent- 
ly deprive themselves of the means of purchas- 
ing valuable books which might enlarge their 
stock of useful knowledge, and perhaps prove a 
blessing to the family by furnishing them with 
instructive reading. If the minds of women 
were enlightened and improved, the domestic 
circle would be more frequently refreshed by 
intelligent conversation, a means of edification 
now deplorably neglected, for want of that cul- 
tivation which these intellectual advantages 
would confer. 

DUTIES OF WOMEN. 

One of the duties which devolve upon women 
in the present interesting crisis, is to prepare 
themselves for more extensive usefulness, by 
making use of those religious and literary priv- 
ileges and advantages that are within their 
reach, if they will only stretch out their hands 
and possess them. By doing this, they will 

122 

become better acquainted with their rights as 
moral beings, and with their responsibilities 
growing out of those riffhts : they will regard 
themselves, as they really are, free agents, 
immortal beings, amenable to no tribunal but 
that of Jehovah, and bound not to submit to any 
restriction imposed for selfish purposes, or to 
gratify that love of power which has reigned in 
the heart of man from Adam down iq the pres- 
ent time. In contemplating the great moral re- 
formations of the day, and the part which they 
are bound to take in them, instead of puzzling 
themselves with the harassing, because unne- 
cessary inquiry, how far they may go without 
overstepping the bounds of propriety, which 
separate male and female duties, they will only 
inquire, * Lord, what wilt thou have ws to do ? ' 
They will be enabled to see the simple truth, 
that God has made no distinction between men 
and women as moral beings ; that the distinc- 
tion now so much insisted upon between male 
and female virtues is as absurd as it is nnscrip- 
tural, and has been the fruitful source of much 
mischief— granting to man a license for the ex- 
hibition of brute force and ccmfiict on the battle 
field ; forst ernness, selfishness, and the exercise 
of irresponsible power in the circle of home — 
and to woman a permit to rest on an arm of 
flesh, and to regard modesty and delicaicy, and 
all the kindred virtues, as peculiarly appropriate 
to her. Now to me it is perfectly clear, that 

WHATSOEVER IT IS MORALLY RIGHT FOR A MAN 
TO DO, IT IS MORALLY RIGHT FOR A WOMAN TO 

DO ; and that confusion must exist in the moral 
world, until women takes her stand on the same 
platform with man, and feels that she is clothed 

123 

by her Maker with the sarne rights, and, of 
course, that upon her devolve the same duties. 

It is not my intention, nor indeed do I think 
it is in my power, to point out the precise du- 
ties of women. To him who still teacheth by 
his Holy Spirit as never man taught, I refer my 
beloved sisters. There is a vast field of use- 
fulness before them. The signs of the times 
give portentous evidence, that a day of deep 
trial is approaching ; and I urge them, by 
every consideration of a Savior's dying love, 
by the millions of heathen in our midst, by the 
sufferings of woman in almost every portion of 
the world, by the fearful ravages which slave- 
ry, intemperance, licentiousness and other ini- 
quities are making of the happiness of our 
fellow creatures, to come to the rescue of a 
ruined world, and to be found co-workers with 
Jesus Christ. 

< Ho ! to the rescue, ho ! 

Up every one that feels— 
'Tis a sad and fearful cry of woe 

From a guilty world that steals. 
Hark ! harki how the horror rolls. 

Whence can this anguish be 1 
'Tis the groan of a tramniel*d people's souls, 

Now bursting to be free** 

And here, with all due deference for the of- 
fice of the ministry, which I believe was estab- 
lished by Jehovah himself, and designed by 
Him to be the means of spreading light and 
salvation through a crucified Savior to the ends 
of the earth, I would entreat my sisters not to 
compel the ministers of the present day to give 
their names to great moral reformations. The 
practice of making ministers life members, or 
officers of societies, when their. hearts have not 
been touched with a live coal from the altar, 

124 

and animated with love for the work we are 
engaged in, is highly injurious to them, as well 
as to the cause. They often satisfy their con- 
sciences in this way, without doing anything to 
promote the anti-slavery, or temperance, or oth- 
er reformations ; and we please ourselves with 
the idea, that we have done something to for- 
ward the cause of Christ, when, in effect, we 
have been sewing pillows like the false proph- 
etesses of old under the arm-holes of our cler- 
ical brethren. Let us treat the ministers with 
all tenderness and respect, but let us be careful 
how we cherish in their hearts the idea that 
they are of more importance to a cause than 
other men. I rejoice when they take hold 
heartily. I love and honor some ministers with 
whom I have been associated in the anti-slavery 
ranks, but I do deeply deplore, for the sake of the 
cause, the prevalent notion, that the clergy must 
be had, either by persuasion or by bribery. 
They will not need persuasion or bribery, if 
their hearts are with us ; if they are not, we 
are better without them. It is idle to suppose 
that the kingdom of heaven cannot come on 
earth, without their co-operation. It is the 
Lord's work, and it must go forward with or 
without their aid. As well might the convert- 
ed Jews have despaired of the spread of Chris- 
tianity, without the co-operation of Scribes and 
Pharisees. 

Let us keep in mind, that no abolitionism is 
of any value, which is not accompanied with 
deep, heartfelt repentance ; and that, whenever 
a minister sincerely repents of having, either 
"by his apathy or his efforts, countenanced the 
fearful sin of slavery, he will need no induce- 
ment to come irrto our ranks ; so far from it> he 

125 

will abhor himself in dust and ashes, for his 
past blindness and indifTerence to the cause of 
God's poor and oppressed : and he will regard 
it as a privilege to be enabled to do something 
in the cause of human rights. I know the min- 
istry exercise vast power ; but I rejoice in the 
belief, that the spell is broken which encircled 
them, and rendered it all but blasphemy to ex- 
pose their errors and their sins. We are be- 
ginning to understand that they are but men, 
and that their station should not shield them 
from merited reproof. 

I have blushed for my sex when I have heard 
of their entreating ministers to attend their as- 
sociations, and open them with prayer. The 
idea is inconceivable to me, that Christian wo- 
men can be engaged in doing God's work, and 
yet cannot ask his blessing on their efforts, ex- 
cept through the lips of a man. I have known 
a whole town scoured to obtain a minister to 
open a female meeting, and their refusal to do 
so spoken of as quite a misfortune. Now, I am 
not glad that the ministers do wrong; but I am 
glad that my sisters have been sometimes com- 
pelled to act for themselves : it is exactly what 
they need to strengthen them, and prepare them 
to act independently. And to say the truth, 
there is something really ludicrous in seeing a 
minister enter the meeting, open it with prayer, 
and then take his departure. However, I only 
throw out these hints for the consideration of 
women. I believe there are solemn responsibili- 
ties resting upon us, and that in this day of 
light and knowledge, we cannot plead ignorance 
of duty. The great moral reformations now 
on the wheel are only practical Christianity ; 
and if the ministry is not prepared to labor with 

126 

us in these righteous causes, let ns press for- 
ward, and they will follow on to know the 
Lord. 

CONCLUSION. 

I have now, my dear sister, completed my 
series of letters. I am aware, they contain some 
new views ; but I believe they are based on the 
immutable truths of the Bible. All I ask for 
them is, the candid and prayerful consideration 
of Christians. If they strike at some of our 
bosom sins, our deep-rooted prejudices, our long 
cherished opinions, let us not condemn them on 
that account, but investigate them fearlessly and 
prayerfully, and not shrink from the examina- 
tion; because, if they are true, they place 
heavy responsibilities upon women. In throw- 
ing them before the public, I have been actuat- 
ed solely by the belief, that if they are acted 
upon, they will exalt the character and enlarge 
the usefulness of my own sex, and contribute 
greatly to the happiness and virtue of the other. 
That there is a root of bitterness continually 
springing up in families and troubling the repose 
of both men and women, must be manifest to 
even a superficial observer ; and I believe it is the 
mistaken notion of the inequality of the sexes. 
As there is an assumption of superiority on the 
one part, which is not sanctioned by Jehovah, 
there is an incessant struggle on the other to 
rise to that degree of dignity, which God de- 
signed women to possess in common with men, 
and to maintain those rights and exercise those 
privileges which every woman's common sense, 
apart from the prejudices of education, tells her 
are inalienable ; they are a part of her moral 

127 

nature, and can only cease when her immortal 
mind is extinguished. 

One word more. I feel that I am calling 
upon my sex to sacrifice what has been, what is 
still dear to their hearts, the adulation, the flat- 
tery, the attentions of trifling men. I am ask- 
ing them to repel these insidious enemies when- 
ever they approach them ; to manifest by their 
conduct, that, although they value highly the 
society of pious and intelligent men, they have 
no taste for idle conversation, and for that silly 
preference which is manifested for their person- 
al accommodation, often at the expense of great 
inconvenience to their male companions. As 
an illustration of what I mean, I will state a 
fact. 

I was traveling lately in a stage coach. A 
gentleman, who was also a passenger, was 
made sick by riding with his back to the horses. 
I offered to exchange seats, assuring him it did 
not affect me at all unpleasantly ; but he was 
too polite to permit a lady to run the risk of 
being discommoded. I am sure he meant lobe 
very civil, but I really thought it was a foolish 
piece of civility. This kind of attention en- 
courages selfishness in woman, and is only ac- 
corded as a sort of quietus, in exchange for 
those rights of which we are deprived. Men 
and women are equally bound to cultivate a 
spirit of accommodation ; but I exceedingly de- 
precate her being treated like a spoiled child, 
and sacrifices made to her selfishness and van- 
ity. In lieu of these flattering but injurious 
attentions, yielded to her as an inferior, as a 
mark of benevolence and courtesy, I want my 
sex to claim nothing from their brethren but 
what their brethren may justly claim from them, 

128 

in their intercourse as Christians. I am per- 
suaded woman can can do much in this way to 
elevate her own character. And that we may 
become duly sensible of the dignity of our na- 
ture, only a little lower than the angels, and 
bring forth fruit to the glory and honor of 
Emanuel's name, is the fervent prayer of 

""hine in the bonds of womanhood, 

Sarah M. Grimke. 

♦PB-45343.SB 
75-46T 
BT 

■t 
\ 

\ ' 

THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON 
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPX.^TXE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE' FEES.