Teutonic Mythology, Vol. III (Jacob Grimm (trans. James Steven Stallybrass), 1882; public domain)
===============================================================================
Vol. III of Grimm's Teutonic Mythology in Stallybrass's translation. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bub_gb_c8AoAAAAYAAJ).

TEUTONIC
MYTHOLOGY



Jacob Grimm



m

Digitized by Google



LIBRARY OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


PRESENTED BY



BENNETT WOOD GREEN


TEUTONIC MYTHOLOGY.



JACOB GRIMM.



Digitized by Google



TEUTONIC MYTHOLOGY

BY

JACOB GRIMM.



TRANSLATED FROM THE FOURTH EDITION.

WITH

NOTES AND APPENDIX



BY

JAMES STEVEN STALLYBR ASS.



VOL. III.


LONDON: GEORGE BELJj & SONS, YORK STREET,

COVENT GARDEN.
1883.



Digitized by Google



122953

Please return this book
to the

Graduate House Library



Butter 4 Tanner,
The Selrood Printing Work*.



PREFACE

TO THE SECOND EDITION (1844).



Now that I am able to put my germinated sprout of German
Mythology into its second leafing, I do it with a firmer confidence
in the unimpeded progress of its growth. When the first shy-
ness was once overcome, seeking and finding came more quickly
together ; and facts, that rebuked any effeminate doubt of the
reality of scientific discoveries on a field till then considered
barren, started up on every side, till now there is a glut of them.
Well, I have got my joists and rafters, drawn some lines, laid
some courses, and yet guarded against pretending to finality ;
for who would do that, so long as in one place the materials are
wanting, and in another the hands are still full with fetching ?
I wish to explain all I can, but I am far from being able to
explain all I wish.

Criticism, often brilliantly successful on foreign fields, had
sinned against our native antiquities, and misused most of the
means it had. The immortal work of a Roman writer had shed
a light of dawn on the history of Germany, which other nations
may well envy us : not content with suspecting the book's
genuineness (as though the united Middle Ages had been capable
of such a product), its statements, sprung from honest love of
truth, were cried down, and the gods it attributes to our ancestors
were traced to the intrusion of Roman ideas. Instead of dili-
gently comparing the contents of so precious a testimony with
the remnants of onr heathenism scattered elsewhere, people made
a point of minimizing the value of these few fragments also,
and declaring them forged, borrowed, absurd. Such few gods as
remained unassailed, it was the fashion to make short work of,
by treating them as Gallic or Slavic, just as vagrants are shunted
off to the next parish — let our neighbours dispose of the rubbish
as they can. The Norse Edda, whose plan, style and substance



Digitized by Google



vi



PREFACE



breathe the remotest antiquity, whose songs lay hold of the heart
in a far different way from the extravagantly admired poems of
Ossian, they traced to christian and Anglo-Saxon influence,
blindly or wilfully overlooking its connexion with the relics of
eld in Germany proper, and thinking to set it all down to nurses
and spinning- wives (p. 1230), whose very name seemed, to those
unacquainted with the essence of folk-lore, to sound the lowest
note of contempt. They have had their revenge now, those
norns and spindle-bearers.

One may fairly say, that to deny the reality of this mythology
is as much as to impugn the high antiquity and the continuity of
our language : to every nation a belief in gods was as necessary
as language. No one will argue from the absence or poverty of
memorials, that our forefathers at any given time did not practise
their tongue, did not hand it down; yet the lack or scantiness
of information is thoughtlessly alleged as a reason for despoiling
our heathenism, antecedent to the conversion, of all its contents,
so to speak. History teaches us to recognise in language, the
farther we are able to follow it up, a higher perfection of form,
which declines as culture advances ; as the forms of the thirteenth
century are superior to our present ones, and those of the ninth
and the fifth stand higher still, it may be presumed that German
populations of the first three centuries of our era, whose very
names have never reached us, must have spoken a more perfect
language than the Gothic itself. Now if such inferences as to
what is non-extant are valid in language, if its present condition
carries us far back to an older and oldest; a like proceeding
must be justifiable in mythology too, and from its dry water-
courses we may guess the copious spring, from its stagnant
swamps the ancient river. Nations hold fast by prescription:
we shall never comprehend their tradition, their superstition,
unless we spread under it a bed on still heathen soil.

And these views are confirmed by what we know to be true of
poetry and legend. If the heathens already possessed a finely
articulated language, and if we concede to them an abundant
stock of religious myths, then song and story could not fail to



Digitized by Google



PREFACE



lay hold of these, and to interweave themselves with the rites and
customs. That such was the case we are assured by Tacitus ;
and the testimony of Jornandes and Eginhart leaves not the
smallest room for doubt respecting later ages. Those primitive
songs on Tuisco, on Mannus and the three races that branched
out of him, are echoed long after in the genealogies of Ingo,
Iscio, Hermino ; so the Hygelac of the Beowulf-song, whom a
tenth century legend that has just emerged from oblivion names
Huglacus Magnus (Haupt 5, 10), is found yet again — as a proof
that even poetry may agree with history — in the ' Chochilaichus '
of Gregory of Tours. If in the 12th and 13th centuries our
country's hero-legend gleamed up for the last time, poets must
have kept on singing it for a long time before, as is plain from
the saved fragment of Hildebrand and the Latin versions of
Rudlieb and Waltharius ; while not a tone survives of those Low
German lays and legends, out of which nevertheless proceeded
the Vilkinasaga that mirrors them back. The rise of our Court-
poetry has without the slightest ground or necessity been ascribed
to the Crusades; if we are to assume any importations from
the East, these can more conveniently be traced to the earlier
and quieter intercourse of Goths and Northmen with the Greek
empire, unless indeed we can make up our minds to place nearly
all the coincidences that startle us to the account of a funda-
mental unity of the European nations, a mighty influence which
is seen working through long ages, alike in language, legend
and religion.

I am met by the arrogant notion, that the life of whole cen-
turies was pervaded by a soulless cheerless barbarism ; this would
at once contradict the loving kindness of God, who has made
His sun give light to all times, and while endowing men with
gifts of body and soul, has instilled into them the consciousness
of a higher guidance : on all ages of the world, even those of
worst repute, there surely fell a foison of health and wealth,
which preserved in nations of a nobler strain their sense of right
and law. One has only to recognise the mild and manly spirit
of our higher antiquity in the purity and power of the national



Digitized by doOQic



Vlll



PREFACE.



laws, or the talent inherited by the thirteenth century in its
eloquent, inspired poems, in order justly to appreciate legend
and myth, which in them had merely struck root once more.

But our inquiry ought to have the benefit of this justice both
in great things and in small. Natural science bears witness,
that the smallest may be an index to the greatest ; and the reason
is discoverable, why in our antiquities, while the main features
were effaced, petty and apparently accidental ones have been
preserved. I am loth to let even slight analogies escape me,
such as that between Bregowine, Freawine, and Gotes friunt
(p. 93).

True to my original purpose, I have this time also taken the
Norse mythology merely as woof, not as warp. It lies near to
us, like the Norse tongue, which, having stood longer undisturbed
in its integrity, gives us a deeper insight into the nature of our
own, yet not so that either loses itself wholly in the other, or
that wo can deny to the German language excellences of its own,
and to the Gothic a strength superior to both of them together.
So the Norse view of the gods may in many ways clear up and
complete the German, yet not serve as the sole standard for it,
since here, as in the language, there appear sundry divergences
of the German type from the Norse, giving the advantage now to
the one and now to the other. Had I taken the rich exuberance
of the North as the basis of my inquiry, it would have perilously
overshadowed and choked the distinctively German, which ought
rather to be developed out of itself, and, while often agreeing
with the other, yet in some things stands opposed. The case
appears therefore to stand thus, that, as we push on, we shall
approach the Norse boundary, and at length reach the point
where the wall of separation can be pierced, and the two mytho-
logies run together into one greater whole. If at present some
new points of connexion have been established, more important
diversities have revealed themselves too. To the Norse anti-
quarians in particular, I hope my procedure will bo acceptable :
as we gladly give to them in return for what we have received,
they ought no less to receive than to give. Our memorials are



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



ix



scantier, but older ; theirs are younger and purer ; two things it
was important here to hold fast : first, that the Norse mythology
is genuine, and so mast the German be ; then, that the German
is old, and so must the Norse be.

We have never had an Edda come down to us, nor did any one
of our early writers attempt to collect the remains of the heathen
faith. Such of the christians as had sucked German milk were
soon weaned under Roman training from memories of home, and
endeavoured not to preserve, but to efface the last impressions of
detested paganism. Jornandes and Paulus Diaconus, who must
have had plenty of heathen stories still within their reach, made
but slight use of the mythical ones. Other ecclesiastics now and
then, for a particular purpose, dole out scraps of information
which are of great value to us: Jonas (pp. 56. 109), Beda
(p. 289), Alcuin (p. 229), Widukind (p. 253), Adam of Bremen
(p. 230). As I have said on p. 9, some monk at St. Gall, Fulda,
Merseburg or Corvei might have conceived the happy idea of
putting pen to the antiquities of his country, gathering up things
of which the footprints were still fresh, and achieving for the
foreground of our history, just where it begins to disengage itself
from legend, a lasting work, such as Saxo Grammaticus accom-
plished. Even if German tradition was more blurred and colour-
less from the seventh century to the eleventh, than was Danish
in the twelfth, if estrangement from native legend had advanced
more slowly in the far North ; yet Waltharius and Rudlieb, or
the rhyme of the boar in Notker, may shew us that in the very
cloisters there was much still unforgotten of the ancient songs.
It is likely that scribes continued for some time to add to the
collection set on foot by Charles the Great, the destruction of
which has proved an incalculable loss, and from which we might
have obtained an abundance of materials and pictures of the
remotest eld. The Middlo High-German poets found themselves
already much farther away from all this ; anything they might
still unconsciously borrow from it must have been preserved
accidentally in traditional forms of poetry or the living idiom
of the people. The very book in which heathen names and cha-



Digitized by Google



X



PREFACE.



racters might the most innocently have found a place, Albrecht
of Halberstadt's translation of the Metamorphoses, is lost to us
in its original form ; when Rudolf in his Barlaam from a christian
point of view refutes the Grecian gods after the fashion of
Chrothilde (see p. 107), he sticks too closely to his text to let
any native characteristics come into his head : the age was too
entirely absorbed in its immediate present to feel the slightest
inclination to look back into its own or other people's distant
past. It is not till the 14th or 15th century that sundry writers
begin to shew a propensity to this. Gobelinus Persona bestows
a mite (p. 254) ; if Bohmer would but soon give us an edition of
the Magdeburg Schoppenchronick and the Chronicon Picturatum,
both sadly wanted! Conf. Bohmer's Reg. ed. 1849, p. xxi,
pag. 62 ad ann. 1213; Zeuss p. 38. The statements of Botho,
uncritical as they are, claim attention, for in his day there may
have been accounts still afloat, which have vanished since. A
curious one is contained in Joh. Craemer's Chronica sancti Petri
in monte crucis ad ann. 1468 : ' Matthaeus Huntler in eel la Sancti
Martini ad Werram vidit librum Johannis Vanderi, ord. S. Bene-
dict monachi in Reynertsborn, de omnibus gentilium deastris
in provincia nostra, quern magna cura conscripsit, et quemlibet
deastrum in habitu suo eleganter depinxit cum multis antiquita-
tibus, in quibus bene versatus esse dicitur.' Botho drew his de-
scriptions from figures of idols that were before his eyes ; and at
Reinhartsbrunn in Thuringia there might be similar things
extant, or the very same that found their way to Brunswick, if
only Paullini, whose Syntagma p. 315 furnishes that passage
from the chronicle, were not himself suspicious. The like un-
certainty hangs over Joh. Berger (p. 96), over a Conradus
Fontanus quoted by Letzner (p. 190), and the Frisian Cappidus
whose work Hamconius professes to have used (see my chap.
XXI, Lotus). Any one that cared to read straight through
Berthold of Regensburg's works, dating from the end of the 13th
century, would very likely, where the preacher gets to speak
of sorcery and devilry, come upon cursory notices of the super-
stitions of his time, as even the later sermons of Johannes



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



Herolt (tny ch. XXXI, Berchta, Holda), Johannes Nider (d. cir.
1440), and Geiler von Kaisersberg offer some details. And even
historians in the 16th and 17th centuries, who rummaged many
a dusty archive, such as Aventin, Celtes, Freher, Spangenberger,
Letzner (d. after 1612), Nicolaus Gryse (d. 1614), must have had
all sorts of available facts within their reach, though to pick the
grain out of the chaff would no doubt come easier to us than to
them.

Much then is irrecoverably lost to our mythology ; I turn to
the sources that remain to it, which are partly Written Memorials,
partly the never resting stream of living Manners and Story.
The former may reach far back, but they present themselves
piecemeal and disconnected, while the popular tradition of to-
day hangs by threads which ultimately link it without a break
to ancient times. Of the priceless records of the Romans, who
let the first ray of history fall on their defeated but unsubdued
enemy, I have spoken in the fourth and sixth chapters. If
among gods and heroes only Tuisco, Mannus and Alx are named
in German, and the rest given in 1 Romana interpretatio ; ' on
the other hand, the female names Nerthus, Veleda, Tanfana,
Hnldana (for Hludana), Aliruna, have kept their original form ;
and so have names of peoples and places that lead back to gods,
Ingaevones, Iscaevones, Herminones, Asciburgium. Christian
authors also, writing in Latin, prefer the Roman names, yet, when
occasion calls, Wodan, Thunar, Frea, Sahsnot cannot be avoided.
The refined language of the Goths, and the framework of their
hero-legend, lead us to imagine a very full development of their
faith, then just giving way to Christianity, though to us it Has
sank into such utter darkness : such expressions as f rauja, halja,
sibja, unhutyo, skohsl, anz, fairguni, sauil (as well as sunna),
vaihts, alhs, gudja, hunsl, dul)>s, jiuleis, midjun-gards, auhns,
a|>n, bl6tan, inveitan, must have heathen notions lying at their
base, and these would offer themselves- far more abundantly if
portions of the Gothic Old Testament had reached us. After
the lapse of a few centuries we find the other dialects all more
or less corrupted when compared with the Gothic, and as a long



Digitized by Google



PREFACE



interval had then passed since the conversion of most of the
races, heathenism must have retreated farther from the language
also and the poetry. Nevertheless the fragment of Muspilli,
the Abrenuntiatio, the Merseburg Lay and a few others, still
allow our glances to rove back beyond our expectation ; isolated
words occur in glosses, and proper names of men, places, herbs,
point to other vestiges; not only do gods and heroes step ont;
of the mist, as Wuotan, Donar, Zio, Phol, Paltar, Froho, Sin-
tarfizilo, Orentil, and goddesses or wise women, as Frouwa, Folia,
Sindgund, Wurt; but a host of other words, itis, wiht, urlac,
fuld, haruc, hliodar, paro, sigil, zunkal, etc. are found uneradi-
cated. Of course, among the Saxons, who remained heathen
longer, especially among the Anglo-Saxons, whose language
preserved its warmth better by poetry, such relics are trebly
numerous, for beside W6den, Thunor, Fred, Bealdor, Helle,
Eastre, HreSe, and the rich store of names in the genealogies,
there add themselves Forneot, Woraa, Geofon, Gersuma, Wusc-
fre&, Bregowine, Earendel, ides, wyrd, waelcyrge, J>yrs, eoten,
geola, hleodor, bearo, neorxenawong, ha)le$helm, Brosingamene,
and many more. What the Middle High German poetry inevi-
tably loses by comparison with the older, is compensated by
its greater quantity : together with hero-names like Nibelunc,
Schiltunc, Schilbunc, Alberich, Wielant, Horaut, which fall at
once within the province of mythology, it has treasured up for
us the words tarnkappe, albleich, heilwac, turse, windesbrut,
goltwine and the like, while in oft-recurring phrases about des
sunuen haz, des am winde, des tiuvels muoter, we catch the
clear echo of ancient fables. Most vividly, in never-tiring play
of colours, the minne-songs paint the triumphal entry of May
and Summer : the pining heart missed in the stately march its
former god. The personifications of Sselde and Aventiure spring
from a deep-hidden root; how significant are the mere names
of Wunsch and valant, which are not found in all the poets
even, let alone in O.H.German ! Yet we cannot imagine other-
wise than that these words, although their reference to Wuotan
and Phol was through long ages latent, were drawn directly



PREFACE.



and without a break from heathenism. They are a proof of the
possibility of traditions lingering only in certain spots, and thus
finding their way after all to here and there a poet; totally
silenced in places and periods, they suddenly strike up some-
where else, though any district, any dialect, can boast but few
or comparatively few of these; it is not many arch-mythical
terms, like frau, holle, wicht, that our language has constant
need of, and has never to this day cast off.

If these numerous written memorials have only left us sundry
bones and joints, as it were, of our old mythology, its living
breath still falls upon us from a vast number of Stories and
Customs, handed down through lengthened periods from father
to son. With what fidelity they propagate themselves, how
exactly they seize and transmit to posterity the essential features
of the fable, has never been noticed till now that people have
become aware of their great value, and begun to set them down
in collections* simple and copious. Oral legend is to written
records as the folk-song is to poetic art, or the rulings recited
by schoffen (scabini) to written codes.

But the folk-tale wants to be gleaned or plucked with a
delicate hand. Grasp it rudely, it will curl up its leaves, and
deny its dearest fragrance. There lies in it such a store of rich
development and blossom, that, even when presented incomplete,
it contents us in its native adornment, and would bo deranged
and damaged by any foreign addition. Whoever should venture
on that, ought, if he would shew no gap in his harness, to be
initiated into all the innocence of popular poetry; as ho who
would coin a word, into all the mysteries of language. Out of
elben (elves) to make elfen, was doing violence to our language ;
with still less of forbearance have violent hands been laid on
the colouring and contents even of myths. They thought to
improve upon the folk-tale, and have always fallen short of it :
not even where it shews gaps, is any restoration to be dreamt
of, which sits upon it as new whitewash on old ruins, con-
triving with a couple of dabs to wipe out all the charm.
Astonishing are the various shapes its identity assumes,



Digitized by Google



XIV



PREFACE.



additional adornments spring up on ground where we least
expect it ; but it is not in every soil that it thrives luxuriantly,
here and there it shews scanty or shy ; it is sure to be vigorous
where rhymes and spells abound in it. The heaviest crops
seem to be realized by those collections which, starting from a
district rich in legend, glean cautiously from the surrounding
neighbourhoods, without straying far from its limits; thus
Otmar's Harz-sagen found a favourable field, which is probably
worth going over a second time within the like modest bounds.
Among collections that have lately come to light, I name
Borner's Tales of the Orla-gau, which, grown up on rich
legendary soil, yield much that is valuable, though the accom-
panying discourses fail to realize the true nature of Folk-legend.
Bernhard Baader's Tales of Upper Germany afford a rich treasure,
in simple suitable language ; but in Mone's Anzeiger they are
presented in so scattered and inconvenient a form, that they
ought to be re-digested in a new edition: the two different
versions of the story of Dold (quoted on p. 983), are a good
illustration of what I meant just now by 'meagre' and 'luxuriant.'
Bechstein's Thuringian Legends seem to me only in the last
two volumes to attain the true point of view, and to offer
something worth having. The Legends of Samogitia and the
Mark, collected by Reusch and Kuhn, satisfy all requirements ;
they furnish most copious material, and put to shame the notion
that any district of Germany is poor in popular traditions, which
only elude those who know not the right way to approach them.
Soon perhaps we shall get collections laid out on the same
thoughtful plan from Holstein, Westphalia, Bavaria and Tyrol.

For Denmark too we have a model collection by Thiele, whose
last edition has only just reached me, and still remains unused.
Many of the finest Swedish legends have been given us in various
places, but a still greater number must be lying ungathered :
Afzelius's Sago-hafder, welcome as they are, go too much on
the plan of extracting the juice from whatever came to hand.
Norway can hardly be less stocked with legend than Sweden,
it has moreover its popular lays to shew, into which songs of



Digitized by Google



PKEFACE



XV



the Edda have been transmuted, witness the lay of Thor's
hammer (p. 181) and the S61ar-lay. In our own day, J. W.
Wolf is labouring on the popular traditions of Belgium, and Rob.
Chambers on those of Scotland, with zeal and visible success.

The Fairy-tale (miirchen) is with good reason distinguished
from the Legend, though by turns they play into one another.
Looser, less fettered than legend, the Fairy-tale lacks that local
habitation, which hampers legend, but makes it the more home-
like. The Fairy-tale flies, the legend walks, knocks at your
door ; the one can draw freely out of the fulness of poetry, the
other has almost the authority of history. As the Fairy-tale
stands related to legend, so does legend to history, and (we may
add) so does history to real life. In real existence all the out-
lines are sharp, clear and certain, which on history's canvas are
gradually shaded off and toned down. The ancient mythus,
however, combines to some extent the qualities of fairy-tale and
legend ; untrammelled in its flight, it can yet settle down in a
local home.

It was thought once, that after tho Italian and French collec-
tions of Fairy-tales it was too late to attempt any in Germany,
but this is contradicted by fact ; and Molbech's collection, and
many specimens inserted in his book by Afzelius, testify also
how rich Denmark and Sweden are in fairy-tales not yet extinct.
But all collections have wellnigh been overtopt lately by the
Norwegian (still unfinished) of Moe and Asbiornsen, with its
fresh and full store; and treasures not a few must be lurking
in England, Scotland, and the Netherlands, from all of which
Mythology may look to receive manifold gain.

To indicate briefly the gain she has already derived from the
Folk-tale (legend) : it is plain that to this alone we owe our
knowledge of the goddesses Holda, Berhta and Fricka, as also
tho myth of the Wild Hunt which leads us straight to W6dan.
The tale of the old beggar-wife is a reminiscence of Grimnir.
Of the wise- women, of swan- wives, of kings shut up in hills we
should have learnt little from written documents, did not Legend
spread her light over them ; even the myths of the Sin-flood and



Digitized by Google



xvi



PREFACE



the World's Destruction she has not lost sight of to this day.
But "what is most fondly cherished in her, and woven into the
gayest tissues, is the delightful narratives of giants, dwarfs,
elves, little wights, nixies, night-hags and home-sprites, these
last being related to the rest as the tame beasts of the fable
are to the wild and unsubjugated : in poetry the wild is always
superior to the tamed. The legend of the sun-blind dwarfs (pp.
466n., 1247) and that of the blood- vat (pp. 468 n., 902) remind us
of the Edda.

In the Fairy-tale also, dwarfs and giants play their part :
Swan-witchen (Swan-white) and Dorn-roschen (Thorn-rose =
Sleeping Beauty), pp. 425, 1204 are a swan-wife and a valkyr ;
the three spinning-wives, p. 415, are norns ; the footstool hurled
down from the heavenly seat (p. 136), Death as a godfather
(p. 853), the player's throw and Jack the gamester (pp. 81 8n., 887)
reach back to heathen times. Fairy-tales, not legends, have
in common with the god-myth a multitude of metamorphoses;
and they often let animals come upon the stage, and so they
trespass on the old Animal-epos.

In addition to the fairy-tale and folk-tale, which to this day
supply healthy nourishment to youth and the common people,
and which they will not give up, whatever other pabulum you
may place before them, we must take account of Rites and
Customs, which, having sprung out of antiquity and continued
ever since, may yield any amount of revelations concerning it.
I have endeavoured to shew how ignition by friction, Easter
fires, healing fountains, rain-processions, sacred animals, the
conflict between summer and winter, the carrying-out of Death,
and the whole heap of superstitions, especially about path-
crossing and the healing of diseases, are distinctly traceable to
heathen origins. Of many things, however, the explanation
stands reserved for a minute inquiry devoting itself to the
entire life of the people through the different seasons of the
year and times of life; and no less will the whole compass of
our law-antiquities shed a searching light on the old religion



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



xvii



and manners. In festivals and games comes out the bright
joyous side of the olden time; I have been anxious to point
out the manifold, though never developed, germs of dramatic
representation, which may be compared to the first attempts
of Greek or Roman art. The Yule-play is still acted here and
there in the North ; its mode of performance in Gothland (p. 43)
bears reference to Freyr. The little wights' play is mentioned
on p. 441 n. ; on the bear's play (p. 785) I intend to enlarge
more fully elsewhere. Sword-dance and giant's dance (p. 30 1),
Berchta's running (p. 279), Whitsun play (p. 785), Easter
play (p. 780), the induction of summer or May, the violet-
hunt and the swallow's welcome are founded on purely heathen
views; even the custom of the kilt-gang, like that of watch-
men's songs (p. 749), can be traced up to the most antique
festivities.

Such are our sources, and so far do they still carry us : let us
examine what results the study of them hitherto has yielded.

Divinities form the core of all mythology : ours were buried
almost out of sight, and had to be dug out. Their footmarks
were to be traced, partly in Names that had stubbornly refused
to be rooted out, yet offered little more than their bare sound ;
partly, under some altered guise, in the more fluid but fuller
form of the Folk-tale. This last applies more to the goddesses,
the former to the gods. Gods and heroes are found in the very
names of runes, the first of which in Old Norse is Freyr, others
are Thor, Zio, Eor, Asc, Man, but nowhere goddesses.

The gods that have kept the firmest hold are the three marked
in the days of the week as Mercury, Jupiter, Mars ; and of these,
Wuotan stands out the most distinct. Jonas, Fredegar, Paul us
Diaconus and the Abrenuntiatio name him, he towers at the head
of ancient lines of kings, many places bear the indelible impress
of his name. Woedenspanne signified a part of the human hand,
as the North named another part 'ulf-lr3r/ wolf-lith, after the
god T£r. Unexpectedly our l$th century has preserved for us

vol. in. b



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



one of his names [Wish], which lies in abeyance even in the
Norse system, yet is the one that stands in the closest contact
with the women that do the god's bidding, with the wand that
unlocks his hoard, with the mantle that carries him through the
air, nay, is the only one that puts all these in the true light.
The Norse name Orai is not quite so clearly explained by the
AS. Woma, though the word marks unmistakably the stormful
god whom we know more certainly through our legend of the
' furious host ' : the wide cloak and low hat are retained in the
name Hackelbernd, which I venture to trace back to a Gothic
Hakul-bairands (p. 146-7). As Longbeard, the god deep-sunk
in his mountain-sleep is reproduced in the royal heroes Charles
and Frederick : who better than Wuotan, on whose shoulder they
sit and bring him thoughts and tidings, was entitled to inquire
after the flying ravens ? Ravens and wolves scented his march
to victory, and they above all other animals have entered into
the proper names of the people. In the Norse sagas the ques-
tioner is a blind graybeard, who just as plainly is old OSin
again. Father of victory, he is likewise god of blessing and
bliss, i.e. Wish over again, whose place is afterwards occupied
by Salida (well-being). Since he appears alike as god of poetry,
of measurement, of the spau, of the boundary and of the dice-
throw, all gifts, treasures, arts may bo regarded as having pro-
ceeded from him.

Though a son of Wuotan and yielding to him in power or
influence, Donar (Thunar, Thor) appears at times identical with
him, and to some extent as an older god worshipped before
Wuotan. For, like Jupiter, he is a father, he is grandfather of
many nations, and, as grandfather, is a god of the hills, a god of
the rocks, a hammer, sits in the forest, throned on the mountain
top, and hurls his old stone weapon, the lightning's bolt. To
him the oak was sacred, and his hammer's throw measured out
land, as did afterwards Wuotan's wand. He rather flies furi-
ously at the giants than fights battles at the head of heroes,
or meditates the art of war. I think it a significant feature, that
he drives or walks, instead of riding like Wuotan: he never



Digitized by Google



PREFACE. XIX

presents himself in the wild hunt, nor in women's company.
Bat his name is still heard in curses (Wuotan* s only in protesta-
tions, p. 132) ; and as Redbeard, Donar might sit in the moun-
tain too. The heroes all go to Wuotan's heaven, the common
folk turn in at Donar's ; beside the elegant stately Wuotan, we
see about Donar something plebeian, boorish and uncouth. He
seems the more primitive deity, displaced in the course of ages
(yet not everywhere) by a kindred but more comprehensive one.

If Wuotan and Donar are to be regarded as exalted deities of
heaven, much more may Zio, Tius, be accepted as such, whose
name expresses literally the notion of sky, while Wuotan signifies
the air, and Donar the thunderstorm. And as Wuotan turns the
tide of battle, Zio presents himself as the special god of war ; as
Donar flings the hammer and Wuotan the spear, he is god of the
sword, as exhibited in the names Sahsnot and Heru. But here
much remains dark to us, because our legend has lost sight of
Zio altogether. Like Wuotan, he also seems to rush down from
the sky in the form of tempest.

Two others, though never appearing in the week, must yet
be reckoned among the great gods. Froho, a god of hunting,
of generation, fertility and summer, had long planted his name in
the heart of our language, where he still maintains his ground in
the derivatives fron and fronen ; his sacred golden-bristled boar
survived in helmet- crests, in pastry, and at the festive meal.
Year by year in kingly state Froho journeyed through the lands
(p. 213. 760). He is the gracious loving deity, in contrast with
the two last-mentioned, and with Wuotan in one aspect ; for, as
Wish, Wuotan also seems kindly and creative like Froho.

As to Phol, scarcely known to us till now, I have hazarded so
many conjectures that I will not add to their number here. If, as
appears most likely, he is synonymous with Pal tar (Balder), he
must pass for a god of light, but also of fire, and again of tem-
pest; under another view he haunted wells and springs. He
approximates the higher elemental powers, and could the more
easily be perverted into a diabolic being. Equally lost to Ger-
many is the name of the Norse Loki, who represents fire in another



Digitized by Google



XX



PREFACE.



aspect, and was still better qualified to stand for the devil. The
stories of his artfulness, his cunning tricks, have reproduced
themselves repeatedly in all branches of our race.

I now turn to the Goddesses. A mother of gods, Nerthus, is
named to us by Tacitus ; her name is the exact counterpart to
that of a Norse god, who confirms her existence, as Freyr would
confirm that of Freyja, had she come down to us only as the
High German Frouwa, and from the Gothic frauja (m.) we have
the same right to infer a fem. frauj6. Say that her name of
Nerthus has long ago died out, if it ever extended to all branches
of our race ; a whole group of beings almost identical with her
lives on in fadeless legend : Holde, Berhte, Fricke, Harke, Gaue,
Stempe, Trempe. At the first glance none of these names seem
to go very high up ; yet, Berhte at all events is introduced in
poems of the 14-1 5th century, and the matter begins to wear
another look the moment we can set her beside the Carolingian
Berhta, beside the Eddie Biort (p. 1149), beside the deeply rooted
tradition of the 9 white lady.' Of dame Holda the legend was
never written down till the 1 7th century ; if Holda was in the
Venus-mountain, which goes as far back as the 14th, she at once
gains in importance; then further, in the 12th century we can
point to Pharaildis (p. 284) ; and if, to crown all, Huldana in the
stone inscription is correct (p. 266), we can have but little doubt
of a Gothic worship of Hul)>6 (p. 990). Now, as Berhta and
Holda are adjective names, I was fain to claim for Nerthus also
an adj. basis nairthus, with the sense of mild, gracious, fair.
Frigg too (p. 301-2) I interpret by the adj. free, fair, gracious.
If Gaue, Gauden, is a corruption of the masc. W6den, it might
still have an accessory notion of good. Frouwa is obviously
the fem. to Froho, and still asserts her full power in our present
frau. Almost all names of the female deities have still a trans-
parent meaning; as compared with those of the male, there is
something innocent and inviolable in them, and for that reason
they seem to have been treated tenderly or tolerated. The deli-
cacy and inoffensive matter of the myth have shielded it longer in
popular legend.



Digitized by Google



PREFACE. XXI

The goddess Hellia has exchanged her personal meaning for a
local one, that of hell. Ostara, Eastre, is preserved at least in the
name of the high festival ; and Hreda, if my conjecture be sound,
in the word for a bride's gerada (outfit), as Zio was in the name
of the sword. Folia and Sindgund have only come to light
through the latest discoveries.

This muster of divinities is strong enough to support the whole
remaining framework of mythology; where such pillars stand, any
amount of superstructure and decoration may be taken for
granted. Considered in and for themselves, almost all the indi-
vidual deities appear emanations and branches of a single One ;
the gods as heaven, the goddesses as earth, the one as fathers,
the other as mothers, the former creating, governing, guiding,
lords of victory and bliss, of air, fire and water, the goddesses
nourishing, spinning, tilling, beautiful, bedizened, loving.

As all the sounds of language are reducible to a few, from
whose simplicity the rest can be derived — the vowels by broaden-
ing, narrowing, and combination into diphthongs, the mute con-
sonants by subdivision of their three groupB each into three
stages, while particular dialects shift them from one stage to
another in regular gradation 1 ; — so in Mythology I reduce the
long array of divine personages to their unity, and let their multi-
plicity spring out of this unity ; and we can hardly go wrong in
assuming for deities and heroes a similar coincidence, combina-
tion and gradation, according to their characters and particular

1 Thus, to take an example from the Dentals :

T TH D T TH



Greek.



L. Germ.



H. Germ.



thugatere duo


daughters two


tochter zwei



It will be Been that the High Germ, is always a stage in advance of Low Germ.,
and this a stage in advance of Greek, Latin, Sanskrit, Sec. The Germ, z is sounded
ti ; and $, like /», is a breathing. -Tbaxs.



Digitized by Google



xxii



PREFACE



functions. How Wuotan, Donar, and Zio partly run into one
another has been shewn ; Logi (lowe, blaze) becomes Loki (lock,
bolt), g becomes k, the sense of fire is exchanged for that of bolts
and bars (of hell), as Hamar and Heru came to signify the im-
plements they used. We have seen Wuotan reappear in long-
bearded Charles, in red-bearded Frederick. On comparing the
Norse hero-legend with the German, we see remarkable instances
of this shifting and displacement of names and persons. Gudrun
in the Edda occupies the place of our Krimhilt, while Grimhildr
is her mother's name ; in the Vilkinasaga Mimir is the smith and
Reginn the dragon, in the "Volsungasaga Reginn is the smith and
Fafnir the dragon. If these changes took place at haphazard,
there would be nothing in them ; but they seem to proceed by
regular gradation, without leaps.

Among all branches of the Teutonic race there shew them-
selves innumerable varieties of dialect, each possessing an equal
right ; so likewise in the people's religion we must presuppose a
good many differences : the difficulty is to reconcile in every case
the local bearings of the matter with the temporal. If the more
numerous testimonies to Wuotan in Lower Germany would lead
us to infer that he was held in higher esteem by Saxons than by
Alemanns or Bavarians, we must remember that this (apparent)
preference is mainly due to the longer continuance of heathenism
in the north ; that in the first few centuries after conversion the
south too would have borne abundant witness to the god. Upper
Germany has now scarcely a single name of a place compounded
with Wuotan (p. 158), Wuotan's day has there given place to.
' midweek/ and just there the legend of his ' wiitende heer 9 is
found more alive than elsewhere ! It would be a great thing to
ascertain whereabouts — whether among Goths — the designation
Fafrguneis prevailed above that of Thunrs. Any conclusion
drawn from the proximity of the Lithuanian Perkunas, the Slavic
Perun, may seem bold, though it is precisely to these two nations
that the Gothic and High German incline more than the Low
German, even in language : witness Hruodo and Kirt (p. 248) .
It seems an easier matter to trace the distinction between Zio



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



and Eru, and follow it up to Swabia and Bavaria; yet, if my
conjecture be right, the Cheruscans must of all races have had
the best claim to Eru. Even the name of the plant Zioliuta
(p. 1193) is worth taking into account. Sahsnut, Seaxneat, was
assuredly an eponymous deity of the Saxons. How do Paltar
and Phol stand to one another, as regards the nations that were
devoted to them? Phol appears to point, now eastward, now
westward. An important mark of distinction is the change of
gender in the same name of a god among different tribes. In
Gothic the masc. frauja (lord) was still current as a common
noun, in O.H. German the fern, frouwa, in 0. Saxon only the
masc. froho, frd, A.S. fre£, so that Goths and Saxons seem to
have preferred the god, High Germans the goddess; in the
North both Freyr and Freyja are honoured alike. But the
North knows only the god NiorSr, and the Germans living on
the opposite side of the Baltic only the goddess Nerthus. The
relation of Zio to Zisa, perhaps Isis (p. 298), demands further
explanation. No doubt the numerous aliases of that female deity,
who is not yet forgotten in modern legend, are due to differences
of race : Holda shews herself in Hesse, Thuringia, and North
Franconia, Berhta in Vogtland, East Franconia and sundry tracts
of Swabia, where likewise a male Berhtold encounters us. There
is no trace of either goddess in Lower Germany, but a dame
Freke now turns up in the Mark, and dame Gaue haunts Meck-
lenburg between Elbe and Weser. Yet in ancient times Holda,
as Huldana, must have reached far westward to the Rhine, and,
if the Ver-hilden-straet (p. 285) was named after her, into the
Netherlands, reminding us of the kinship between Chatti and
Batavi ; while the Carolingian Berhta Pedauca and the Biort of
the Edda would betoken a similar extension of Berhta's worship.
We must pay regard to the almost universal rush of nations
toward the West : even Isis and her Suevian ship we managed to

trace as far as the Ardennes. But, beside the deities, other

portions of mythology must also have their say. Him ins and
himil, himel and heven are discussed on p. 698, the lapse of Himil
into Gimill on p. 823 ; in Hesse is the borderland between Wights



Digitized by Google



xxiv



PREFACE.



and Elves, the one belonging to Franconian, the other to Saxon
soil : the Low Saxon hune is out of use in High Germany, even
in O.H. German the huni seem to be only Huns, not giants, and
the M.H. German hiune had a very limited circulation, being
never heard now in Hesse, Swabia or Bavaria, unless we are to
look for it in the name of the disease (p. 1163).

Such investigations and similar ones capable of indefinite
expansion, some of them not even dreamt of at present, may
gradually become important to the internal aspect of our own
Mythology : a still more urgent task is, to establish its relation
to the Religions of Other Nations ; nay, this is really the hinge
on which mythological study in general turns. But seldom
have their mutual influences or differences been so successfully
explored, as to educe therefrom a safe standard for the treat-
ment of any one mythology.

Every nation seems instigated by nature to isolate itself, to
keep itself untouched by foreign ingredients. Its language, its
epos feel happy in the home circle alone ; only so long as it rolls
between its own banks does the stream retain its colour pure.
An undisturbed development of all its own energies and inmost
impulses proceeds from this source, and our oldest language,
poetry and legend seem to take no other course. But the river
has not only to take up the brooks that convey fresh waters to it
from hill and mountain, but to disembogue itself at last in the
wide ocean : nations border upon nations, and peaceful inter-
course or war and conquest blend their destinies in one. From
their combinations will come unexpected results, whose gain
deserves to be weighed against the loss entailed by the suppres-
sion of the domestic element. If the language, literature and faith
of our forefathers could at no time resist at all points the
pressure of the Foreign, they have one and all undergone the
most disruptive revolution by the people's passing over to
Christianity.

We had long plagued ourselves to derive all languages from
the far-off Hebrew ; it was only by closely studying the history



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



XXV



of the European idioms near at hand, that a safe road was at
length thrown open, which, leaving on one side for the moment
the Semitic province, leads farther on into the heart of Asia.
Between the Indiau and Zendic languages and the majority of
those which spread themselves over Europe there exists an
immediate tie, yet of such a kind as makes them all appear as
sisters, who at the outset had the same leading features, but
afterwards, striking into paths of their own, have everywhere
found occasion and reason to diverge from each other. Amongst
all languages on earth points of contact are to be found, any
discovered rule compels us to admit exceptions, and these ex-
ceptions are apt to be misleading ; but the rule teaches us to fix
upon fundamental distinctions, for whioh we can only expect a
very slow resolution into a higher unity. While there is every
appearance of Europe not having contained any aborigines, but
received its population gradually from Asia, yet the figures in
our chronologies do not reach back to the actual descent of all
human speech from one original source; and the strata of our
mountains bear witness to a higher prehistoric age, whose im-
measurable breadth no inquirer can penetrate. Then, over and
above the original kinship necessarily underlying the facts taught
by comparative philology, we must also assume in the history of
European tongues some external, accidental and manifest inter-
changes of influence between them, which, powerful and resultful
as they may have been, are to be carefully distinguished from
that more hidden agency : we have only to call to mind the
former influence of Latin and the later of French on almost all
the other languages, or the origin of English from a mixture of
Teutonic and Romance elements. The difference between the
two kinds of likeness shews itself especially in the fact that,
while the originally cognate elements of a language remain
flexible and intelligible, the borrowed ones, because they are
borrowed, shew an indistinctness of form and a crippling of
movement. Hence all cognate words are rooted in the essential
life of a language, about which the borrowed ones mostly tell us
nothing : how lifeless, for example, has our adj. rund become !



Digitized by Google



xxvi



PREFACE



whereas the French rond, from which it comes, can still carry us
back to roond, reond, the Span, redondo, It. rotondo, and so to
rotundus, and therefore rota. Again, cognate forms are seldom
confined to one stem or branch, but run impartially through
several : e.g. our numerals ; our ist, Goth, ist, Lat. est, Gr. lor/,
Skr. asti ; the Goth, sa, so, J>ata, AS. se, seo, J^oat, ON. sa, su, )>at,
Gr. 6, 17, to, Skr. sa, sil, tad ; all of them consonances which did
not arise, like that • rund/ at some definite assignable period, but
were there from time immemorial.

These examples are well known, and are here chosen merely to
make good for Mythology also a distinction between material
that was common from the first and that which was borrowed
and came in later. Our scholarship, disloyal to its country,
inured to outlandish pomp and polish, loaded with foreign speech
and science, miserably stocked with that of home, was prepared
to subordinate the myths of our olden time to those of Greece
and Rome, as something higher and stronger, and to overlook
the independence of German poetry and legend, just as if in
grammar also we were free to derive the German ist from est and
eo-Tt, instead of putting the claims of these three forms perfectly
on a par. Giving the go-by to that really wonderful and de-
lightful consonance, whose origin would have had to be pushed
far back, they struggled, however much against the grain, to
hunt up any possible occasions of recent borrowing, so as to strip
their country of all productive power and pith. Not content
even with handing over our mythology to foreign countries,
they were eager, with as little reason, to shift its contents into
the sphere of history, and to disparage essentially unhistoric
elements by expounding them as facts.

Why hold our tongues about the mischief and the caprices
of this criticism? Mone, an honest and able explorer, whose
strenuous industry I respect, will often come half-way to meet
the truth, then suddenly spring aside and begin worrying her.
By hook or by crook the Reinhart of our apologue must be re-
solved into a historical one, the Siegfried of our heroic lay into
Arminius, Civilis and Siegbert by turns, Tanhiiuser into Ulysses.



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



xxvii



In all that I had gathered by a careful comparison of original
authorities on sorcery and witches, he of course can see neither
circumspectness nor moderation, who gravely imagines that
witchcraft was once a reality, who from the minutes of a single
trial in 1628 jumps at once to the Greek Dionysia, makes the
devil Dionysus, and warms up again the stale explanation of
hexe (witch) from Hecate. This is allowing the devil a great
antiquity in comparison with those heroes ; to me Reinhart and
Isengrim Beem to reach up far higher than the ninth century,
and Siegfried even beyond Arminius, therefore a long way before
the time when the term devil first came into our language.
Several designations of the giants are unmistakably connected
with the names of surrounding nations; Mone's view applies
them to Indians, Frisians, Persians, according as the words ent
and wrise suit his purpose; let no one be startled to find that
Caucasus comes from our Gouchsberg (cuckoo's hill) !

A later work, whose merits I acknowledge on p. 1070n., comes
in not unseasonably here. Soldan agrees in my opinion on the
atrocity and folly of the witch-persecutions, but he would dispute
the connection of witches with German mythology, and derive all
our magic and demonology from the Greeks and Romans again.
The resemblance of the mediaeval notions to classical antiquity
strikes him so forcibly, that he seems to think, either that
Germany and all barbarian Europe till their early contact with
the Romans were without any magic or belief in ghosts, or that
such belief suddenly died out. The Walburgis-night, it seems,
was suggested by Roman lares praestites, even the practice of
bidding for fiefs by floralia and averruncalia, and the cutting
of henbane by the fruges excantare: why may not our es also
come from id, our auge from oculus, our zehn from decern ? At
that rate Wuotan might without more ado be traced back to
Jupiter, Holda to Diana, the alp to the genius, all German
mythology to Roman, and nothing be left us of our own but
the bare soil that drank in the foreign doctrine.

When two nations resemble each other in language, manners,
and religion, such agreement is welcome in proof of their age,



Digitized by Google



XXV111



PREFACE.



and is not to be perverted to conclusions in favour of borrowing
or influence which any peculiarity in them may suggest. But
the stamp of authority will be given to research, when side by
side with the string of consonances there also runs an inevitable
string of divergences and transpositions.

In our book of heroes the adventures of Wolfdieterich and
Orendel have in their several ways a striking similarity to features
in the Odyssey, especially does the angel's mission to shaggy
Els and to lady Breide resemble that of Hermes to Calypso, when
she is commanded to let Odysseus go. But such wauderings
of heroes and encounters with wise women and giants seem to
be a common epic property prevailing everywhere, while the very
absence here of all the other main motives of the Greek myth ex-
cludes the supposition of borrowing. We may surely give their
due weight to the many resemblances of Wuotan to Zeus and
Apollo, of Zio to Zeus and Ares, we may recognise Nerthus in
Demeter, Frigg and Freyja in Hera and Aphrodite, Wieland in
Hepha3stus and Daedalus, without the whole swarm of Grecian
gods needing therefore to be transported to our soil, or all that
this produced having to be looked for in Greece. Must ' honum
hlo hugr i briosti' have somehow got into the Edda from
Homer's iyeXaaae Be ol <f>l\ov fjrop ? The distinction, drawn in
Homer as well as the Edda, between the speech of gods and of
men may signify something to us, and yet be no harder to explain
than the identity of Zio with Zeus, or of Zeu? irarrjp with All-
father. It is beautiful how Venus and venustus are made in-
telligible by the ON. vaonn and vaenstr, and even by the 0. Sax.
superlative wanuino. What is true of the Greek and Roman
mythologies, that with all their similarity they are yet far from
identical, has to be asserted with still more emphasis of the relation
between the Roman and German, inasmuch as Greek literature
left an infinitely deeper dint on the Roman, than Latin literature
was ever able to produce on our antiquity. If in ch. XXXV and
XXXVII many things are quoted which appear to spring out of
Roman superstition, it is fully justified by the poverty of native
information compelling me to seek a support for it from abroad :



Digitized by GooqI



PREFACE.



xxix



I do not suppose that the old German fancies about beasts
crossing one's path, or about the virtues of herbs, were in them-
selves any poorer than the Roman.

What I claim for Teutonic nations as compared with the
Greeks and Romans, must also hold good of them as regards the
Celts, Slavs, Lithuanians and Finns, whose paganism was similar
to onrs or not so similar. Here however the quantity of coinci-
dences is still more damaging to the theory of plagiarisms, which
would else encumber every nook and corner.

In favour of the study of Celtic languages and legends a whole-
some reaction has set in, insisting that this downtrodden race,
which once occupied wide tracts of Germany, shall receive its
due. By no means poor in memorials, it has an auxiliary resource
in several living tongues, the Armoric, Welsh, Irish and High-
land Scotch. But the paths still lie uncertain and slippery, and
what we concede to the Celts ought not in the zeal of discovery
to be turned against ourselves ; in cases of resemblance what
i3 genuinely German must put in its claim too. Now Heinrich
Schreiber's interesting studies of grave-mounds, weapons and
fays appear to me at times to stray beyond the true line : surely
the horses' heads on roof-gables in Mecklenburg and Holstein are
more undoubtedly German than the similar ones in Switzerland
are Celtic; and so far as our elfins and white ladies extend, they
have their justification, as the fays have on the other side. Some
obscure names of animals Leo has, I think, succeeded in inter-
preting as Celtic ; so long as he is obliged to leave the main
characters in the fable Gorman, as Reginhart and Isangrim, I have
no fear for the genuineness of our epos ; and the foreignness of
subordinate characters tends to throw farther back the date of the
entire poem. Also what he contributes to Nerthus and muspell
(Haopt 3, 226) demands attention. Beside the fays, who answer
to our swan-maidens, wish-wives and norns, beside Abundia, who
resembles Folia (fulness), I attach importance to Taranis = Donar,
to Gwydion = Wuotan, to Beal = Phol or Balder, and I am not
sure but that Hesus is the same as Cheru, and that Segomon (p.
371) ought not to be overlooked. Needfires and May-offerings



Digitized by Google



XXX



rREFACE.



are subjects for consideration. It would greatly advance onr
knowledge of Wuotan's true nature, if we could ascertain how
far the Celtic worship of Mercury differed from the Roman ; to
all appearance that deity was greater to the Celts and Germans
than Hermes-Mercury was to the Greeks and Romans; to Tns-
megistus and Tervagan I allude on p. 150. All that is left us of
the Celtic religion, even in stray fragments, bespeaks a more
finished mental culture than is to be found in German or Norse
mythology; there comes out in it more of priestly lore. But
in respect of genius and epic matter our memorials are incom-
parably superior.

As the Celts enclose us on the west, so do the Slavs on the
east ; and Slavic writers, like the Celtic, are rather fond, wherever
their ancient faith coincides with ours, of interpreting things
from a Slavic point of view, which can just as well be explained
from a German. The affinity of the two races can be perceived at
once by such old cognate words as the Gothic sunus (son), O.H.
German sunu, Slavic syn; Goth. Hubs (dear), OHG. liop, Boh.
liby, Russ. liubo ; Goth. lauj>s (people), OHG. Hut, Slav. Hud ;
Goth, hldifs (loaf), OHG. hleip, Slav. khlSb. And the mythic
resemblances are no less significant. Radegast must stand for
Wuotan, Perun for Fairguneis, Fiorgunn, but Svatovit for Zio ;
between Radegast the god of bliss (rad glad, radost joy), and our
Wish, the harmony is yet stronger. Kroto reminds us of Kirt,
Molnia of Miolnir (pp. 1221. 813). How near the badniak of the
Servians comes to our Christmas fire 1 their cuckoo-pole to the
Langobardic dove-pole (p. 1 185n.), their dodola to the fetching-in
of rain (p. 594), the carrying-out of death to the fight of summer
and winter, the vila to our wise-women ! If the elf and dwarP
legends appear less polished than they are among Celts and
Germans, our giant legend on the other hand has much more in
common with the Slavic and Finnic. No doubt Slav mythology
altogether is several degrees wilder and grosser than German, yet
many things in it will make a different figure when once the
legends and fairy tales are more fully and faithfully gathered in,
and the gain to German research also will be great.



Digitized by Google



PREFACE



From similar collections of Lithuanian, Samogitian and Lettish
myths revelations no less important are impending, as we may
anticipate from the remarkable connexion between the lan-
guages.

More results have already been attained in Finland, whose
people, comparable in this to the Servians alone, have in their
mouths to this day a most wonderful store of songs and tales,
though in Servian poetry the heroic legend predominates, and in
Finnic the myth. Merely by what Ganander, Porthan and now
Lonnrot have published, an immense deal is bridged over between
the German, Norse, Slav, Greek and Asiatic mythologies. Rask
(in Afhand. 1, 96) had already derived some Norse names of
giants from Finnic. And further, the distinction we made be-
tween legend and fairy-tale does not at all apply as yet to this
Finnic poetry : it stands at an older stage, where the marvels of
the fairy-tale without any sense of incongruity mingle with the
firmer basis of the folk-tale, and even the animal fable can be
admitted. Wainamoinen (Esth. Wannemunne) can be compared
to Wuotan both in general, and particularly in his character of
Wish : the Finnic waino and wainotem signify desiderium, wainok
cupidus, wainotet desiderare : the Swedish Lapps, with a kindred
language, have waino (wish, desire), and the Norwegian Lapps
vaimel cupidus. Thus Wish, Radegast and Wainamoinen seem
to be getting nearer to each other. This last is a god of poetry
and singing (p. 907), he is constantly called Wanha, the old one,
as the thunder-god Ukko likewise is called father or old, and his
wife Akka mother or old. With the Lapps, Atia means both
grandfather and thunder (see ' old daddy/ p. 168). As Thor's
minni was drunk, so full bowls were emptied in honour of Ukko.
Wainamoinen wakes Wipune out of her grave (Rune 10), as
OSinn does Vola. Ilmarinen, the smith-god of the Finns, re-
minds us of Hephaestus and Volundr, but makes a deeper im-
pression than either ; he fashioned a wife for himself out of gold
(conf. p. 570 n.). To the Lapps, Sarakka means creatress, from
saret to create, a goddess of fortune.

All Finnish nations use Yumala as a general name for the



Digitized by Google



xxxii



PREFACE.



Supreme Being in the sense of our God or the Slavic Bdgh, to
which corresponds the Swed. Lapp, yupmel, Norw. Lapp, ibrael ;
but the Syrian have also yen (gen. yenlon), the Permians en, the
Votiaks inmar, the Tcheremiss yumn. Along the northern edge
of Europe and over the Ural into northern Asia extends this
widespread group of nations of the Finn kind, their languages and
myths shewing everywhere a common character. The Votiaks,
like the Slavs and Germans, hold the woodpecker sacred (p. 705) ;
but what I lay special stress upon is the bear-worship of these
nations, which has left its traces in Sweden and Norway, and
betrays the earliest stage of our Teutonic beast-legend (p. 667).
Poetic euphemisms designate the sacred beast, and as soon as he
is slain, solemn hymns are struck up as by way of atonement.
Runes 28 and 29 in Kalewala describe such a hunt with all its
ceremonial. Ostiaks in taking an oath kneel on a bearskin, in
heathen sacrifices they covered the victim with a bearskin (p.
1010), and long afterwards they hung bearskins about them in
the service of the devil (p. 1018). As the bear was king of all
beasts, the terms applied to him of 1 old one ' and ' grandfather '
suggest those of the thunder-god. The constellation of the
Great Bear (p. 725) would of itself seem an evident traco of
his worship even among the Greeks.

Coming down from northern Asia to the tribes of the Caucasus,
we again meet with the most remarkable coincidences. The
Tcherkesses (Circassians) keep up a worship of the boar (p. 215),
as did the ancient Aestyi and Germani. Both Tcherkesses and
Ossets glorify the same Elias (p. 1 73-4, conf . p. 185) who is such
a sacred personage to the Slav races. Even the ancient Alani
and Scythians seem to be linked with the heathen Germans by
their worship of the sword (p. 204) ; Attila means grandfather,
and is among Huns as well as Germans a name for mountains.
The same inspection of shoulder-blades that Jornandes relates of
Huns goes on to this day among Kalmuks (p. 1113). A good
many Mongolian customs agree with those of Celts and Germans :
I will only instance the barleycorn's being the unit of all mea-
surement of land (see my account of it in Berl. Jahrb. for 1842,



Digitized by Google



PREFACE



XXXI 11



pp. 795-6) ; conf. the Finnic ohrasen yivea=hordei granum, Kal.
17,625. 27, 138.

A still closer agreement with our antiquities than exists among
Finns and Mongols is to be looked for in the more cognate
Zendic and Indian mythologies. That of India is finely wrought
like the Greek, but I think the Greek has the same advantage
over it that I awarded to the German as compared with the
Celtic : a certain theosophic propensity betrays itself in the In-
dians as well as Celts, which in the fulness of Greek and German
myth falls more into the background. It seems worthy of notice,
that to the Indian gods and goddesses are assigned celestial
dwellings with proper names, as in the Edda. Among the gods
themselves, Brahma's creative power resembles Wuotan's, Indra
is akin to Donar, being the wielder of lightning and the ruler of
air and winds, so that as god of the sky he can also be compared
to Zio. The unison of our Wish with the notion embodied
in manoratha (p. 870) deserves attention. Nerthus answers to
Bhavani (p. 255), Halja to Kali, and Mannus to Manus (p. 578),
the last two examples being letter for letter the same; but
one thing that must not be "overlooked is, that the same myth
of man's creation out of eight materials (pp. 564 — 7) which has
already turned up five times, appears in a portion of the Vodas,
the Aitareya Aranya, from which an excerpt is given in Cole-
brooke's Misc. Essays, Lond. 1837, vol. 1, p. 47 seq.; here also
eight ingredients are enumerated : fire, air, sun, space, herb,
moon, death, and water. Naturally the details vary again,
though even the five European accounts are not without a certain
Indian colouring. Still more interesting perhaps is an echo
that reaches the very heart of our hero-legend. Putraka (in
Somadeva i. 19) comes upon two men who are fighting for some
magic gifts, a cap, a staff, and a pair of shoes ; he cheats them
into running a race, steps into the shoes himself, and flies up into
the clouds with the cup and staff. With the same adroitness
Siegfried among the dwarfs manages the division of their hoard,
upon which lies the wishing-rod (p. 457) ; and our nursery tales
are full of such divisions (Altd. bl. 1, 297. KM. ed. 5, no. 193.

VOL. III. c



Digitized by Google



xxxiv



TREFACE



2, 502. Bechstein's Marchen p. 75). The same trick decides
the quarrel in Asbiornsen, no. 9, p. 59, and in the Hungarian
tale, Gaal p. 166.

Now whence can these details have been imported into the
homespun fairy-tale ? Every country has them at its fingers'
ends. To take another striking instance : the story of the three
cousins (p. 415) who had spun till the nose of one grew long,
another's eyes red, and another's fingers thick, is told still more
vividly in Norway (Asb. and Moe, no. 13), and most vividly in
Scotland (Chambers, p. 54-5). Or the changeling's unfailing
formula (pp. 469. 927), was that conveyed from Denmark to
Scotland, from Ireland to Hesse ? Was the legend of the willow
that has never heard a cock crow (p. 1243) handed over by the
Romans to the Poles; and the myth of the thunder-bolt by
the Greek to the Slav, by the Slav to the German ? Did a little
bird always pick up the legendary seed, and lug it over hill
and dale to other lands ? I believe Myth to be the common
property of many lands, that all its ways are not yet known, but
that it is proporest to that nation with whose gods it closely
coalesces, as a word common to several languages may best be
claimed by that one which can explain its root. The legend of
Tell relates no real event, yet, without fabrication or lying, as a
genuine myth it has shot up anew in the bosom of Switzerland,
to embellish a transaction that took hold of the nation's inmost
being.

I do not deny for a moment, that beside this mysterious
diffusion of myths there has also been borrowing from without,
nay, that they could be purposely invented or imported, though
it is a harder matter than one would imagine for this last sort to
take root among the people. Roman literature has from early
times spread itself over other European lands, and in certain
cases it may be quite impossible to strike the balance between
its influence and that inner growth of legend. And nowhere
is extrinsic influence less a matter of doubt than where, by
the collision of christian doctrine with heathenism among the



Digitized by Google



FREFACE.



XXXV



converted nations, it became unavoidable to abjure the old, and
in its place to adopt or adapt what the new faith introduced or
tolerated.

Oftentimes the Church — and I have specified sundry instances \
— either was from the outset, or gradually became, tolerant and \
indulgent. She prudently permitted, or could not prevent, that \
heathen and christian things should here and there run into one
another; the clergy themselves would not always succeed in
marking off the bounds of the two religions ; their private lean-
ings might let some things pass, which they found firmly rooted
in the multitude. In the language, together with a stock of
newly imported Greek and Latin terms, there still remained,
even for ecclesiastical use, a number of Teutonic words previously
employed in heathen services, just as the names of gods stood
ineradicable in the days of the week ; to such words old customs
would still cling, silent and unnoticed, and take a new lease of
life. The festivals of a people present a tough material, they are
so closely bound up with its habits of life, that they will put up
with foreign additions, if only to save a fragment of festivities
long loved and tried. In this way Scandinavia, probably the
Goths also for a time, and the Anglo-Saxons down to a late
period, retained the heathenish Yule, as all Teutonic Christians
did the sanctity of Eastertide ; and from these two the Yule-boar
and Yule-bread, the Easter pancake, Easter sword, Easter fire
and Easter dance could not be separated. As faithfully were
perpetuated the name and in many cases the observances of
Midsummer. New christian feasts, especially of saints, seem
purposely as well as accidentally to have been made to fall on
heathen holidays. Churches often rose precisely where a heathen
god or his sacred tree had been pulled down, and the people
trod their old paths to the accustomed site : sometimes the very
walls of the heathen temple became those of the church, and
cases occur in which idol-images still found a place in a wall of
the porch, or were set up outside the door, as at Bamberg cathe-
dral there lie Slavic-heathen figures of animals inscribed with
rones. Sacred hills and fountains were re-christened after saiuts,



Digitized by Google



xxxvi



PREFACE



to whom their sanctity was transferred; sacred woods were
handed over to the newly-founded convent or the king, and even
nnder private ownership did not altogether lose their long-
accustomecl homage. Law-usages, particularly the ordeals and
oath-takings, but also the beating of bounds, consecrations,
image- processions, spells and formulas, while retaining their
heathen character, were simply clothed in christian forms. In
some customs there was little to change : the heathen practice of
sprinkling a newborn babe with water (vatni ausa p. 592, dicare
p. 108, line 5) closely resembled christian baptism, the sign of the
hammer that of the cross, and the erection of tree-crosses the
irmensuls and world-trees of paganism. Still more significant
must appear that passage where Voluspa and the Bible coincide
(p. 811); in the far later S61ar-lio$ traces of christian teaching
are discernible.

In a conflux of so many elements it could not but happen, even
where the mental conceptions and views of a simple populace un-
able to do without myths had felt the full force of the revolution,
that in its turn the Old, not wholly extinct, should half un-
consciously get interwoven with the irrepressible New. Jewish
and christian doctrine began to lean towards heathen, heathen
fancies and superstitions to push forward and, as it were, take
refuge in all the places they found unoccupied by the new reli-
gion. Here we find christian material in a heathen form, there
heathen matter in a christian disguise.

As the goddess Ostara was converted into a notion of time,
so was Hellia into one of place. The beliefs of our forefathers
about elves and giants got intensified and expanded into angels
and devils, but the legends remained the same. Wuotan, Donar,
Zio, Phol put on the nature of malignant diabolic beings, and
the story of their solemn yearly visitation shaped itself into that
of a wild rabble rout, which the people now shunned with horror,
as formerly they had thronged to those processions.

Veiled under the biblical names of Cain, Elias, Enoch, Anti-
christ, Herodias. there come into view the same old myths about
moon-spots, giants' buildings, a god of thunder and of storm, the



Digitized by Google



PREFACE. XXXV11

gracious (holde) night-dame and the burning of the world. And
what arrests our attention still more is, that to the Virgin Mary
we apply a whole host of charming legends about Holda and
Frouwa, norns and valkyrs, as the Romans did those about
Venus, Juno and the parcae ; nay, in the fairy-tale, dame Holle
and Mary can usurp the place of gray-hatted Wuotan. What a
tender fragrance breathes in those tales of Mary, and what has
any other poetry to put by the side of them ? To the kindly
heathen traits is superadded for us that sense of superior sanctity
which encompasses this Lady. Herbs and flowers are named
after Mary, her images are carried about, and, quite in accord-
ance with the heathen worship, installed on forest trees. She
is a divine mother, she is a spinning-wife, she appears as maid
of mercy (vierge secourable) to whosoever calls upon her. To
the country folk in Italy, Mary stands well in the foreground of
their religion ; the Madonnas of several churches in Naples are
looked upon as so many different divine beings, and even as
rivals, and a Santa Venere by their side gives no offence. Three
Marys together (p. 416, note) resemble the three norns and
three fays ; Mary carries stones and earth in her apron (p. 537)
like Athena or the fay. The worship of Mary altogether, being
neither founded on Scripture nor recognised by the first cen-
turies, can only be explained by the fact of those pretty and
harmless but heathen fancies having taken such deep root in
the people that the Church also gradually combined with them
a more daintily devised and statelier devotion (attentio) which
we find woven into numerous legends and sermons.

But Mary does not stand alone by a long way. Immediately
at her side there has grown up in the Catholic and Greek
churches an interminable adoration of Saints, to make up for
heathen gods of the second or third rank, for heroes and wise-
women, and to fill the heart by bridging the gulf between it and
pure Deity. Dogma may distinguish between Deity and inter-
cessors ; but how many a pious lip, moving in prayer before the
sacred image, must be unaware of this distinction, or forget it !
And further, among the saints themselves there are various



Digitized by Google



xxxviii



PREFACE.



grades, and the particular troubles under which they can be of
service are parcelled out among them like so many offices and
lines of business, so that almost every disease and its remedy are
called by the name of their saint ; this division of tasks has the
strongest analogy to the directions given in Norse and Lithuanian
mythology for the invocation of the several deities (p. 335). The
victorious hero who had slain the dragon made room for Michael
or George ; and the too pagan Siegberg (p. 198), which may
have meant the same as Eresberg (p. 201), was handed over to
Michael, as the mons Martis in France was turned into a mons
martyrum, Montmartre. It is remarkable that the Ossets have
converted the dies Martis into Georgeday, and dies Veneris into
Mary's day (Pott 1, 105. 2, 802). The places of OSinn and of
Freyja in minni-drinking are taken by John and by Gertrude,
a saint who in other ways also has changed places with the
goddess (pp. 61. 805. 673); but we can easily see why the
heathen counterpart to a saint's legend is oftener to be found
in tho Roman than in our German mythology. The Church
in her saints and canonizations had not the wit to keep within
bounds, and the disproportion comes out most glaringly in the
fact that the acts and miracles of the Saviour and his apostles
are in some cases outdone by those of the saints. Whoever
would push these investigations further, as they deserve to be
pushed, will have to take particular notice, what saints are the
first to emerge in the popular faith of any country, and which of
them in poems and in forms of benediction have gradually slipt
into the places of the old gods.

Here let me illustrate the more or less thorough interpene-
tration and commingling of Christian and heathen legend by
two examples, which seem to me peculiarly important.

It must be regarded as one of the original possessions common
to our mythologies, that the God, or two gods, or three, descend
from heaven to earth, whether to prove men's works and, ways
(p. 337), or in search of adventures. This does violence to the
christian belief in God's omnipresence and omniscience ; but it



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



xxxix



is a very pleasing fancy, that of the gotta in person walking the
earth unrecognised, and dropping in at the houses of mortals.
Even the Odyssey 17, 485-7 alludes to such wanderings, in which
is found the loftiest consecration of hospitality : a man will be
loth to turn away a stranger, under whose guise a celestial god
may be visiting him. A Greek myth with details appears in the
story of Orion : three gods, Zeus, Poseidon, Hermes (some say
Zeus, Ares, Hermes = Donar, Zio, Wuotan) take lodging with
Hyrieus, and after being feasted, give him leave to ask a favour ;
he wishes for a son, and they create him one much in the same
way as Kvasir was engendered (p. 902, conf. 1025n.). Ovid's
Fasti 5, 495—535. Hyginus 195 relates the same fable of the
Thracian Byrseus. In the beautiful legend of Philemon and
Baucis (Ovid's Met. 8, 626 — 721), Jupiter and Mercury are travel-
ling, and reward their kind entertainers by saving them from
the impending deluge (p. 580) ; a fable of Phaedrus makes the
divine messenger alone, the god of roads and highways, pass
the night with mortals (Mercurium, hospitio mulieres olim duae
illiberali et sordido receperant). But Demeter also is at time3
represented as travelling and associating with men, as would be
natural for all mothers of gods ; Aesop in Fab. 54 makes Demeter
travel with a swallow and an eel, but when they came to a river
the bird flew up, the fish slipt into the water, and what did
Demeter do ? With the Indians it is principally Brahma and
Vishnu that visit the earth. In a Lithuanian legend Perkunos
walks the earth at the time when beasts yet spoke ; he first met
the horse, and asked his way. 1 1 have no time to shew thee the
way, I have to eat.' Hard by was an ox grazing who had heard
the traveller's request : ' Come, stranger/ he cried, ' I will shew
thee the way to the river.' Then Baid the god to the horse:
• As thou couldst not for eating find time to do rne a turn of kind-
ness, thou shalt for a punishment be never satisfied ; ' then to the
ox: 'Thou good-natured beast shalt conveniently appease thy
hunger, and after chew the cud at thine ease, for thou wert ready
to serve me.' This myth likewise inculcates kindness to the
stranger, and for Perkunos subsequent narrators could without



Digitized by Google



xl



PREFACE



scruple substitute the Saviour. In the Edda it is always OSinn,
Loki and Hoonir that go on journeys together, the same three Ases
that also co-operate in creating (p. 560), for Lo$r and Loki are
apparently one (p. 241), and in this connexion Loki has nothing-
base or bad about him. Hoenir is called in Sn. 106 sessi, sinni,
mali Ofcins (sodalis, comes, collocutor Odini). These three Ases
set out on a journey, and at night seek a lodging ; in the stories
preserved to us no mention is made of a trial of hospitality. In
a later saga OSinn with Loki and Hoenir rides to the chase
(Miiller's Sagabibl. 1, 364) ; and a remarkable lay of the Faroe
Isles (Lyngbye pp. 500 seq.) presents the same three, Ouvin,
Honerand Lokkji, not indeed as travelling, but as succouring
gods, who when called upon immediately appear, and one after
the other deliver a boy whom giant Skrujmsli is pursuing, by
hiding him, quite in fairy-tale fashion, in an ear of barley,
a swan's feather, and a fish's egg. There were doubtless many
more stories like this, such as the Norwegian tale in Asbidrn. no.
21, conf. p. 423. As bearing upon their subsequent transfer-
ence, it must not be overlooked that in Fornm. sog. 9, 56. 175
OSinn on horseback calls one evening at a blacksmith's, and has
his horse shod ; his identity with Hermes becomes quite startling
in these myths. At other times however it is Thdrr with his
heavy hammer (p. 180) that seeks a lodging, like Zeus, and when
he stays the night at the peasant's, Loki accompanies Thorr (Sn.
49) ; then again Heimdallr, calling himself Ktgr, traverses the
world, and founds the families of man. The Finnish legend
makes Wainamoinen, Ilmarinen and Lemminkainen travel (rune
23), quite on a par with OSinn, Loki, and Hoenir.

If now we look from these heathen myths to those in a
christian dress and of a later time, the connexion between them
can be no enigma : that of Perkunos changing into the Saviour
has already set us the key. Either Christ and Peter journey out
together, or one of the two alone ; the fable itself turns about in
more than one direction. Antique above all sounds the visit of
these godlike beings, like that of OSinn, to the blacksmith, and
here the rewarding of hospitality is not left out. In the Norw.



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



tale no. 21, the Saviour, after he has far surpassed his host ia
feats of skill, yet places three wishes at his disposal, the very
same that were allowed the smith of Juterbok : compare also
Kinderm. no. 147, the Netherl. story of Smeke in Wolfs Wodana
p. 54 seq., and H. Sachs iv. 3, 70. But in Kinderm. 82, though
the player, like the smith, asks for the tree from which one
cannot get down, the main point with him is the dice, and the
bestowal of them cannot but remind us of Wuotan the inventor
of dice (p. 150. 1007), and again of Mercury. In H. Sachs ii.
4, 114 it is only Peter that bestows the wishing-die on a lands-
knecht at work in the garden. But the Fabliau St. Pierre et le
jongleur (Meon 3, 282) relates how the juggler fared after death
in hell ; though nothing is said of travelling or gift-giving, yet
Peter coming down from heaven in a black beard and smug
moustaches and with a set of dice, to win from the showman the
souls entrusted to his keeping, has altogether the appearance of
Wuotan, who is eager, we know, to gather souls into his dwell-
ing ; and that tailor who hurled the leg of a chair out of heaven
(p. 136) had been admitted by Peter. Then another group of
legends betrays a new feature, full of significance to us. The
Saviour and Peter are travelling together, Peter has to dress the
dinner, and he bites a leg off the roast chickon (Wolf's Wodana,
p. 180); in the Latin poem of Heriger, belonging to the tenth
century, Peter is called in so many words head-oook of heaven,
and a droll fellow secretly eats a piece of lung off the roast, as in
Marchen no. 81 brother Lustig, travelling with Peter, steals the
heart of the roast lamb, and elsewhere the landaknecht or the
Swabian steals the liver. This seems to be all the same myth,
for the circumstance that Peter plays by turns the culprit and the
god whose attendant is in fault, may itself be of very old date :
even the heathen stories may have made 0$inn and Loki change
places. Loki is all the more a oook, a roast-stealer, and there-
fore on a lino with Peter, as even the Edda imputes to him the
eating of a heart (the suspected passage in Saom. 118 b I emend
thus : 'Loki at hiarta lundi brenda, fann hann halfsviSinn hugstein
konu/ Lokius comedit cor in nemore assum, invenit semiustum



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



raentis-lapidem mulieris), and in onr ancient beast- fable the sly
fox (Loki still) carries off the stag's heart half-roasted (Reinh.
xlviii. lii) . — Nor does this by any means exhaust the stock of
such tales of travel. Hans Sachs 1, 492 made up a poem in 1557
(and Burc. Waldis 4, 95 before him in 1537) how Peter journey-
ing with Christ wished in the pride of his heart to rule the
world, and could not so much as manage the goat which the
Lord had given into his hands for one day; again 1, 493 how
they arrived at a parting of the roads, and asked their way of a
lazy workman lying in the shade of a peartree, who gave them
a gruff answer ; then they came upon a maidservant, who was
toiling in the sweat of her brow, but, on being asked, immedi-
ately laid her sickle down, and saw the Lord into the right road :
' be this maid/ said the Saviour to Peter, * assigned to none other
but that man/ (in Agricola, Spr. 354, the maid is idle and the
man industrious). This recalls not only Perkunos with the
horse and ox, but the norns or fays passing through the land
in the legend quoted on p. 409. Old French poems give the
part of short-sighted Peter to the hermit who escorts an angel
through the world (Meon, Nouv.rec. 2, 116, and pref. to tome 1) ;
from Mielcke's Lith. sprachl. p. 167 I learn that the same ver-
sion prevails in Samogitia, and the Gesta Romanor. cap. 80 tell
of the angelus et eremita. As the gods lodged with Philemon
and Baucis, so does a dwarf travelling in the Grindelwald with
some poor but hospitable folk, and protects their little house
from the flood (DS. no. 45) ; in Kinderm. 87 God Almighty
lodges with the poor man, and allows him threo wishes ; to Riigen
comes the old beggar-man ( = Wuotan), gets a night's lodging
from a poor woman, and on leaving in the morning lets her
dabble in the wishing business, which turns out ill for the envious
neighbour. Thiele (Danmarks folkesagn 2, 306) finds the very
same myth in Fiinen, and here the traveller is Peter again : the
Norwegian tale makes the Lord God and Peter come to dame
Gertrude and turn the stingy thing into a bird (p. 673). There
is a popular joke about Christ and Peter being on a journey, and
the Saviour creating the first Bohemian; and a Netherl. tale



Digitized by Google



PREFACE. xliii

•

(Wbdana p. xxxvii) about their putting up at an ogre's house
in a wood, and being concealed by his compassionate wife, an
incident that occurs in many other tales.

Afzelius (Sagohafder 3, 155), while he proves the existence of
these legends of Christ and Peter in Sweden also, is feertainly
wrong in pronouncing them mere fabricated drolleries, not
founded on popular belief. They are as firmly grounded as any-
thing can be on primitive traditions, and prove with what fidelity
the people's memory has cared for our mythology, while MHG.
poets despise these fables which they could have sung so admir-
ably, just as they leave on one side dame Berhte and Holde and
in general what is of home growth. Yet a couple of allusions
may prove, if proof it needs, that this dressing up of the old myth
was in vogue as early as the 13th century: Rumelant (Amgb.
1 2') relates of Christ and Peter, how they came to a deep rivulet
iuto which a man had fallen, who was doing nothing to help him-
self; and a nameless poet (Mone's Anz. 5, 192) tells of a wood-
cutter whom Peter was trying to hoist into heaven by his mallet,
but when on the topmost rung, the mallet's handle came off, and
the poor man dropt into hell. The pikeman or blacksmith in the
fairy-tale got on better by flinging his knapsack or apron (sledge-
hammer in Asbiornsen p. 136 is still more archaic) into heaven.
Of course these wanderings of the Saviour and one of his disciples
have something in common with the journeys of Josus and his
apostles in Judea, the dwarf visitor might be compared to the
angels who announced God's mercies and judgments to Abraham
and Lot, as Philemon and Baucis have a certain resemblance to
Abraham and Sarah ; but the harmony with heathen legend is
incomparably fuller and stronger. The angels were simply mes-
sengers ; our mythology, like the Greek and Indian, means here
an actual avatura of Deity itself.

Another example, of smaller compass, but equally instructive
as to the mingling of christian with heathen ideas, may be drawn
from the old legend of Fruoto. The blissful birth of the Saviour,
the new era beginning with him, were employed in drawing pic-
tures of a golden age (p. 695. 793 n.) and the state of happiness



Digitized by Google



xliv



PREFACE.



and peace inseparable from it. The Roman Augustus, under
whom Christ was born, closed the temple of Janus, and peace
is supposed to have reigned all over the earth. Now the Norse
tradition makes its mythic Fr65i likewise contemporary with
Augustus, FroSi whose reign is marked by peace and blessed-
ness, who made captive giantesses grind heaps of gold for him
(p. 531. 871), and had bracelets deposited on the public high-
way without any one laying hands on them. The poets call gold
' miol Fr6Sa/ Fruoto's meal (Sn. 146), to explain which phrase
the poem Grottasaungr is inserted in the Edda; and in Seem.
151* occurs: 1 sleit Frooa fri$ fianda a milli/ Rymbegla says,
in his time the fields bore crops without being sown (it is the
blessed Sampo-period of the Finns), and metal was found every-
where in the ground; nature joined in extolling the prince,
as she does in lamenting his death (p. 591). When Helgi
was born, eagles uttered a cry, and holy waters streamed down
from the hills of heaven (Seem. 149*) ; in the year of Hakon's
election the birds, we are told, bred twice, and twice the trees
bore, about which the Hak. Hakonarsaga cap. 24 has some
beautiful songs. Hartmann, a monk of St. Gall, sings on the
entry of the king : ( Haec ipsa gaudent tempora, floreque verno
germinant, adventus omni gaudio quando venit optatior.' So
deep a feeling had the olden time for a beloved king. And
Beda 2, 16 thus describes king Eadwine's time: 'Tanta eo
tempore pax in Britannia fuisse perhibetur, ut, sicut usque hodie
in proverbio dicitur, etiamsi mulier una cum recens nato par-
vulo vellot totam perambulare insulam a mari ad mare, nullo se
laedente valeret. Tantum rex idem utilitati suae gentis con-
suluit, ut plerisque in locis, ubi fontes lucidos juxta publicos
viarum transitus construxit, ibi ob refrigerium viantium erectis
stipitibus aereos caucos suspendi juberet, neque bos quisquam
nisi ad usum necessarium contingere prae magnitudine vel timoris
ejus auderet vel amoris vellet.' And of several other kings the
tale is told, that they exposed precious jewels on the public road.
Mildness and justice were the highest virtues of rulers, and
' mild 1 signified both initis and largus, munificus. Fr68i was



Digitized by Google



PREFACE. Xlv

called the femildi (bountiful) ; ' fr68i ' itself includes the notion
of sagacity. When the genealogies and legends make several
kings of that name follow one another, they all evidently mean
the same (conf. p. 348). Saxo Gramm. 27 makes his first Frotho
sprinkle ground gold on his food, which is unmistakably that
c FroSa miol ' of Snorri ; the second is called 1 frcekni,' vegetus ;
it is not till the reign of the third, who fastens a gold bracelet
on the road, that the Saviour is born (p. 95).

But this myth of the mild king of peace must formerly have
been known outside of Scandinavia, namely, here in Germany,
and in Britain too. For one thing, our chroniclers and poets,
when they mention the Saviour's birth, break out, like Snorri
and Saxo, in praises of a peaceful Augustan age ; thus Godfrey
of Viterbo p. 250 :

Fit gladius vomer, fiunt de cuspide falces,
Mars siluit, pax emicuit, miles fuit auceps ;
nascentis Christi tempore pax rediit.

Wernher's Maria, p. 160 :

D6 wart ein chreftiger fride, Then befel a mighty peace,

diu swert versluogen die smide, smiths converted their swords,

bediu spieze und sper ; both pikes and spears ;

do ne was dehein her then was there no army

daz iender des gedsehte that anywhere thought

daz ez strite oder vaehte, of striving and fighting,

d6 ne was niht urliuge then was no war

bi des meres piuge, by the sea's margin,

noch enhein nitgeschelle. nor any sound of hate.

Hit gr6zer ebenhelle In great unison

und harte fridliche and right peacefully

stuonden elliu riche. stood all kingdoms.

And p. 193 : Aller fride meiste

mit des keisers volleiste

der wart erhaben und gesworn

dd Christ was geborn.



Digitized by Google



xlvi



PREFACE.



Compare En. 13205 — 13, and Albrecht of Balberstadt's Prologue,
which also says that Augustus

machte s6 getanen fride (perfect peace)
daz man diu swert begunde smide
in segense (scythes), und werken hiez
zuo den sicheln den spiez.

It is true, none of these passages make any reference to Fruoto ;
but how could the 1 milte Fruote von Tenemarke 1 have got so
firm a footing in our heroic lays of Gudrun and the Raben-
schlacht, and in the memory of our Court-poets (MS. 2, 22 l b ,
227 b , Conr. Engelhart, and Helbl. 2, 1303. 7, 366. 13, 111)
without some express legend to rest upon ? This I had a pre-
sentiment of on p. 532 from our proper names Fanigolt, Mani-
golt (fen-gold, bracelet- gold) ; conf. Haupt's pref. to Engelh.
p. x. And what is more, the Austrian weisthumer (3, 687. 712)
require by way of fine a shield full of ground gold ; and filling .
shields with gold meant being liberal. The folk-song in Uhland
1, 76-7 makes the mill grind gold and love. How else to explain
gold-grinding and gold-meal I cannot divine.

I could multiply such examples ; I could also, if the task were
not reserved for others or another occasion, shew in detail that
the same mythic basis, which must bo assumed for our own
heroic lays, was not foreign either to the Carolingian poetry,
the product mainly of a German tribe, or even to the British.
Arthur belongs to the 'wild host' and the 'heaven's wain/
Morgana coincides with norns and elfins. A great deal nearer
still stands Charles with his heroes : he is the Long-beard that
sleeps in the mountain and rides on the Karl-wain, his Karl-
stone is the same as the Woden-stone (p. 155), Roland stands
on the pillar, Froberge reminded us of Fr6 (p. 216), and Galans,
who plies the forge for these Frankish heroes, is Way land,
Wielant, Volundr. Berthe with the foot, progenitress of Charles,
is our Berhta (p. 429) ; and, attached to her, stand Flore and
Blanchefleur with their elvish names (p. 1063). Charles's loved
one was an e!6n (p. 435), Auberon is Elberich and elf-king; and



Digitized by Google



TBEFACE.



xlvii



Maugis, Malagis=Madalgis, borders on the elvish. Charles's
hall resembles that of Asgard (p. 1133n.).

If these investigations have not been a sheer waste of time
(and to me it seemed worth the trouble to look into the affairs
of our antiquity from all sides), I may now at length attempt an
answer to questions, or some of them at least, as to what is the
true fundamental character of Teutonic mythology.

Judged by the standard of those mythologies that completed
their career from beginning to end, notably the Greek (with
which nevertheless it has so many important features in common),
it will bear no comparison, if only for the reason that it was
interrupted early, before it had produced all that it could have
produced. As to our language and poetry, they were sensibly
disturbed and hindered too, but they lived on, and could acquire
a new impetus ; the heathen faith was cut down to the root, and
its poor remains could only save themselves by stealth under a
new guise. Crude, unkempt it cannot but appear, yet the crude
has its simplicity, and the rough its sincerity.

In our heathen mythology certain ideas stand out strong and
clear, of which the human heart especially has need, by which
it is sustained and cheered. To it the highest god is a father
(p. 22), a good father, gofar (p. 167), gaffer, grandfather, who
grants salvation and victory to the living, and to the dead an
entrance to his dwelling. Death is a going home, a return to
the father (p. 839). By the side of the god stands the highest
goddess as a mother (p. 22), gammer, grandmother, wise and
white ancestress. The god is exalted, the goddess beaming
with beauty ; both go their rounds and appear in the land, he
instructing in war and weapons, she in spinning, weaving,
sowing of seed ; from him comes the poem, from her the tale.
The same paternal authority is deeply stamped on our ancient
law, the father taking the newborn son on his lap and acknow-
ledging him ; but what we read in some only of our ancient
codes, may have been the rule everywhere, namely, that the
composition paid to women was originally a higher, a double



Digitized by Google



xlviii



PREFACE.



one. The German reverence for woman was already known to
Tacitus (p. 397), and history vouches for it in the Mid. Ages :
in the heroic lays a greater stress is laid on Mother Uote than
on the father of the heroes, as Brunhild towers even above
Siegfried (see Suppl.). By the side of the beautiful description
of mother's love in the Vita Mahthildis (Pertz 6, 298) we can
put this touch by Rudlieb 1, 52 : ' Ast per cancellos post hunc
pascebat ocellos Mater/ as her son was departing. Whenever
in dry old Otfried I come to the lines iv. 32 : wir sin gibot
ouh wirk&n, inti bi unsa muater thenkSn (we his bidding also
do, and of our mother think), it moves me to melancholy, I
don't know whether he meant the church, or her that bore him,
I think of my own dear mother (Dorothea Grimm, b. 20 Nov.
1755, d. 27 May 1808). Another thing also we learn from the
oldest history of our people, that modesty and virtue had never
fled from the land ; beside Tacitus, we may rely on Salvian
(5 th cent.) as the most unimpeachable of witnesses. Be fined
grace might be wanting, nay, it has often retired before us, and
been washed out of remembrance ; to the Greeks Apollo, Pallas,
Aphrodite stood nearer, their life was brighter like their sky.
Yet Fr6 and Frouwa appear altogether as kind and loving deities,
in Wuotan I have produced the god of song, and as Wish he
may have been a god of longing and love. However many
blossoms of our old mythology and poetry may lie undisclosed
and withered, one thing will not escape the eye of a judge,
that our poesy still has virgin forms and unlaboured adornment
at her command, which, like certain plants, have disappeared
from hotter climes.

When the plastic and poetic arts have sprung out of a people's
faith, they adorn and protect it by imperishable works; yet
another fact must not be overlooked, that both poets and
artists insensibly deviate from the sanctity of the old type, and
adopt an independent treatment of sacred subjects, which, in-
genious as it may be, mars the continuity of tradition. The
tragedians will alter for their own ends what epic had handed
down entire; the sculptors, striving after naked forms of beauty,



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



xlix



will, in favour of it, sacrifice if need be the significant symbol ;
as they can neither bring in all the features of the myth, nor
yet find the whole of them sufficient, they must omit some
things and add others. Sculpture and the drama aim at making
the gods more conceivable to the mind, more human ; and
every religion that is left free to unfold itself will constantly
fall back upon man and the deepest thoughts he is capable of,
to draw from them a new interpretation of the revealed. As
in statues the rigid attitude unbent itself and the stiff folds
dropt away, so devotion too in her converse with deity will not
be needlessly shackled. In the same way language, even in the
hands of poets, declines from the sensuous perfection of poetry
to the rational independence of prose.

The grossness that I spoke of would have disappeared from
the heathen faith had it lasted longer, though much of the
ruggedness would have remained, as there is in our language
something rough-hewn and unpolished, which does not unfit it
for all purposes, and qualifies it for some. There goes with
the German character a thoughtful earnestness, that leads it
away from vanity and brings it on the track of the sublime.
This was noticed even by Tacitus, whose words, though discussed
in the book (p. 70-1, 104-5), will bear repeating: 'Ceterum
nec cohibere parietibus deos, neque in ullam humani oris speciem
a88imilare, ex magnitudine coelestium arbitrantur. Lucos ac
nemora consecrant, deorumque nominibus appellant secretum
illad, quod sola reverentia 'trident.' This is no empty phrase,
this ' arbitrantur ' and ' appellant ' must have come of inquiries,
which a Roman, if he wished to understand anything of the
Germani, had first of all to set a-going. That is how it actually
was in Germany at that time, such answer had German men
given, when asked about the temples and images of their gods.
Temples are first built to hold statues : so long as these were
not, neither were those. Anything mentioned in later centuries,
or occurring by way of exception among particular tribes, seems
to have been corruption and confusion, to which there was no
want of prompting. All the Scandinavian temples and idols

d



Digitized by Google



1



PREFACE.



fall into this later time, or they have their reason in the difference
of race.

That notable piece of insight shows us the whole germ of
Protestantism. It was no accident, but a necessity, that the
Reformation arose first in our country, and we should long ago
have given it our undivided allegiance, had not a stir been made
against it from abroad. It is remarkable how the same soil of
Old-German faith in Scandinavia and Britain proved receptive
of Protestant opinion ; and how favourable to it a great part of
France was, where German blood still held its ground. As in
language and myth, so in the religious leanings of a people
there is something indestructible.

Gods, i.e. a multiplication of the one supreme incomprehen-
sible Deity, could only be conceived of by Germans as by

»

others under a human form (p. 316), and celestial abodes like
earthly houses are ascribed to them. But here comes a differ-
ence, in this reluctance to exhibit the immeasurable (that magni-
tude coelestium) in visible images, and confine it between earthly
walls. To make a real portrait of Deity is clean impossible,
therefore such images are already prohibited in the Old Test,
decalogue; Ulphilas renders ctBwXov by galiug or galiuga-gu$
(lie-god), meaning that any representation of a god was a lie;
and the first christian centuries abhorred image-worship, though
it gradually found its way into the church again. The statues
of Greek gods, we know, proceeded originally from a sacred
type, which only by degrees became more secular ; the paintings
of the Mid. Ages, and even Raphael's great soul-stirring com-
positions, for want of such a type, were obliged to invent their
figures, the legend from which artists chiefly drew their subjects
being already song or story; accordingly these pictures stand
lower than the works of Greek art, and the spirit of Protestant-
ism insists on their being bundled out of the churches. But
if our heathen gods were imagined sitting on mountains and
in sacred groves, then our medieval churches soaring skyward
as lofty trees, whose sublime effect is unapproached by any
Greek pediments and pillars, may fairly bo referable to that Old



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



li



German way of thinking. Irmansul and Yggdrasill were sacred
trees, rearing their heads into the breezes : the tree is the steed
(drasill, the snorter) on which Wuotan, the bodeful thrill of
nature, stormfully careers: Yggr signifies shudder, thrill of
terror (p. 120, and Suppl.). By the Old German forest-worship
I also explain the small number of the priests, who only begin
to multiply in temples entrusted to their charge.

Of all forms of belief, the Monotheistic is at once the most
agreeable to reason and the most honouring to Deity. It also
seems to be the original form, out of whose lap to a childlike
antiquity Polytheism easily unfolded itself, by the loftiest
attributes of the one God being conceived first as a trilogy,
then as a dodecalogy. This arrangement comes out in all the
mythologies, and especially clear, I think, in ours : almost all
the gods appear unequal in rank and power, now superior, now
subordinate, so that, mutually dependent, they must all at last
be taken as emanations of a highest and only One. What is
offensive in polytheism is thereby diminished (p. 176). For
even in the heathen breast a consciousness of such subordination
could hardly be quite extinct, and the slumbering faith in a
highest god might wake up any moment.

To point out these groups of deities from our half dried-up
sources was beyond my power, but the threes and twelves of the
Edda are indicated, p. 335. The Greeks however differ in hav-
ing only one twelve, consisting of six gods and six goddesses,
while of the ases and asynjas there are twelve each, making to-
gether twice as many deities as the Greek. Twelve chairs are
set for the gods sitting in council (p. 858). Sometimes the
highest god has twelve inferiors added to him, which raises the
total by one : Loki is called the thirteenth among the gods, and
Gna among the goddesses. Snorri 211 b names thirteen ases, and
even more asynjas. These triads and twelves of the gods are
reflected again in the heroes and wise-women : Mannus begot
three sons, heads of races (p. 345. 395), Heimdall founded three
orders, the Ynglinga saga 2, 7 calls OSin's fellow-gods his
twelve princes (hofdingjar) ; Westmar has twelve sons (Saxo



Digitized by Google



Hi



PREFACE



Gram. p. 68); there were thirteen valkyrs (p. 421), aud three
norns. In Welf's retinue are twelve heroes (p. 395) ; king
Charles's twelve might indeed be traced to the twelve apostles,
and the poem itself points to that, but the same thing is found
in numberless myths and legends. The might of the godlike
king flashes forth yet again in his heroes.

To my thinking, Polytheism almost everywhere arose in in-
nocent unconsciousness: there is about it something soft and
agreeable to the feelings; but it will, when the intellect is
roused, revert to the Monotheism from which it started. No one
taunts the Catholic doctrine with teaching many gods, yet one
can see in what respect Catholics stand in the same relation to
heathens as Protestants do to Catholics. Heathenism bowed
before the power of pure Christianity ; in course of time heathen-
ish movements broke out in the church afresh, and from these
the Reformation strove to purify it. The polytheistic principle,
still working on, had fastened on two points mainly, the worship
of saints, of which I have spoken, and that of relics (conf. GDS.
p. 149). A stifling smell of the grave pervades the medieval
churches and chapels from an adoring of dead bones, whose
genuineness and miraculous power seem rarely well attested, and
sometimes quite impossible. The weightiest affairs of life, oath-
takings, illnesses, required a touching of these sanctities, and all
historical documents bear witness to their widely extended use,
a use justified by nothing in the Bible, and alien to primitive
Christianity (conf. p. 1179). But in idololatria and saint-worship
the dominion of the priesthood found its main stay.

Of Dualism proper I have acquitted our heathenism (pp. 895-6.
984). Unlike Polytheism, it seems to me to take its rise, not in
gradual corruption, but in conscious, perhaps moral, reflexion,
and at a later time. Polytheism is tolerant and friendly ; he to
whom all he looks at is either heaven or hell, God or devil,
will both extravagantly love and heartily hate. But here again
let me repeat, that to the heathen Germans the good outweighed
the bad, and courage faintheartedness : at death they laughed.

Between deifying much and deifying all, it is hard to draw the



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



liii



line, for even the most arrant Pantheism will admit some excep-
tions. The limit observed by the Greek and even the Norse
religion appears in those sets of twelve ; Personification indeed,
on which I have inserted a chapter, seems to dip into the domain
of Pantheism ; yet when elements and implements are thought of
as divine, they scarcely mean more than our old acquaintances,
the gods, presented in a new form : the air melts into Wuotan,
the hammer into Donar, the sword into Eor, and Saelde (fortune)
into Wuotan again. The human mind strives to conceive the
unfathomable depth of Deity in new and ever new ways. Some
would give our heathenism Fetishism for a foundation (p. 104);
the truth is, hammer, spear, flint and phallus were but symbols
of the divine force, of which there were other types, both material
and moral, equally valid. From thing to person, or from person
to thing, was in this matter but a step. As the gods change into
heroes and are born again, so they sink even into animals ; but
this precipitate of them would require certain explanations, which
I mean to complete once for all in a new treatment of the Beast-
fable. The faster the brood of deities multiplies, the sooner is
faith likely to topple over into denial and abuse of the old gods ;
striking evidences of such atheistic sentiment Scandinavia itself
supplies, both in undisguised mockery, and in reposing con-
fidence in one's own strength and virtue (p. 6). The former is
expressed in 0. Norse by go$g& (irrisio deorum), O.H. Germ,
kotscelta (blasphemia). And this revolt of heathens against
heathenism increased as Christianity came nearer: thus the
Nialssaga cap. 105 says of Hialti, that he was charged with
scoffing at the gods, ' varS sekr a )>ingi um go5g& ' ; conf. Laxd.
p. 180. Kristnisaga c. 9.

An element (oTot^eiov, inro<na<Ji<i) is firm ground, basis, for
which the Goth still has a good Teutonic name ' stabs ' ( = staff",
whence the Romance stoffa, e*toffe, and so our stuff" again), or
'sterna* (whence our ungestiim, OHG. ungistuomi, unquiet). It
meets the eye of man in all its glory, while deity remains unseen :
how tempted he must feel to give it divine honours 1 But his
senses and his mind link every exhibition of nature's forces with



Digitized by Google



llV PREFACE .

subjective impressions bodily and mental, the promptings of
language teach him to connect. How came Zio to unite in him-
self the ideas of sky and war ? The Gothic veihan meant pug-
nare, vamjo pugna, veihs sacer, veiha sacerdos (p. 68), the OHG.
wig pugna and Mars (p. 203) ; the hallowed, the holy was at the
same time the bright, the beaming. To the Gothic hveits cor-
responds the Skr. svetas (albus), to this the Slav, svety, sviatyi
(sanctus), and svet, swiat, svetlo signify mundus, coelum, lux.
But again Svetovit, Swan to wit, is Ares and bellum, and the
parallelism of Wuotan, Donar, Zio to Radigast, Perun, Svetovit
stands unquestionable : the god of victory shines in the battle.
To the Indians Suryas denotes the sun, light, day, and he re-
sembles Zio ; when Suryas is taking hold of a victim, it bites his
hand off, and. a golden one has to be put on : is not this Tfr,
whose hand the wolf bit off (p. 207) ? and who knows but the
like was told of the Slavic Svetovit ? It was beautiful to derive
the eye from the sun, blood from water, the salt flow of tears
from the bitter sea, and the more profound seem therefore the
myths of SiPs hair, of FreyjVs tears ; earth and heaven reflect
each other. But as even the ancient cosmogonies are inversions
of each other (pp. 568. 570, man made of world, world made of
man), we have no right to refer the heathen gods exclusively
either to astrology and the calendar, or to elemental forces, or to
moral considerations, but rather to a perpetual and unceasing
interaction of them all. A pagan religion never dropt out of the
clouds, it was carried on through countless ages by the tradition
of nations, but in the end it must rest on a mysterious revelation
which Accords with the marvellous language and the creation and
propagation of mankind. Our native heathenism seems not to
have been oppressed by gloomy fancies about the misery of a
fallen existence (like the Indian doctrine of emanation), it
favoured a cheerful fatalism (p. 860-1), and believed in a paradise,
a renovated world, deified heroes ; its gods resemble more those
of Greece, its superstition more that of Rome : f tanta gentium
in rebus frivolis plerumque religio est.'

The question has been gravely asked, whether the heathen



Digitized by Google



PREFACE.



lv



gods really existed ; and I feel disgust at answering it. Those 1
who believe in a veritable devil and a hell, who would born a
witch with a will, may feel inclined to affirm it, thinking to
support the miracles of the church by the evidence of this other
miracle, that in the false gods she had crushed actual fiends and
fallen angels.

Having observed that her Language, Laws and Antiquities
were greatly underrated, I was wishful to exalt my native land.
To me one labour became the other : what was evidence there
was also a confirmation here, what furnished a foundation hero
served there as a prop. Perhaps my books will have more in-
fluence in a quiet happy time which will come back some day ;
yet they ought to belong to the Present too, which I cannot
think of without our Past reflecting its radiance upon it, and on
which the Future will avenge any depreciation of the olden time.
My gleanings I bequeath to him who, standing on my shoulders,
shall hereafter get into full swing the harvesting of this great
field.

JACOB GRIMM.

Beblin, 28th April, 1844.



Digitized by (jOOqIc



CONTENTS.



VOL. III.

CHAPTER PAGES

XXX. Poetry . . 899—912

XXXI. Spectres 913—950

XXXII. Translation 951—983

XXXIII. Devil 984—1030

XXXIV. Magic. ....... 1031—1104

XXXV. Superstition 1105—1147

XXXVI. Sicknesses 1148—1189

XXXVII. Herbs and Stones 1190—1222

XXXVIII. Spells and Charms ..... 1223—1249

Index 1251—1276



Digitized by Google



Digitized by Google



CHAPTER XXX.
POETRY.

Maere however means not only fama, but fabula; and here
some other and more interesting personifications present them-
selves.

We perceive that the existence, organization and copiousness
of poetry, as of language itself, reach back to a remote antiquity,
that the resources and beauties of both gradually decay, and
have to be recruited in other ways. Ancient poetry was a sacred
calling, which bore a direct reference to the gods, and had to do
with soothsaying and magic.

Before our modern names dlchter (Ducange sub v. dictator)
and poet were imported from abroad, we had no lack of native
ones more beautiful. At first the inditing and uttering of poetry
seem to have gone together, the sdnger (OHG. sangari, MHG.
senger and singer) was likewise the poet, there was no question
as to who had made the song. Ulphilas calls the ahvv liufiareis
(OHG. liodari ?) ; and perhaps would distinguish him from the
saggvareis (praecentor). Again, aot^o? comes from a€t£a>, as
olSa from eiSa>, the digamma, ascertainable from video and Goth,
vait, being dropt; we must therefore assume an older afelSay
and a/oiSd?, 1 the singer and the godlike seer (jiavrts, Lat. vates)
are one. With this I connect the Goth, inveita (adoro, p. 29) ;
from the sense of celebrating in festive song, might proceed that
of worshipping. In the Slavic tongues slava is gloria, slaviti
venerari, slavik [0. Slav, slaviy, Russ. solovey] the glorifying
jubilant bird, as ar)Sa>v is from aeZ8a>, and our nahtigala from
galan, canere. If aoiSos means a seeing knowing singer, poet,
soothsayer, why may not a Goth, invaits, supposing there was
such a word, have expressed the same ?
When the creative inventive faculty, as in •jroirjrijs, i.e., faber

1 That t(8w I aee, and falSu I sing, both change « into w proves no connexion
between them, the change being common to many verbs (Xe/irw Xotiroj, xet/xai koIttj) ;
vates, at once seer and singer, in an important link. — Tiuss.

VOL. III. 699 B


Digitized by Google



900



POETRY.



(and our smid equally stood for the framer of the lied or lay, ON.
lioSa-smiSr), was to be specially marked, this was done by the
OHG. scuof, OS. AS. scop (p. 407-8 n.), which reminds at once of
the supreme Shaper of all things and of the shaping norn. The
ON. has no skopr 1 that I know of, but instead of it a neuter
skald, which I only grope after dubiously in OHG. (pp. 94. 649) ,
and whose origin remains dark; 8 skdldskapr, AS. sc6pcra?ft =
poesis. The Romance poetry of the Mid. Ages derived the name
of its craft from the Prov. trobar, It. trovare, Fr. trouver, 8 to
find, invent, and trobaire, trovatore, trouvere is 'inventor, as scuof
is creator. A word peculiar to AS. is gid, gidd (cantus, oratio);
Beow. 2124. 3446. 4205-12. 4304. 4888, or giedd, Cod. exon.
380. 25 [yeddynges, Chauc] ; giddian (canere, fari), Csodm.
127, 6. Cod. exon. 236, 8. Beow. 1253; gidda (poeta, orator) :
'gidda snotor/ El. 419. 'giedda snotor/ Cod. exon. 45, 2. 293,
20. Leo has traced it in the Ir. hat cit, git (carmen dictum). 4

A far-famed word is the Celtic bar d, Ir. bard, pi. baird, Wei.
bardh, occurring already in Festus: ' bardua Gallice, cantor qui
virorum fortium laudes canit.' Lucan's Phars., 1, 447 : f plurima
securi fudistis carmina bardi ; * the lark was called bardaea or
bardala (Ducange sub v.), songstress like arjboov, nahtigala and
slavik. No old authority gives a hint that such bards were
known to the language or customs of Germany (see Suppl.).

1 Bifirn gives a neut. skop (ironia, jocns), skoplegr (ridiculus, almost <TK(arrtx6i),
which might make one sceptical of the long vowel in AS. scdp, but this is used of a
lofty earnest poet in Beow. 179. 987. 2126, though sometimes of a coinicus, sccni-
cus. The OHG. salmscOf = psalmista, and the spelling scof scoffes (beside scaffan
scuofi) in Isidore does not disprove the long vowel, as the same document puts
blomo, blostar for bluomo, bluostar. An OHG. uo in scuof would remove all doubt,
but this I cannot lay my hand on. The gloss 1 scof, nubilar vel poesis ' seems to
connect two unrelated words which disagree in quantity, scop tugurium (our schop-
pen) and scoph poesis.

8 ON. sk&lda, Swed. sk&Ua, Dan. skolde, Dut. schouden =»glabrare ; with this
agrees the Fr. eschauder, echauder, M. Lat. excaldare (Ducange sub v.) to scald the
hair off. So that skald would be depilis, glaber (Enfcl. scald), bald-head, whether
it meant aged minstrel, or that poets shaved their heads ? Even scaldeih may
have signified an oak stript of foliage.

3 As there is no Latin root, we may suggest our own trefiVn, ON. drepa [drub] ,
lit. to strike, hit, but also (in antreffon) to hit upon, find. The Gothic may have
been drupan, as treten was trudan, which would account for the Romance o.

4 Malb. gl. p. 49, conf. Ir. ceat = canere, carmine celebrare. The question is,
whether, in spite of this Celtic affinity, the word is not to be found in other Teut.
dialects. We might consider ON. ge'S (mens, animus), OHG. ket, kett, keti, ketti
(Graff 4, 144), the doubling of the lingual being as in AS. bed, bedd, OHG. petti
(Goth, badi), or AS. biddan, OHG. pittan (Goth, bidjan). The meaning would be
a minding, remembering ; gotfspeki in S*em. 33 b is the wisdom of yore, inseparable
from poetry. 1 Gyd, gyddian' seems a faulty spelling : giedd shews the vowel broken.



Digitized by Google



SCOP. SKALD. GLEOMAN. GLEOCRiEFT. 901



Song, music and dance make glad (repirovai) the heart of man,
lend grace to the banquet (dvadrffiara &uto<?, Od. 1, 152. 21,
430), lulling and charming our griefs (fipor&v deX/err/pia, Od. 1,
337). God himself, when ailing, comes down from heaven, to
get cheered by the minstrel's lay (p. 331). Hence poetry is
called the joyous art, and song joy and bliss. We know the gai
saber of the trobadors ; and joculator, joglar, jongleur, is derived
from jocus, joc, jeu, play and pleasantry. Even the Anglo-
Saxons named song and music gleo (glee, gaudium), wynn (our
wunne, wonne), or dream (jubilum) : 'scop hwilumsang hador on
Heorote, )>a wses heele^a dream/ Beow. 987 ; ' gidd and gleo '
are coupled 4025; the song is called 'healgamen' (aulae gaudium),
the harp ' gamenwudu, gleobeam/ playing and singing 'gamen-
wudu gr^tan/ to hail, to wake the frolic wood, Beow. 2123.
4210; 'gleobeam gr6tan/ Cod. exon. 42, 9. ' hearpan gr&tan ' and
'hearpan wynne grGtan' 296, 11. Beow. 4029. Then, beside
gretan, there is used wrecan (ciere, excitare) : 'gid wrecan/ to
rouse the lay, Beow. 2123. 4304. 4888. 'gid awrecan' 3445.
4212. 'wordgid wrecan' 6338. 'geomorgidd wrecan/ Andr.
1548. The gleoman, gligman, is a minstrel, gleocrceft the gay
science of music and song. In Wigaloisp. 312 six fiddlers scrape
ail sorrow out of the heart ; if one could always have them by !
And Fornald. sog. 1, 315, says: "leika horpu ok segja sogur
sva at gaman j?aetti at." I will quote a remarkable parallel
from Finnish poetry. It is true, the lay is called runo, the poet
runolainen, and runoan to indite or sing, the song is laulu, the
singer laulaya, and laulan I sing; but in the epic lays I find
ilo (gaudium) used for the song, and tern iloa (gaudium cieo)
for singing 1 (see Suppl.).

A thing of such high importance cannot have originated with
man himself, it must be regarded as the gift of heaven. Inven-
tion and utterance are put in the heart by the gods, the minstrel
is god-inspired : Oecrirt^ aoiBij, Od. 1, 328. 8, 498. aoiSr) deairea-lr),
II. 2, 600. 0€Wt5 aoiSo? o tcev Tepir V <nv deiSav, Od. 17, 385.
Gods of the highest rank are wardens and patrons of the art
divine, Zeus and Apollo among the Greeks, with us Wuotan

■ ■ Tehessa isan iloa,' Kalew. 22, 236. 29, 227, the father (the god Wainamoi-
nen) was making (waking) joy -he sang ; 4 io kawi ilo ilolle ' 22, 215, joy oame to
joy = the song resounded, struck up.



Digitized by Google



902



POETRY.



and Bragr, Wainamoinen with the Finns. Saga was Wuotan's
daughter (p. 310), as the Muse was Zeus's ; Freyja loved the
minnesong : f henni likaSi vel mansongr/ Sn. 29.

On the origin of poetry the Younger Edda (Sn. 82 — 87) gives
at full length a myth, which the Elder had alluded to in Havam&l,
(Saem. 12. 23-4). Once upon a time the Aesir and Vanir made
a covenant of peace, and in token of it each party stept up to a
vessel, and let fall into it their spittle, 1 as atonements and treaties
were often hallowed by mingling of bloods (RA. 193-4) ; here the
holy spittle is equivalent to blood, and even turns into blood, as
the sequel shews. The token of peace (grrSamark) was too pre-
cious to be wasted, so the gods shaped out of it a man named
Kvdsir, of all beings the wisest and shrewdest. 1 This Kvasir
travelled far in the world, and taught men wisdom (frocSi, OHG.
fruoti). But when he came to the dwelling of two dwarfs, Fialar
and Galar (OHG. Filheri, Kalheri ?), they slew him, and let his
blood run into two vats and a cauldron, which last was named
OShrcerir, and the vats Son and Bo$n. Then the dwarfs mixed the
blood with honey, and of this was made a costly mead, 3 whereof
whosoever tasted received the gift of poesy and wisdom : he be-
came a skald or a froeffa-nmffr (sage). We came upon a trace
of this barrel of blood and honey among the dwarfs, p. 468.

Fialar and Galar tried to conceal the murder, giving out that
Kvasir had been choked by the fnlness of his wisdom ; but it was
soon reported that they were in possession of his blood. In a
quarrel they had with giant Suttungr, they were forced to give
up to him the precious mead, as composition for having killed
his father. Suttungr preserved it carefully in Hnitbiorg, and
made his daughter the fair Gunnlo^S keeper of it.

The gods had to summon up all their strength to regain
possession of the holy blood. OSinn himself came from heaven
to earth, and seeing nine labourers mowing hay, he asked them
if their scythes wanted sharpening. They said they did, and he

1 Hr&ki, better perh. liraki, is strictly matter ejected from the rachen (throat),
OHG. hracho, as the AS. hraca is both guttur and tussis, sputum ; conf. OHG.
hrachison scrcarc, Fr. craoher, Serv. rakati, Buss, kharkat'.

* Creatiug out of spittle and blood reminds one of the snow and blood in fairy-
tales, where the wife wishes for children ; of the snow-child in the Modus Liebinc ;
of the giants made out of frost and ice (pp. 440. 465) ; Aphrodite's being generated
out of sea-foam is a part of the same thing.

3 The technical term • inn dyri mio«r ' recurs in Sajm. 23 b . 28*.



Digitized by Google



A DRINK. OD-HRCERI.



903



pulled a whetstone 1 out of his belt, and gave thein an edge ; they
cut so much better now, that the mowers began bargaining for
the stone, but OSinn threw it up in the air, and while each was
trying to catch it, they all cut one another's throats with their
scythes. 8 At night OSinn found a lodging with another giant,
Suttuug's brother Baugi, who sorely complained that he had that
day lost his nine men, and had not a workman left. OSinn, who
called himself Bolverkr, was ready to undertake nine men's work,
stipulating only for a drink of Suttung's mead. 3 Baugi said the
mead belonged to his brother, but he would do his best to obtain
the drink from him. Bolverkr accomplished the nine men's work
in summer, and when winter came demanded his wages. They
both went off to Suttung, but he would not part with a drop
of mead. Bolverkr was for trying stratagem, to which Baugi
agreed. Then Bolverkr produced a gimlet named Rati,* and
desired Baugi to bore the mountain through with it, which
apparently ho did; but when Bolverkr blew into tha hole and
the dust flew back in his face, he concluded that his ally was iro
honester than he should be. He made him bore again, and this
time when he blew, the dust flew inwards. He now changed
himself into a worm, and crept in at the hole ; Baugi plunged
the drill in after him, but missed him. In the mountain Bolverkr
passed three nights with GunnloS, and she vowed to let him have
three draughts of the mead : at the first draught he drained
OShroerir, at the second Bo$n, at the third Son, and so he had
all the mead. Then he took the shape of an eagle, flew his
fleetest, and Suttungr as a second eagle gave chase. The Aesir
saw OSinu come flying, and in the courtyard of AsgarB they set
out vats, into which OSinn, hard pressed by Suttung, spat out
the mead, and thus it turned into spittle again, as it had been at
first. 5 The mead is given by OSinn to the ases, and to men

1 Hein, AS. han, Engl, hone, 8 wed. hen, Sskr. a' Ana.

2 Like Dr. Faust fooling the seven topers into cutting each other's noses off.

» Here 0*inn playa the part of Strong Hans (Kinderm. 90), or of Siegfried
with the smith.

4 Mentioned also in 8©m. 23 b ; evidently from , 4 rata ' permeare, terebrare,
Goth, vratdn, so that it would be Vraia in Gothic

* It is added : ' en honum var >a sva n«?r komit at Suttungr mundi nA honum,
at hann nendi aptr (behind) tuman mifitfinn, ok var bess ecki g®tt : hafSi Nit hverr
er vildi, ok kollum ver |<at skaldfifla lut (malorum poetarum partem) ' ; or, as
another MS. has it : 4 en sumum roepti hann aptr, hafa t»at akildfln, ok heitir arnar



Digitized by Google



904



POETRY.



that can skill of poesy. This explains the fluctuating names of
the poetic art : it is called Kudxis bloff (Kv. sanguis) ; dverga
drecka, fylli (nanorum potus, satietas) ; Offhrceris, Boffnar, Sonar
laug (0., B., S. aqua) ; Hnitbiarga laug (Hn. aqua) ; Suttungs
mibdr (S. mulsum) ; O&ins fengr, fundr, dryckr (0. praeda, in-
ventio, potus) ; O&ins gibf (0. donum) ; dryckr Asanna (Asarum
potus).

Some of these names are well worth explaining minutely.
Bo&n is rendered oblatio, Son reconciliatio : neither of them, at
all events when first used by the dwarfs, can have had any such,
meaning yet. We can easily connect bo$n with AS. byden,
OHG. putin (Graff 3, 87) ; son certainly agrees with the OHG.
suona (emendatio), not with Goth, saun (lytrum). Sasm. 118 b .
234* has 'Sonar dreyri ' in the sense of • sdnar dreyri/ atonement-
blood (conf. sonar goltr, p. 51). More meaning and weight at-
taches to the cauldron's name, which occurs also in Sa3m. 23 b . 28*.
88*, the l*st time spelt correctly. To explain the word, I must
Taention first, that a Goth. adj. v6j>a, dulcis, answers to OHG.
wuodi, OS. wothi, AS. weiSe, which is used alike of sweet smell
and sweet sound ; ' sw6g b®s wfrban sanges/ sonus dulcis canti-
lenae. And further, that an AS. noun wo$ (masc.) is carmen,
facundia : 1 wofta wynsumast/ carmen jucundissimum, Cod. exon.
358, 9. f wo$a wlitegast,' carmen pulcherrimum, El. 748. ' w65
wera/ prophetia virorum, CaBdm. 254, 23. 1 w6$bora ' (carmen
ferens), both as poeta, Cod. exon. 295, 19. 489, 17 and as orator,
propheta 19, 18. 346, 21. 'witgena woSsong/ cantus prophe-
tarum 4, 1. ' woocraeft,' poesis 234, 30. 360, 7 synon. with
the scopcraoffc and gleocraeft above. ' wynlicu wd$giefu/ jocun-
dum pocseoB donum 414, 10 alluding at once to the gay art and
to W6den's gift. Now, whether the sense of * sweet, gentle,' lav

leir (habent id mali poetae, et dicitur aquilae lutum),' because Oflinn flew in eagle's
shape. In Mart. Capella, before Athanasia will hand the immortalitatU poculum to
Philologia, * leniter dextera cordis ejus pulsum pectusque pertractat, ac nescio qua
intima plenitudine distentum magno cum turgore respiciens, Nisi haec, inquit,
quibus plenum pectus geris, coactissima egestione vomueris forasque diffuderis,

nmortalitatis sedem nullatenus obtinebis. At ilia omni nisu magnaque vi quic-
id intra pectus senserat evomebat. Tunc vero ilia nausea ac vomitio laborata in
nigenum copias oonyertitur litterarum. . . . Sed cum talia virgo undanter

.omeret, puellae quam plures, quarum artes aliae, ahae dictae sunt disciplinae,
subinde quae virgo ex ore diffuderat colligebant, in suum unaquaeque illarum neces-
sarium usum facultatemque corripiens.' What seemed too gross as yet for immor-
tality becomes here, when thrown up by the bride of heaven, the foundation of
human science. Conf. Aelian's Var. hist. 18, 22.



Digitized by Google



SONG-RAISER ? INSPIRATION.



905



in the noun wo$ itself, or was first developed in the derived adj.
(-which seems nearer the truth, as w65 in some passages of Cod.
exon. 118, 4. 125, 31. 156, 8 means only a loud sound, clamor,
without any reference to song) ; it is plain that to it corresponds
the ON. 6$r (also raasc), which denotes as well poema as in-
genium, facundia. In the former sense its agreement with the
!Lat. oda, Gr. p&i] (contr. from aoihrj), is purely accidental, as the
difference of gender sufficiently shews. It is remarkable that at
the creation of Askr and Embla, Sa3in. 3 b , Hoenir is said to have
imparted to them the lacking 63, which on p. 561 I translated
' reason ' : perhaps ' speech, gift of speech ' would be more cor-
rect ? 1 Be that as it may, Offhrcerir seems clearly to be ' poesin
ciens, dulcem artem excitans/ which is in striking harmony with
the AS. 1 gid wrecan 9 and Finn. ' teen iloa 9 above; hroera, OHG.
hruoran, MHG. riieren, means tangere, ciere, and the cauldron
would have been in OHG. Wuodhruori, AS. W65hre>e. FreyjVs
husband Offr (Saem. 5 b . Sn. 37), whom she sought through the
world and be wept with golden tears, may have been a personifi-
cation of poetic art ; 2 was he the same as Kvasir, who traversed
the world, and was murdered by the dwarfs ?

Thus OShrcerir contained the sweet drink of divine poesy,
which imparted immortality ; and from the exertions made by the
gods, particularly OSinn, to regain possession of it when it had
fallen into the hands of dwarfs and giants, follows its identity
with amrita, ambrosia and nectar (p. 317-9) ; the ichor in the
veins of gods is like the limpid spittle of the Ases and Vanes.

The pure bee, which has survived from Paradise, 3 brings the
honey of song to tho lips of the sleeps, p. 696 (see Suppl.) .

I cannot resist the temptation to add some more legends, of
how the inspiration of song came to great poets overnight in their r
sleep : the story of Pindar is told again of Homer and Aeschylus
under another form.

Helen is said to have appeared to Homer : \eyovai Si rives koX

1 Here, as elsewhere, the ON. dialect becomes unsafe for comparison, because
it confounds middle and final d with "S.

* The difficulty noticed in the preceding note forbids my inquiring whether
this 0$r be related to OSinn ; the AS. Woden and w6d (rabies) stand apart from
wofl (poe'sis), conf. supra p. 131-2.

1 Anc. laws of Wales 1, 739 : bees draw their origin from Paradise, which they
left through man's transgression, but God gave them his blessing; therefore muss
cannot be sung without wax. Leoprechting's Lechrain, p. 80.

Digitized by Google



906



POETRY.



rwv 'O/JLVpiBwv &»9 €7Tiara<Ta (EXevt}) ttjs WKrbs'Owpq) irpoaira^c
rrroielv wepl rwv aTpaT€vaap,ev(ov iiri Tpoiav, fiovXofiivrj tov i/ceivwv
Bdvarov ^rfKxDTOTepov rj tov fiiov rcov d\\wv Karaartjaau Kal
fiipos fiev ti Bia ttjv 'Opijpov rexvyv, fxaXiara Be Sia ravrrjv o{/t<o?
€7ra<pp68irov zeal irapa Traaiv 6vop.aarrjv avTOV yeveaOai ttjv irolrjciv
[Some of the Homeridee say, that Helena appeared to Homer by
night, and bade him sing of those who warred against Troy, she
wishing to make their deaths more enviable than other men's
lives. And that partly by Homer's art, but chiefly by her, his
poetry was made so lovely and world-renowned]. Isocr. 'jEJX.
iyKcofiiov in Oratt. Att. ed. Bekker 2, 245.

Bacchus revealed himself to Aeschylus : e<j>Tj Be Ala^yko^ peipd-
klov (ov KaOevBetv ev dyput <f>v\do-a<ov <rTa<f>v\a<{ Kal ol Aiovvcov
iiriaravra KeXevaat, TpaypBtav iroielv. m Bk rjv rjfxepa (weiOeaOai
yap edeXeiv) paaTa rjBrj Treipd>nevo<s iroielv. outo? pev ravra eXe-
yev [Aesch. said, that when a boy he foil asleep in the field while
watching grapes, and Dionysus appeared to him and bade him
write tragedy. In the morning, wishing to obey, he composed
quite easily as soon as he tried]. Pausan. i. 21, 2; paara, as
pela is said of the gods (p. 320).

As Aeschylus was watching the vineyard, Teutonic herdsmen
were pasturing sheep or oxen when the gift of Wuotan came to
them.

Hallbiorn had long wished to sing tho praise of a dead minstrel
Thorleif, but could not, until Thorleif appeared in the hush of
night, unloosed his tongue, and, just as he was vanishing, dis-
played his shoulder (p. 326). Fornm. sog. 3, 102.

The heathen myth was still applicable to christian poets. A
poor shepherd in his sleep hears a voice urging him without
delay to put the Scriptures into Saxon verso ; previously unskilled
in song, he understood it from that moment, and fulfilled his
commission, Opusc. Hincmari remensis (Par. 1615), p. 643. The
like is told in fuller detail of the famous AS. poet Cffldmon,
Beda's Hist. eccl. 4, 24 (Frau Aventiure p. 28-9). All these
poets, on awaking in the morning, succeed in a task untried
before (see Suppl.).

Not only does the poetic faculty itself proceed from the gods ;
they invent the very instruments by which song is accompanied.

Apollo, who in Homer plays the phorminx, is said by Calli-



Digitized by Google



t



INSTRUMENTS INVENTED. 907

macks to have strung the lyre with seven chords; yet the in-
vention of the lyre is ascribed to Hermes, who gave it to Apollo.
This is important for us, as in Wuotan there is much of Hermes
and of Apollo, with a preponderance of the former. Ingenuity
is characteristic of Mercury, and I can scarcely doubt that in our
antiquity, as Wuotan was the inventor of writing and rhythm, so
he was of some instrument to accompany singing.

A confirmation of this is the five-stringed harp (kantelo) of
the Finns, an invention of their highest god WainamOinen, who
everywhere represents our Wuotan. First he made kantelo of tlie
bones of a pike, and when it fell into the sea, he made it again
of birchwood, its pegs of oak bough, and its strings of a mighty
stallion's tail. In the same way Hermes took the tortoise (chelys)
out of its shell, and mounted this with strings (Hymn to Merc.
24 seq.). Swedish and Scotch folksongs relate, that when a
maiden was drowned, a musician made a harp of her breastbone,
the pegs of her fingers, the strings of her golden hair, and the
(first) stroke of the harp killed her murderess, Sv. folk v. 1, 81.
Scott's Minstr. 3, 81. In one kinderm. no. 28 a bone of the slain
brother is made into a shepherd's whistle, and every time it is
blown, it publishes the crime ; and a Swiss legend tells the same
of a flute (Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 36). The power of music and
song was explained by giving the instruments a supernatural
origin, and doubtless a remoter antiquity did not leave gods out
of the reckoning.

When Wainamoinen touches his harp, the whole of nature
listens, the four-footed beasts of tho wood run up to him, the
birds come flying, the fish in the waters swim toward him ; tears
of bliss burst from the god's eyes, and fall on his breast, from
his breast to his knees, from his knees to his feet, wetting five
mantles and eight coats, Kalew. rune 22-9. Such tears are shed
by Freyja (gratfbgr, p. 325), her that well liked song, and was
wedded to OSr ; in fairytales lucky maidens have the power to
laugh roses and weep pearls.

The stromharl also breaks into weeping when he sings to the
harp (p. 493). But as all nature, animate and inanimate, betrays
her sympathy with human lamentations, so at the sound of the
bewitching albleich (elf-lay, p. 470), we are told, the rushing
river stayed its roar, the fish in the wave clicked with their



Digitized by Google



908



POETRY.



tongues, the birds of the forest twittered. Next to the gods, it
is elves and watersprites that seem the most initiated into the
mysteries of music, and Hnikarr the teacher of song Btands for
OSinn himself (p. 489).

But from gods the gift of poesy passed to particular heroes,
and similar effects are ascribed to their minstrelsy. Two heroes
of Teutonic legend are eminent as minstrels : Horant (Herrant,
AS. Heorrenda, ON. Hiarrandi, conf. Gramm. 1, 352. Z. f. d. a.

2, 4), of whom it is said in Gudr. 388-9 that by his songs he
chained all men whole and sick, and that

diu tier in dem walde ir weide liezen st£n,
die wiirme di da solten in dem grase ge*n,
die vische die da solten in dem wage vliezen,
die liezen ir geverte ;

beasts let be their grazing, creeping things and fishes forsook
their wonted ways. The saga HerrauSs ok Bosa (Fornald. sog.

3, 323) couples the Hiarranda-hlioft with the enchanting g^gjar
slagr (giantess's harp- stroke). Then the hero Yolker (Folhheri)
plays the fiddle to the Nibelungs 1772 :

under die ture des buses saz er uf den stein,

kiiener (bolder) videlaere wart noch nie dehein :

do klungen sine seiten (strings), daz al daz hus erdoz (rang),

sin ellen zuo der fuoge (art) diu warn beidiu gr6z.

Biiezer unde senfter gigen er began :

do entswebete er an den betten vil manegen sorgenden man ;

he lulled to sleep in their beds full many an anxious man. In
Greek mythology Orpheus and Amphion bear mastery in song.
When Amphion sang, the stones obeyed his lyre, and fitted them-
selves into a wall. Rocks and trees followed after Orpheus, wild
beasts grew tame to him, even the Argo he lured from dry land
into the wave, and dragons he lulled to sleep (entswebete). As
Herm65r, like him, made the descent to Hades [to fetch Balder
back], and as it is for this same Balder that ail beings mourn,
we may fairly suppose that HermoSr too had worked upon them
by music aud song, though nothing of the kind is recorded in the
Edda (see Snppl.).

Now if poetry was a joint possession of men and gods, if by



Digitized by Go



HERO-MINSTRELS. 909

gods it had been invented and imparted, it necessarily follows
that antiquity would regard it as a function and business of the
priest, and that the notions of priest, prophet and poet would
meet and touch. Aud here I attach some weight to our finding
the AS. word bregowine (pp. 93. 235), which seems to indicate a
follower and friend of the poet-god Bragi, as we at the present
day call the minstrel a friend or favourite of the Muses. In
lands and times that looked kindly on the tuneful art, we may
even suppose that minstrels, especially those of courts, had like
priests a peculiar garb ; particularly instructive on this point is
the information furnished by the Welsh Laws as to the position
and privileges of bards at the king's court, and the Norse sagas
are unanimous on the estimation in which skalds were held.
Poets of the Mid. Ages enjoyed a like distinction at princely
courts, both Teutonic and Romance ; and a close investigation of
this interesting subject might bring out much in our modern
customs, that has its source in the very oldest time 1 (see
Suppl.).

I call attention to utterances of MHG. poets, which repre-
sent the art of song as something not acquired, but inborn, i.e.
inspired by God (a sentiment as old as Homer, Od. 22, 347 :
avroBiBaxro^ 5* eipi, $€0<i he fioi to <f}pealv otpa? iravroias
ivtyvae). Heinr. von Morunge 1, 53* says : 'wan ich durch
sane (for song) bin ze der werlte geborn/ it is a burden laid on
him, his mission. Walther 26, 4, referring to God : ' sit ich von
dir beide wort hun unde wise.' The Wartb. kr. jen. 102: 'gab
iu Got sinne und sanges site.' Even the later Meistersiinger
speak to the same purpose : ' es trieb der Heilig Geist zwolf
manner froh, die fiengen an zu dichten.' Why should not
heathen poets in like mannor have traced back their gifts to
Wuotan's mead ?

The singing-matches also seem to have sprung out of the
simplest nature of poetry itself. As the wise men of old ques-
tioned one another on their knowledge, as heroes proved on each

1 Niebuhr in Pref. to Merobaudea gays : ' quern morem coronandorum poetarum
cum potisi ipsa, oui semper aliquis honos mansit, etiam rudibus, quae secutae sunt,
eaeculis perdurasse arbitror.' But why go back to the Romans for what seems to
have been the usage of our own antiquity, when kings, judges, priests, heroes and
minstrels wore garland and fillet, and even the people's poets used to elect a king
of their own? ' Au j>ui ott on corutu les biaus disco or,' llenars 1677.



Digitized by Google



910



POETRY.



other the prowess of their arms, so shehperds and poets sang for
the prize of poetry. OSinn wishes to sound the wisdom (orSspeki)
of the sage giant, Vingborr that of the sage dwarf, the blind
guest 1 that of king Hei$rekr ; then lays are sung and riddles pro-
pounded, VafbHVSnir expressly stipulating ' hofSi vefcja vi$ scolom
hollo i, gestr, um geflspeki/ Sasm. 33 b ; they are to wager heads,
as in the contests between cunning smiths or chess-players.
Lives are staked also in the Wartburg war of minstrels : ' nu wirt
gesungen ane vride . . . stempfel muoz ob uns nu beiden stan alhie
mit sinem swerte breit, er rihte ab unser eime in roubes site,
dem man valles jehe ! ' we'll sing and give no quarter . . . over us
two shall stempfel stand with his broad sword, and despatch as
an outlaw him that gets the fall. This transaction is of legend,
not history, but it shews in what a serious light the poetic art
was viewed.

And here let me mention the widely circulated myth of the poet
who sees his property imperilled, because another's memory has
mastered his songs. What passed between Virgil and Bathyllus
is related, with alterations, of Arnoldo Daniello and a jongleur
(Diez's Leben der troub. p. 352), but so it is of the Indian Kali-
dasa, whose poem four Brahmans had learnt by heart. The same
Kalidasa and Valmiki were held to be incarnations of Brahma
himself ; what could more firmly establish a poet's reputation
than to pass for an avatara of the sublime divinity?

The gods share their power and influence with goddesses, the
heroes and priests with wise women. Of the asynjor, Sasja is
named next after Frigg in Sn. 36, and together with Sol in 212 ;
her residence is Sokqvabeckr, sinking beck, a large and roomy
place ; Sagones (Saga's ness) in Ssem. 154 b seems also to take its
name from her. In S»m. 41* Socqvabeckr is described as a place
where cool waters rush : there Offinn and Saga day by day drink
gladly out of golden cups. This is the drink of immortality, and
at the same time of poesy. Saga may be taken as wife or as
daughter of OSinn ; in either case she is identical with him as
god of poetry. With the Greeks the Musa was a daughter of
Zeus, but we often hear of three or nine Muses, who resemble our
wise women, norns and schopferins (shapers of destiny), and dwell

1 OSinn himself ; whose blindness fits in with that of the ancient poets. The
loss of eyes strengthens the memory, it lends the capacity and impulse to sing.



Digitized by Google



SAGA.



911



beside springs or wells. 1 The cool flood well befits the swan-
wives, daughters of Wish. Saga can be no other than our sago
(saw, tale), the ' maere ' of p. 897 personified and deified.

Our 13th cent, poets personify ' aventiure/ making a J rail
Auentiure, like the norn, foot it overland to the minstrel's hut,
knock and demand admission. 2 To this day, when people take
turns in telling stories, they say 1 the marlein goes round from
honse to house.' Suchenwirth no. xxv describes an apparition
of dame Aventiure on a blooming ea in the forest; she has
travelled through the land to kings and princes as frau Eh re' 8
messenger, and now presents her report; putting a gold ring on
her finger, she disappears. I have one thing more to mention,
that M.Nethl. poets make a person of 'aventure' in the sense
of our MHG. frau Sselde : ' die Aventure wacht,' Maori. 2, 14.
* dat rat (rota) van Aventuren,' Rein. 6183, just like * diu Sffllde
wacht' and 'Sffilden rat' (p. 863-8). I am not aware that in this
they followed the pattern of any Romance poetry (see Suppl.).

That 'passing round' or alternate telling of myth and miirchen
was already a Greek and Roman custom, as we may see by
Ovid's Met. lib. iv, where the Minyads during their spinning aud
weaving beguile the time by telling tales, 39 :

' Utile opus manuum vario sermone levemus,
perque vices aliquid, quod tempora longa videri
non sinat, in medium vacuas referamus ad aures.'
dicta probant, primamque jubent narrare sorores.

167 : Desierat, mediumque fuit breve tempus, et orsa est
dicere Leuconoe, vocem tenuere sorores.

274: Poscitur Alcithoe, postquam siluere sorores.

But it was the festival of Bacchus, the priest had bidden them
keep it, ' immunes operum dominas famulasquo suorum,' and tho
god avenged himself by turning their web into a tissue of vines
and ivy, and the Minyads into owls and bats. (The song of
women at the loom is also mentioned by Agathias, p. 29.) Holda
and Berhta are often angry at spinning which desecrates their

1 O. Boh. glosses in Hanka 55*> : 4 xcodna - musa ' (Jangm. 5, 147). Is thiB
water-wife, spring-wile ?

* Refs. given in my little work quoted above, p. 310. To these add, from
Ulr. von Turheim's Wh. 192* , a dialogue of the poet with frau Aventiure.



Digitized by Google



912



POETRY



holy day (pp. 270-4), though otherwise they favour and reward it.
The norns making visitations have spindles, and they sing at
their spinning: the wise women and divine mothers of onr
antiquity may be regarded as teachers of song, story and
spindle.



Digitized by Google



CHAPTER XXXI.



SPECTRES.

A preceding chapter has treated of Souls in their state of
separation from the body and passage to another dwelling-place :
these are the souls that have found their rest, that have been
taken up into hades or heaven. Thenceforward they sustain only
a more general connexion with earth and the living ; their
memory is hallowed by festivals, and in early times probably by
sacrifices. 1

Distinct from these are such spirits as have not become par-
takers, or not completely, of blessedness and peace, but hover
betwixt heaven and earth, and in some cases even return to their
old home. These souls that appear, that come back, that haunt,
we call spectres (ghosts) .

The Roman expression for peaceful happy spirits of the dead
was manes, for uncanny disquietiug apparitions lemures or larvae;
though the terms fluctuate, for ' manes ' can denote spectral
beings too, and ' lemures ' can have a general meaning (Creuzer's
Symb. 2, 850 — 866). Larva betrays its affinity to lar (p. 500),
and the good kindly lares were often held to be manes or souls
of departed ancestors. So in our German superstition we find
instances of souls becoming homesprites or kobolds, 2 and still
oftener is there a connexion between unquiet spirits and spec-
tres 3 (see Suppl.).

• Between the christian All-touh* day (Nov. 2), on which the people visit
churchyards and hang garlands on graves, and the three Roman holidays when the
under world opened (munilit* patet) and the 1 manes ' ascended (Creuzer 2, 865. O.
Miiller's Etrask. 2, 97), there is a manifest connexion. On the night of Nov. 2 tho
Efithonians set food for the dead, aud rejoice when they find any of it gone in the
morning. In the Fellin district near Dorpat the departed touU are received in the
bath-room, and bathed one after the other, Hupel's Nachr. p. 144, conf. Possart's
Eatland p. 172-3 ; exactly as food i$ net before angels and homesprites (p. 448).

J I confine myself here to one Hessian folktale. Kurt, a farmer at Hachborn,
wonld not quit the farm even after his death, but lent a hand in the fieldwork as
a good spirit. In the barn he helped the labourer to throw sheaves from the loft :
when the man threw one, Kurt would throw another. But once, when a strange
servant got up into the loft, he would not help ; at the cry 1 You throw, Kurt 1 ' he
seized the man and flung him on the thrashingfloor, breaking his legs.

■ Isengrim changes into Agemund (p. 511).

913



Digitized by Google



914



SPECTRES.



For the quiet spirits and their condition, our language has a
beautiful adj., OHG. hiuri laetus, mitis, AS. heoru, Beow. 2744,
ON. hyr, MHG. gehiure, our geheuer when we say 'es ist
geheuer,' all is quiet, happy, peaceful. The contrary is ex-
pressed by OHG. and OS. unhiuri dirus, saevus, AS. unheortt,
Beow. 1967 (unhiore 4822. unh^re 4236. Caedm. 138, 5), ON.
ohyr, MHG. ungehiure, our ungeheuer : ' es ist ungeheuer,' there's
something wrong. But both words go further, God is called
hiuri, the devil unhiuri; ungeheuer is monstrutn, portentum in
general. The Gothic form would be hiuris, which seems nearly
allied to hailri (pruna, ember), ON. hyr ignis, and is therefore
the shining, the bright ; if an OHG. gloss in Graff 4, 1014 be
correct, even the non-negative hiuri may signify dirus, viz. fiery
in a bad sense, such as we shall find presently in connexion with
ignes fatui. Much the same in meaning with hiuri and unhiuri
are holdo and unholdo (pp. 266. 456), though these are applied
more to spirits and daemons than to human souls ; yet Notker
renders 'manes' by unholdon, so that holdo and unholdo also
appear synonymous here.

The OHG. kispanst fem. (our gespenst n., spectre) meant
properly suggestio (from spanan, suggerere) ; but as the forms
of confession dealt much with devilish suggestion and entice-
ment, 1 men came to use it habitually of ghostly delusion and
illusion. Boner 94, 54 has ' diu gespenst ' (why not gespanst ?)
for phantom, apparition. The neuter is found in the Msere vom
schretel und wazzerber 92 quite in the above connexion: 'des
tiuvels valant und sin gespenste ' ; even earlier, Herbort 3500
couples gespenste and getwas. Keisersperg (Omeiss 39) has
des teufels gespenst (praestigium) : not till recent centuries did
the term become really common, and some spelt it gespengst?

We also say spuk ; it is a LG. word, which first occurs in the
Chron. saxon. (Eccard p. 1391) in the form spokne ; Detmar 1,
136 has spuk, and 2, 206 vorspok praesagium. Nowadays spok,
Nethl. spook, spookzel, Swed. spoke, Dan. spohmis a.d. 1618,
sjibgelse spectrum, spog jocus; we should therefore expect a
MHG. spuoch, Mod. spuch, but it is nowhere to be found.

1 * Von des teufels gespenste,' instigation, Oberlin's Bihtebuoch 36.
Frisch 2, 302* ; but he thinks it conn, with Lat. $pectrum.



Digitized by Google



SPECTRES



915



Gc spile indeed stands in Berthold, Cod. pal. 35, fol. 27 b (see
Suppl.).

More precise is the ON. aptrgdnga fem., Laxd. saga p. 224, as
if anima rediens, Dan. gienfdrd, gienganger, Fr. revenant, Saxo
Gram. 91 says redivivus ; conf. our phrase 'es geht urn,' some-
thing haunts (lit. goes about) ; 1 at hann gengi eigi dauSr/ that
he walk not when dead, Fornald. sog. 2, 846. To haunt is in
L. Sax. dwetern, on the Harz walten (Harry's Volkss. 2, 46) .

The regular word in ON. is draugr, Fornm. sog. 3, 200 :
OSinn is styled ' drauga dr6ttinn/ Yngl. saga cap. 7, and a
gravemound draugahus, Saem. 169*. The word is lost in
Sweden and Denmark, but lives in the Norweg. drou, droug
(Hallager 20 c ). It seems to be of one root with OHG. gitroc,
MHG. getroc, delusive apparition, phantom, used of elvish and
fiendish beings (p. 464); but our verb triegen, OHG. triokan
trdc (fallere) has no corresponding driuga in the Northern lan-
guages. 1 The Edda uses the analogous svik (fallacia, fraus)
likewise in the sense of a ghostly jugglery, Sam. 166 b . 167*.
And that is also the meaning of the terms gi&cin and sctnleih
quoted p. 482 ; they can refer to spectres as well as to wood-
sprites (see Suppl.).

The glosses yield a number of old words for the Lat. larva.
To begin with the earliest, the Florent. 982 b gives talamasga,
and the later M.Nethl. coll. (Diut. 2, 220) talmasge, Kilian too
has talmasche larva, talmaschen larvam induere; it is the O.Fr.
ialmache, tamasche in Roquefort, who explains it as masque, faux
visage, and ' talmache de vaisseau ' is a 6gure fixed on a ship. 3
Other glosses have flathe, and scraz, scrat (p. 478). Mummel is
both larva and kobold (p. 506). Anything uncanny and alarm-
ing, monstrum, prodigium, portentum, praestigium, acquires the
meaning of spectre too. Again, getwds (p. 464), Herbort 842.
12856. 'ein b6se getwas, Vom gelouben 530; the M.Nethl.
ghedwaes, Hor. belg. 6, 249 agrees with the Lith. dwase, spectre
[v. the LS. verb dwetern above]. In Martina 10 we read ' daz



1 AS. dreogan dre&h, though answering letter for letter, never means fallere,
but agere, patrare, tolerare, to dree ; agreeing with ON. driugr, frequens.

3 Ducange Hub. v. talamatca, rtrfta, delusio imaginaria ; the author, cited are
Bincmar in capit. ad presb. dioec. cap. 14 ; llegino 1, 213 ; Burchardus wormat. 2,
161, who says: 'larvas daemon um, quas vulgo talamasca* dicunt, ante se ferri
consentiat.' Extr. from ConoiL namnetenae cap. 10 ; conf. Schmeller 2, 610.

VOL. III. C



Digitized by Google



916



SPECTRES.



ge8chrudel; 9 and in Staid. 2, 27. 59. 64 das nachthuri, das gJtudi.
The ON. vofa is spectrum, from vofa ingruere, imminere ; the
draugr is also called a dolgr, foe, Fornald. sog. 2, 368. Foram.
sog. 3, 200, and from this perhaps comes the Upland doddljor,
manes dofunctorum (Ihre's Dial. lex. 32 b ), if not from djlja
(celare), Sw. dolja (see Suppl.).

Now it is remarkable that even the ON. draugar are described
as begirt with fire : 1 hauga eldar brenna/ Fornald. sog. 1, 434.
' lupu upp haaga eldarnir' 1, 518. Loka daun (p. 242) is the
Icel. name of a fiery exhalation. To this day it is the popular
belief all over Germany, that souls which have not attained
heavenly peace roam at night like bewildered birds, in fiery
shape, 1 on field and meadow, conf. wiesenhiipfer p. 829. The
traveller, who takes them for village lights, they lure out of his
way, now approaching, now retiring : they perch on his back like
kobolds (Superst. I, 611), and flap their wings together over him
(Deut. sag. no. 276) ; they lead into bogs, on deceptive devious
tracks, hirrlig-spor (St. 2, 45), exactly like the butz, p. 507.
The pedestrian tries to keep one foot at least in the carriage-rut,
and then he gets on safely, for ignes fatui have power on foot-
paths only. According to Villemarque^s Barzasbreiz 1, 100 the
spirit is a child with a firebrand in his hand, which he whirls
round like a flaming wheel ; now he appears as a sick horse, and
when the herdsman would lead him into the stable, hurls the
brand at his head ; now as a bleating goat gone astray, that after
sundown shews itself on the pond, and tempts the traveller into
the water, then scampers off to tease him. In Etner's Unwiird.
doctor p. 747, ' fire-men and frisking goats 1 are coupled together.
The phenomenon has a vast variety of names. Our com-
monest one is irliclU (err-light) and, from its resemblance to a
burning wisp of straw, irwisch and on the Rhine heerwisch ; in
Austria feuriger mann and fuchtelmann (Hofer 1, 251) from
fuchteln to burnish or jerk to and fro, viz. the fiery blade. 8 In

1 In Lausitz the ignis lambens that plays about the tops of forest trees is called
feuermann, Laus. monatsschr. 1797. p. 749.

* These fiery exhalations also settle on the masts of ships, Marienleg. 87, 96, or
the spear* of warriors. The former kind the ancients named after the Dioscuri,
Pliny 2, 37, the moderns call it * feu de St. Elme.' For the flaming spears I have
old authorities : • signa (also, pila) militum arsere,* Tac. Ann. 12, 64. 15, 7. ' duae
puerornm lanceae, emissis flammis, lumen euntibus praebuerunt, ibantque ful-
gurantes hastae,' Greg. tur. mirac. Mart. 1, 10. And a modern instance in Zeiller's



Digitized by Google



WILL O' THE WISP.



917



Pictorius p. 524 zeusler from zeuseln, ziiseln to toy with fire ; other-
wise ziinsler, ziindler, and in Fischart's Garg. 231 zunsel-gespcnst,
conf. Hofer sub v. zinserl. In Low Germ, gloiniger (glowing)
man; tiickebold, tukkebode, not from tiicko malice, bat from tuk a
quick movement (Reinh. p. 109) or k zucken to dart to and fro,
conf. HG. ziebold butterfly ; in Westph. smalgenfiir, which I can
hardly make out. More generally known are dwerlicht (whirl-
ing flame) ; elflichi ; dwellicht (from dwelen, dwalen to stray) ;
Nethl. dwaallicht ; droglicht (deceptive again), drogfackel, and
in Nassau druckfackel, Kehrein's Nas. 31-2. Dan. lygtemand
(lantern-mau), blaasmand (Molbech's Dial. 39) and viitte-lys
(light of wights, sprites) ; Swed. lys-eld, lyktgubbe ; Engl., with
that fondness for christening which we noticed under home-
sprites (p. 504), Will with a wisp, Jack in a lanthorn. Lat.
ignis fatuus (Ann. corbei. an. 1034) ; Fr. feu follet (follis, p. 508),
fifollet (Pluquet's Contes p. 13), farfadet, sauterai, also, acc. to
Mem. des ant. 4, 406, a uuela incomprehensible to me. Sloven.
vezha (butterfly, witch), sMcopnik, -niak (straw-man, from shkopa,
MHG. schoup), sinotava (from smota, error), slep ogeni (blind
fire) ; svetylko (light, dim.), bludicka (from blud, error) ; Pol.
blednica ; Laus. bludne swieczke ; Russ. bludidshchiy ogoni. I do
not know any very old names even in Teutonic languages, unless
it be irreganc and girregar in a Konigsberg MS. (Grundr. 345) ;
but Irreganc in Ls. 2, 314 is the name of a wandering scholar,
and irrefogel in Haupt's Zeitschr. 1, 438 means the same, conf.
Schm. 3, 588; the Titurel 576 has ' ein irregengel vor allem
valsche.' The two words vatte-lys and elf-licht, shewing a close
connexion with wights and elves, are perhaps the oldest we have.
Sindri (scintilla), a dwarfs name in the Edda, Seem. 7 b , suggests
the Slav homesprite Iskrzycki (iskra spark, p. 513). A story
is told of an irivisch getting caught, and a groat many more
coming soon after to claim him back : this represents them as an
elvish people, who stick to one another. 1

Miscell. (Niirnb. 1661) p. 143-4. Deut. sag. no. 279. None of these refer to souls,
they are rather happy omens of victory, as will be shewn in ch. XXXV. Shooting
ttan indeed pass for sonls (p. 722), even with the Oreenlanders (Major's Myth,
lex. 2, 240) and Mongols (Bergmann 3, 42).

1 Ad. Kahn (Pref. to Mark, sagen p. ix) is for regarding all kobolds as orig.
fire-divinities, and the domestic hearth-fire as the foundation of their worship.
Both kobolds and will o' wisps are called follet (p. 508-14), and kobolds, like fiery
dragons (p. 691), bring money or corn ; but the adder too is of kobold nature
(p. 691), and the dominae bring gifts (p. 287), and st> do devils.



*



Digitized by Google



918



SPECTRES



Will o* wisps had once, no doubt, a wider meaning, which has
now been narrowed down mainly to two classes of unblessed
spirits, the souls of unchristened babes, 1 and those of men who in
their lifetime dealt wrongly by the cornfield, who respected not
the sacredness of landmarks. 8 Unrighteous land-surveyors (Swed.
skiall-vriingare) may be seen hovering up and down the furrows
with a long fiery pole, as if re-measuring the wrongly measured ;
whoso has ploughed of his neighbour's land, whoso has moved
the mark-stone, on him falls the curse of wandering as a will
o* wisp. Hence about ploughing debatable strips, one hears
the people say: 'ik mag niit spuken gan/ conf. Deut. sag.
nos. 284-5. Thiele 1, 58 (see Suppl.).

Another class of spectres will prove more fruitful for our
investigation : they, like the ignes fatui, include uncJiristened
babes, but instead of straggling singly on the earth as fires,
they sweep through forest and air in whole companies* with a
horrible din. This is the widely spread legend of the furious
host, the furious hunt, which is of high antiquity, and interweaves
itself, now with gods, and now with heroes. Look where you
will, it betrays its connexion with heathenism.

The Christians had not so quickly nor so completely renounced
their faith in the gods of their fathers, that those imposing
figures could all at once drop out of their memory. Obstinately
clung to by some, they were merely assigned a new position
more in the background. The former god lost his sociable cha-
racter, his near familiar features, and assumed the aspect of a
dark and dreadful power, that still had a certain amount of influ-
ence left. His hold lost upon men and their ministry, he wan-
dered and hovered in the air, a spectre and a devil.

I have already affirmed on p. 132 a connexion between this
wutende heer and Wuotan, the god being linked with it in name

1 Braunschw. anz. 1760 no. 86, 35. Praetorii Weltbeschr. 1, 262-9. Laus.
monatss. 1797 p. 747. So far back as the Anegenge 180". 190 b : 'wA mit din armen
cbindelin daz fiiccr haben geschoufet, diu d& ungetoufet &n i r schulde scheidcnt von
hinne ; ' but here the fire of purgatory is meant.

* Ungerechte subnet, Moser's Patr. phant. 8, 809. 'filrig marcher,' will o*
wisps, in Hebel's poem. Mone's Anz. 1835, 408. 1838, 223. Westendorp p. .ill.

* Yet there are some brausende getiter (blustering spirits) that go singly too,
as ' jungfer Eli • in the Davert, Deut. sag. no. 121. Their name of 4 braus. g.' is
vouched for by Plitt's Nachr. yon Wetter p. 42.

\

\

m

Digitized by Google



FURIOUS HOST I WUOTAN.



919



as in reality. An unprinted poem of Rudiger von Munir con-
tains among other conjuring formulas 'bi Wuotunges her J
Wuotunc and Wuotan are two names of one meaning. Wuotan,
the god of war and victory, rides at the head of this aerial
phenomenon ; when the Mecklenburg peasant of this day hears
the noise of it, he says'de Wode tiit (zieht)/ Adelung sub v.
wiithen ; so in Pomerania and Holstein, ' Wode jaget/ W. hunts
(p. 156). Wuotan appears riding, driving, hunting, as in Norse
sagas, with valkyrs and einheriar in his train; the procession
resembles an army. Full assurance of this hunting Wode's
identity with the heathen god is obtained from parallel phrases
and folktales in Scandinavia. The phenomenon of howling wind
is referred to OSin's waggon, as that of thunder is to Thor's.
On hearing a noise at night, as of horses and carts, they say
in Sweden ' Oden far forbi.' 1 In Schonen an uproar produced
perhaps by seafowl on November and December evenings is
called Odens jagt.* In Bavaria they say nacht-gejaid or nacht-
gelait (processio nocturna), Schm. 2, 264. 514; in German
Bohemia nacht-goid = spectre, Rank's Bohmerwald pp. 46. 78. 83.
91. In Thuringia, Hesse, Franconia, Swabia, the traditional
term is ' das wiitende heer,' and it must be one of long standing :
the 12th cent, poet of the Urstende (Hahn 105, 35) uses f daz
wuettinde Iter 9 of the Jews who fell upon the Saviour ; in Rol.
204, 1 6 Pharaoh's army whelmed by the sea is ' sin wotigez her/
in Strieker 73 b ' daz wiietunde her 9 ; Reinfr. v. Brnswg. 4 b ' daz
wiietende her' ; Mich. Beheim 176, 5 speaks of a 'crying and
whooping (wufen) as if it were das wutend her * ; the poem of
Henry the Lion (Massm. denkm. p. 132) says, 'then came he
among daz wbden her, where evil spirits their dwelling have.'
Geiler v. Keisersperg preached on the wiitede or wiitische hter?
H. Sachs has a whole poem on the wiitende heer f Agricola and
Eiering relate a Mansfeid legend. It is worth noticing, that acc.

1 Loccenii Antiq. sveog. cap. 3. Geijer Sv. hafd. 1, 268.
* Nilsson's 8kandinavisk fauna 2, 106.

s Omeiss 36 seq. ; his description deserves a place here : ' And they that so
run, run mostly at the fron-fasts, and chiefly at the fron-fast before Christmas, that
is the holiest tide. And every one runneth as he is in his raiment, the peasant as
a peasant, the knight as a knight, so run they in a string, and one beareth the kros
before him, another hi.* head in his hand, and one runneth before, that crieth, Flee
out of the way, that God give thee thy life 1 Thus speak the meaner sort thereon.
I know nought thereof.'



Digitized by Google



920



SPECTRES.



to Keisersperg all who die a violent death ' ere that God hath set
it for them/ and acc. to Superst. I, 660 all children dying un-
baptized, come into the furious host to Holda (p. 269), Berhta
and Abundia (p. 288), just as they turn into will o' wisps (p.
918) : as the christian god has not made them his, they fall due
to the old heathen one. This appears to me to have been at
least the original course of ideas (see Suppl.).

While in this connexion the meaner sort long cherished the
thought of Wuotan, or conveniently stowed him away in a cog-
nate verb ; it was quite in the regular course of things that the
more cultivated should from an early time put the devil in his
place. ' Si bliesen unde gullen, vreisliche si hullen, s6 daz diu
helle wagete, alse der tuvel da jagete,' says Veldeck in En. 3239.
Caesarius heisterb. 12, 20 tells of a vain woman, who had herself
buried in fine new shoes, and whose soul was therefore hunted by
the infernalis venator : ' ex remoto vox quasi venatoris terribiliter
buccinantis, necnon et latratus canum venaticorum praecedentium
audiuntur.' 1 ' der tiuwel hat uz gesant sin geswarme und sin her,'
Rol. 204, 6. ' der tiuvel und sin her,' Renn. 2249. 2870. The
people in Bavaria say that on Ash-wednesday the devil chases the
little wood-wife, Superst. I, 914 b . With the devil is associated
the figure of an enormous giant, who can stand for him as well
as for Wuotan ; and this opinion prevails in Switzerland. There
the wild hunt is named diirsten-gejeg (see durs, Jmrs, p. 521) : on
summer nights you hear the durst hunting on the Jura, cheering
on the hounds with his hoho ; heedless persons, that do not get
out of his way, are ridden over. 2 Schm. 1, 458 quotes an old
gloss which renders by duris durisis the Lat. Dis Ditis, and
plainly means a subterranean infernal deity.

In Lower Saxony and Westphalia this Wild Hunter is identified
with a particular person, a certain semi-historic master of a hunt.
The accounts of him vary. Westphalian traditions call him

i Joach. Camerarii Horae subsec. cent. 2. cap. 100 p. 390 : Ceterom negari non
potest, diabolum varia ludibria cam alias turn praesertim in venatione leporum
aaepenumero exercere, cam nonnanqaam appareant tripedet claudicantes et igntis
oculis, illisque praoter ruorem dependentibus villis, atqne venatoree insequentes
abducere student vel ad praecipitia vel ad paludosa aliaque periculosa loca. Imo
visa sunt phantatmata et in terra et in nubibus integral v< nationes cum canibas,
retibas, clamoribus raucis tamen, aliisque instruments venaticis iustituere, prae-
ferentia form as hominum longe ante defunctorum.

5 Ildef. v. Arx, BuchBgau p. 230. Staid. I, 208.



Digitized by Goog



FURIOUS host: hackelbernd.



921



Hackelbdrend, Hackelbernd, Hackelberg, Hackelbloch This HackeU ^
barend was a huntsman who went a hunting even on Sundays,
for which desecration he was after death (like the man in the
rnoon, p. 717) banished into the air, and there with his hound he
must hunt night and day, and never rest. Some say, he only
hunts in the twelve nights from Christmas to Twelfth-day ;
others, whenever the storm-wind howls, and therefore he is called
by some the jol-jager (from yawling, or Yule Once, in a
ride, Hackelberg left one of his hounds behind in Fehrmann's barn
at Isenstadt (bpric. Minden). There the dog lay a whole year,
and all attempts to dislodge him were in vain. But the next
year, when Hackelberg was round again with his wild hunt, the
hound suddenly jumped up, and ran yelping and barking after
the troop. 8 Two young fellows from Bergkirchen were walking
through the wood one evening to visit their sweethearts, when
they heard a wild barking of dogs in the air above them, and a
voice calling out between ' hoto, hoto t 9 It was Hackelbloch the
wild hunter, with his hunt. One of the men had the hardihood to
mock his * hoto, hoto.' Hackelblock with his hounds came up, and
set the whole pack upon the infatuated man ; from that hour not
a trace has been found of the poor fellow. 8 This in Westphalia.
The Low Saxon legend says, Hans von Hackelnberg was chief +
master of the hounds to the Duke of Brunswick, and a mighty
woodman, said to have died in 1521 (some say, born that year, died
1581), Landau's Jagd 190. His tombstone is three leagues from
Goslar, in the garden of an inn called the Klepperkrug. Ho had
a bad dream one night ; he fancied he was fighting a terrific boar
and got beaten at last. He actually met the beast soon after, and
brought it down after a hard fight ; in the joy of his victory he
kicked at the boar, crying 1 now slash if you can ! * But he had
kicked with such force, that the sharp tusk went through his
boot, and injured his foot. 8 He thought little of the wound at
first, but the foot swelled so that the boot had to bo cut off his

1 Weddigen's Westfal. mag. vol. 3, no. 18.
9 Redeker's Westfal. sagen, nos. 48 and 47.

* ' Siguier iarl drap MelbrigSa Tdnn, ok b&tt hoftrS hans vvS slagdlar per oc
slant kykqva vtfSva sinom a tonnina, er ska'Si or hofSino, kom >ar i bl&str i f6tinn,
oc feck hann af hvi bana,' Har. saga ens harf. cap. 22. Gundarich the son of
Thassilo dies of a wound in his calf inflicted by a boar, MB. 13, 504-5. Conf.
Orion's fate, end of this chapter.



Digitized by Google



922



SPECTRES



leg, and a speedy death ensued. Some say he lies buried at
Wiilperode near Hornburg. 1 This Hackelnberg ' fatsches' in
storm and rain, with carriage, horses and hounds, through the
Thiiringerwald, the Harz, and above all the Hackel (a forest
between Halberstadt, Groningen and Derenburg, conf. Praet.
weltb. 1, 88). On his deathbed he would not hear a word about
heaven, and to the minister's exhortations he replied : ' the Lord
may keep his heaven, so ho leave me my hunting ; ' whereupon
the parson spoke : 'hunt then till the Day of Judgment ! ' which
saying is fulfilled unto this day. 2 A faint baying or yelping of
~ hounds gives warning of his approach, before him flies a night-
- owl named by the people Tutosel (tut-ursel, tooting Uraula).
Travellers, when he comes their way, fall silently on their faces,
and let him pass by; they hear a barking of dogs and the hunts-
man's ' huhu ! ' Tutosel is said to have been a nun, who after
her death joined Hackelnberg and mingled her tuhu with his
huhu? The people of Altmark place a wild hunter named Hakke-
berg in the Dromling, and make him ride down by night with
horses and hounds from the Harz into the Dromling (Temme,
p. 37). Ad. Kuhn no. 17 calls him Hackenberg and Hackelberg :
he too is said to have hunted on Sundays, and forced ail the
peasants in his parish to turn out with him ; but one day a pair
of horsemen suddenly galloped up to him, each calling to him to
come along. One looked wild and fierce, and fire spirted out of
his horse's nose and mouth; the left-hand rider seemed more
quiet and mild, but Hackelberg turned to the wild one, who
galloped off with him, and in his company he must hunt until the
Last Day. Kuhn has written down some more stories of the
wild hunter without proper names, nos. 63. 175. There are others
again, which tell how Hackelberg dwelt in the Soiling, near
Uslar, that he had lived in the fear of God, but his heart was so
much in the chase, that on his deathbed he prayed God, that for
his share of heaven he might be let hunt in the Soiling till the
Judgment-day. His wish became his doom, and oft in that forest
one hears by night both bark of hound and horrible blast of horn.

1 Otmar'e Volkasagen 249. 250.

3 Like Diimeke's desire to drive his waggon for ever (p. 726).
3 Otmar 241. Dent. sag. no. 311. Conf. Goth. >iutan (ululare), >ut-ha<irs
(tuba).



Digitized by Google



furious host: hackelbernd.



923



His grave is in the Soiling too, the arrangement of the stones is
minutely described; two black hounds rest beside him. 1 And *~
lastly, Kuhn's no. 205 and Temme's Altmark p. 106 inform us of
a heath-rider Barm, whose burial-place is shewn on the heath .
near Grim nit z in the Ukermark; this Baren's dream of the stumpf-
schwanz (bobtail, i.e. boar) points unmistakably to Haekelbarend.

The irreconcilable diversity of domiciles is enough to shew,
in the teeth of tombstones, that these accounts all deal with a
mythical being : a name that crops up in such various localities
must be more than historical. I am disposed to pronounce the
Westpb. form Hackelberend the most ancient and genuine. An
OHG. hahhul [Goth, hakuis], ON. hokull m. and hekla f., AS.
hacele f., means garment, cloak, cowl, armour ; 3 hence hakol-
berand is OS. for a man in armour, conf. OS. wapanberand (ar-
miger), AS. asscberend, garberend, helmb., sweordb. (Gramm. 2,
589). And now remember OSin's dress (p. 146) : the god ap-
pears in a broad-brimmed hat, a blue and spotted cloak (hekla
bla, flekkott) ; hakolberand is unmistakably an OS. epithet of the .
heathen god Wodan, which was gradually corrupted into EackeU *
berg, Hackenberg, Hackelblock. The name of the Hac&eJ-wood
may be an abbrev. of Hakelbernd's wood. The ' saltus Ilakel 9
in Halberstadt country is mentioned first in the (doubtful)
Chron. corbeiense ad an. 936 (Falke p. 708) ; a long way off,
hard by Hoxter in the Auga gau, there was a Haculesthorp
(Wigand's Corv. giiterb. p. 94. Saracho 197. Trad. corb. 385)
and afterwards a Hackelbreite ; then in L. Hesse, a Hackelsberg
near Volkmarsen, and a IlackelbeTg by Merzhausen (bailiw. Wit-
zenhausen). But if a hakel=*wood can be proved, the only trace
of a higher being must be looked for in berand, and that may bo
found some day ; in ch. XXXIII. I shall exhibit Hakol in the ON.
Hekla as mountain, hence wooded heights, woodland. In any
case we here obtain not only another weighty testimony to
Woden-worship, but a fresh confirmation of the meaning I attach
to the ' wiitende heer ' ; and we see clearly how the folktale of
Hackelberg came to be preserved in Westphalia and L. Saxony

1 Kirchhors Wendunmut no. 283, p. 342. Deut. sag. no. 171. The Braun-
schw. anz. 1747, p. 1940 Bays the wild hunter Hackelnberg lies in the Steinfeld,
under a stone on which a mule and a hound are carved.

» OHG. miasa-hahal (casula).St. Gall gl.^03 ; misse-hachil, Gl. herrad. 185 b is
mass- weed, chasuble, Graff 4, 797.



Digitized by Google



924



SPECTRES.



(where heathenism lasted longer) rather than in South Germany
(yet see Habsberg, Hagelberg, Mone's Anz. 4, 309. Eachihtat,
Graff 4, 797).

That the wild hunter is to be referred to Wodan, is made per-
fectly clear by some Mecklenburg legends.

Often of a dark night the airy hounds will bark on open heaths,
in thickets, at cross-roads. The countryman well knows their
leader Wod, and pities the wayfarer that has not reached his
home yet ; for Wod is often spiteful, seldom merciful. It is only
those who keep in the middle of the road that the rough hunter
will do nothing to, that is why he calls out to travellers: ' midden
in den weg ! '

A peasant was coming home tipsy one night from town, and
his road led him through a wood ; there he hears the wild hunt,
the uproar of the hounds, and the shout of the huntsman up in
the air : ' midden in den weg ! 9 cries the voice, but he takes no
notice. Suddenly out of the clouds there plunges down, right
before him, a tall man on a white horse. ' Are you strong? ' says
he, ' here, catch hold of this chain, we'll see which can pull the
hardest.' The peasant courageously grasped the heavy chain, and
up flew the wild hunter into the air. The man twisted the end
round an oak that was near, and the hunter tugged in vain.
• Haven't you tied your end to the oak ? ' asked Wod, coming
down. 'No/ replied the peasant, 'look, I am holding it in my
hands.' ' Then you'll be mine up in the clouds,' cried the hunter
as he swung himself aloft. The man in a hurry knotted the chain
round the oak again, and Wod could not manage it. 1 You must
have passed it round the tree/ said Wod t plunging down. f No,'
answered the peasant, who had deftly disengaged it, ' here I have
got it in my hands.' 1 Were you heavier than lead, you must up
into the clouds with me.' He rushed up as quick as lightning,
but the peasant managed as before. The dogs yelled, the waggons
rumbled, and the horses neighed overhead ; the tree crackled to
the roots, and seemed to twist round. The man's heart began
to sink, but no, the oak stood its ground. r Well pulled ! ' said
the hunter, 'many's the man I've made mine, you are the first
that ever held out against me, you shall have your reward.' On
went the hunt, full cry : hallo, holla, wol, wol ! The peasant was
slinking away, when from uns'een heights a stag fell groaning at



Digitized by Goog



FURIOUS host: wuotan.



925



his feet, and there was Wod, who leaps off his white horse and
cuts up the game. ' Thou shalt have some blood and a hind-
quarter to boot/ ' My lord/ quoth the peasant, 'thy servant has
neither pot nor pail/ ' Pull off thy boot,' cries Wod. The man
did so. ' Now walk, with blood and flesh, to wife and child/
At first terror lightened the load, but presently it grew heavier
and heavier, and he had hardly strength to carry it. With his
back bent double, and bathed in sweat, he at length reached his
cottage, and behold, the boot was filled with gold, and the hind-
qnarter was a leathern pouch full of silver. 1 Here it is no human
hunt-master that shows himself, but the veritable god on his
white steed : many a man has he taken up into his cloudy heaven
before. The filling of the boot with gold sounds antique.

There was once a rich lady of rank, named fran Oauden ; so
passionately she loved the chase, that she let fall the sinful word,
* could she but always hunt, she cared not to win heaven/ Four-
and-twenty daughters had dame Oauden, who all nursed the same
desire. One day, as mother and daughters, in wild delight,
hunted over woods and fields, and once more that wicked word
escaped their lips, that 'hunting was better than heaven,' lo,
suddenly before their mother's eyes the daughters' dresses turn
into tufts of fur, their arms into legs, and four-and-twenty bitches
bark around ihe mother's hunting-car, four doing duty as horses,
the rest encircling the carriage ; and away goes the wild train
up into the clouds, there betwixt heaven and earth to hunt un-
ceasingly, as they had wished, from day to day, from year to
year. They have long wearied of the wild pursuit, and lament
their impious wish, but they must bear the fruits of their guilt
till the hour of redemption come. Come it will, but who knows
when ? During the twolven (for at other times we sons of men
cannot perceive her) fran Oauden directs her hunt toward human
habitations ; best of all she loves on the night of Christmas eve
or New Year's eve to drive through the village streets, and where-
ever she finds a street-door open, she sends a dog in. Next morn-
ing a little dog wags his tail at the inmates, he does them no
other harm but that he disturbs their night's rest by his whining.
He is not to be pacified, nor driven away. Kill him, and he turns

1 Liach, Mecklenb. jahrbuch 6, 78—80.



Digitized by Google



926



SPECTRES



into a stone by day, which, if thrown away, comes back to the
house by main force, and is a dog again at night. So he
whimpers and whines the whole year round, brings sickness and
death upon man and beast, and danger of fire to the house ; not
till the twoluen come round again does peace return to the house.
Hence all are careful in the twelves, to keep the great house-door
well locked up after nightfall ; whoever neglects it, has himself
to blame if frau Qauden looks him up. That is what happened
to the grandparents of the good people now at Bresegardt.
They were silly enough to kill the dog into the bargain ; from
that hour there was no • sag und tag ' (segen bless, ge-deihen
thrive), and at length the house came down in flames. Better
luck befalls them that have done dame Qauden a service. It
happens at times, that in the darkness of night she misses her
way, and gets to a cross-road. Gross-roads are to the good lady
a stone of stumbling : every time she strays into such, some part
of her carriage breaks, which she cannot herself rectify. In this
dilemma she was once, when she came, dressed as a stately dame,
to the bedside of a labourer at Boeck, awaked him, and implored
him to help her in her need. The mau was prevailed on, followed
her to the cross-roads, and found one of her carriage wheels was
off. He put the matter to rights, and by way of thanks for his
trouble she bade him gather up in his pockets sundry deposits
left by her canine attendants during their stay at the cross-roads,
whether as the effect of great dread or of good digestion. The
man was indignant at the proposal, but was partly soothed by
the assurance that the present would not prove so worthless as
he seemed to think ; and incredulous, yet curious, he took some
with him. And lo, at daybreak, to his no small amazement, his
earnings glittered like mere gold, and in fact it was gold. He
was sorry now that he had not brought it all away, for in the
daytime not a trace of it was to be seen at the cross-roads. In
similar ways frau Qauden repaid a man at Conow for putting a
new pole to her carriage, and a woman at Gohren for letting into
the pole the wooden pivot that supports the swing-bar : the chips
that fell from pole and pivot turned into sheer glittering gold.
In particular, frau Qauden loves young children, and gives them
all kinds of good things, so that when children play at fru Qauden,
they sing :



Digitized by Google



FURIOUS HOST: WUOTAN. 927

fru Gauden hett mi'n lammken geven,
darmitt sail ik in freuden leven.

Nevertheless in course of time she left the country ; and this
is how it came about. Careless folk at Semmerin had left their
street-door wide open one St. Silvester night ; so on New-year's
morning they found a black doggie lying on the hearth, who
dinned their ears the following night with an intolerable whining.
They were at their wit's end how to get rid of the unbidden guest.
A shrewd woman put them up to a thing : let them brew all the
house-beer through an ' eierdopp/ They tried the plan ; an egg-
shell was put in the tap-hole of the brewing-vat, and no sooner
had the 1 worp ' (fermenting beer) run through it, than dame
Gauden' 8 doggie got up and spoke in a distinctly audible voice :
' fk bun so old as Bohmen gold, iiwerst dat heff ik min leder nicht
truht, wenn man 't bier dorch 'n eierdopp brunt/ after saying
which he disappeared, and no one has seen frau Gauden or her
dogs ever since 1 (see Suppl.).

This story is of a piece with many other ancient ones. In the
first place, frau Gauden resembles frau Holda and Berhta, who
likewise travel in the 1 twelves/ who in the same way get their
vehicles repaired and requite the service with gold, and who
finally quit the country (pp. 268, 274-6). Then her name is that
of frau Gaue,frau Gode f frau Wode (p. 252-3) who seems to have
sprung out of a male divinity fro Woden (p. 156), a matter which is
placed beyond doubt by her identity with Wodan the wild hunter.
The very dog that stays in the house a year, Hakelberg's
(p. 921) as well as frau Gauden's, is in perfect keeping. The
astonishment he expresses at seemingly perverse actions of men,
and which induces him, like other ghostly elvish beings, to
speak and begone, is exactly as in the stories given at p. 469.

At the same time the transformation of the wild hunter into
goddesses appears to be not purely arbitrary and accidental, but
accounted for by yet other narratives.

E. M. Arndt 2 tells the tale of the wild hunter (unnamed) in the
following shape : In Saxony there lived in early times a rich and
mighty prince, who loved hunting above all things, and sharply

I Lisch, Meckl. jb. 8, 202—5. In the Prignitz they tell the same story of frau
Gods, Ad. Kuhn no. 217.

a Marcben and jugenderinnerungen 1, 401—4.



Digitized by Google



928



SPECTRES



punished in his subjects any breach of the forest laws. Once
when a boy barked a willow to make himself a whistle, he had his
body cut open and his bowels trained round the tree (RA. 519-20.
690) ; a peasant having shot at a stag, he had him fast riveted to
the stag. At last he broke his own neck hunting, by dashing up
against a beech- tree ; and now in his grave he has no rest, bat
must hunt every night. He rides a white horse whose nostrils
shoot out sparks, wears armour, cracks his whip, and is followed
by a countless swarm of hounds: his cry is 'wod wod, hoho,
hallo \' 1 He keeps to forests and lonely heaths, avoiding the
common highway; if he happens to come to a cross-road, down
he goes horse and all, and only picks himself up when past it ; he
hunts and pursues all manner of weird rabble, thieves, robbers,
murderers and witches.

A Low Saxon legend of the Tilsgraben or devil's hole between
Dahlum and Bokenem (Harrys 1, 6) says, the wild knight Tils was
so fond of the chase that he took no heed of holidays, and one
Easter Sunday he had the presumption to say ' he would bring a
beast down that day if it cost him his castle.' At evening the
cock crew out that the castle would sink before night ; and soon
after it sank in the lake with all that was in it. A diver once on
reaching the bottom of the lake, saw the ritter Tils sitting at a
stone table, old and hoary, with his white beard grown through tlie
table.

In the Harz the wild chase thunders past the Eichelberg with
its 1 hoho ' and clamour of hounds. Once when a carpenter had tbo
courage to add to it his own ' hoho,' a black mass came tumbling
down the chimney on the fire, scattering sparks and brands about
the people's ears : a huge horse's thigh lay on the hearth, and the
said carpenter was dead. The wild hunter rides a black Jieadless
horse, a hunting-whip in one hand and a bugle in the other ; his
face is set in his neck, and between the blasts he cries 'hoho
hoho ; * before and behind go plenty of women, huntsmen and
dogs. At times, they say, he shews himself kind, and comforts
the lost wanderer with meat and drink (Harrys 2, 6).

In Central Germany this ghostly apparition is simply called
the wild huntsman, or has some other and more modern name

1 * Hoho, woit gut ! ' AW. 3, 144-5. Both icod and tooit seem to me to refer to
W6dan, Wuotou, as exclamations are apt to contain the names of gods.



Digitized by Google



FURIOUS HOST.



929



attached to him. By Wallrod near Schliichtern in Hanau country
are seen tall basaltic crags standing up like ruins : there in former
times was the wild man's house, and you may still see his grey
gigantic figure make its rounds through the forest, over heath and
field, with crashing and uproar (conf. 432. 482). A Thuringian
story contains (and in a clearer form) that Bavarian chase after
the holzweiblein. The wild hunter pursues the moss-folk, the
little wood-wives 1 ; he remains unseen, but you hear him bluster in
the air, so that it 'crickles and crackles.' A peasant of Arntsch-
gerente near Saalfeld had the impudence, when he heard
shouting and the bark of dogs in the wood, to put in his tongue
and mimic the huntsmen's cry : the next morning he found the
quarter of a litth moss-wife hung up outside his stable door, as if
to pay him for his share in the hunt. 3 ' Dixerunt majores nostri,
tempore melioris et probioris aevi, concubinas sacerdotuin in aere a
daemonibuSf non alitor quam feras sylvestres a canibus venaticis,
agilari atque tandem discerptas inveniri : quod si hominum quis-
piam haec [hanc ?] audiens venationem suo clamore adjuverit, illi
partem vel membrum concubinas dissectum adjanuam domus mane
a daemonibu3 suspensum/ Bebelii Facetiae (Tub. 1555) p. 11*.
Here the wood-wives are replaced by priests' wives, but the same
may already have been done in the 13th cent, folktale. Our
German tradition says nothing about the reason why the airy
hunter pursues the wood-wife; 8 among the people of Upper
Germany the wild women themselves play a leading part in the
* twelve nights,' and in Lent they are part and parcel of this

i These moosleute and holzweibel belong to the class of wood-sprites (p. 483),
forming a link between them and dwarfs ; it is Voigtland legend that knows mo-it
about them. They look like three-year old children, keep on friendly terms with
men, and make them presents. They often help at haymaking, feed cattle, and sit
down to table with men. At flax-harvest the countryman leaves three handfuls of
flax lying in the field for the hoUweibel (conf. pp. 448. 509) ; and in felling trees, dur-
ing the brief time that the noise of the falling tree lasts, he marks three crosses on the
trunk with his axe : in the triangle formed by these crosses the holzwoibel sit and
have respite from the wild hunter, who at all times is shy of the cross (oonf. Dent,
sag. no. 47). But Voigtland tradition makes the wild hanter himself have the
figure of a small man hideously overgrown with moss, who roamed about in a narrow
glen a league long (Jul. Schmidt 140). In the Riesengebirg the night-spirit is said
to cbase before him the rUttelweibchen, who oan only find protection under a tree
at the fulling of which the words * Oott wait's ! * (not ' wait's Gott ! ') were uttered,
Deat. sag. no. 270.

* Deut. sag. no. 48. Jul. Schmidt p. 143 ; conf. no. 301, where the dwarf hangs
a chamois before the huntsman's door.

* See below, the story from Boccaocio and that of Gronjette.



Digitized by Google



930



SPECTRES.



heathenish spectredom. Even among the Vicentine and Veronese
Germans, the keenest sportsman will not venture on the track of
game at the seasons just mentioned, for fear of the wild man and
the wood-ivife. No herdsman will drive cattle out, the flocks and
herds are watered in the stable, children fetching the water in
earthen vessels from the nearest spring. For the wood-wife the
women spin a portion of hair (flax) on their distaffs, and throw it
in the fire as a peace-offering to her (Hormayr's Tyrol 1, 141).
The legend of the wild hunt extends to the Ardennes, and Wolf
in his Niederl. sagen nos. 516-7 (conf. p. 706) justly lays stress on
the fact that the object hunted is usually the boar, that a wood-
cutter who had taken part in the hunt was a whole fortnight salt-
ing boar's flesh ; which reminds us of the boar of the einheriar
(pp. 318, 386), the caro aprina, and the roast boar in the legend
of Walther (Waltharius p. 105) ; and Hackelberg's dream (p. 921)
is about the boar (see Suppl.).

The people dread having to do with these powerful spirits, and
whoever breaks through this backwardness pays for it heavily.
The Westphalian peasant (p. 921) fared worse than he of Saalfeld ;
so did a tailor in the Miinsterland. When the wild hunt swept
over his house, he mocked the hunter by repeating his huhu f Mif-
klaf after him ; then a horse's foot came through the window, and
knocked him off his table, while a terrible voice rang out of the
air : ' willstu mit rair jagen, sollst du mit mir knagen (gnaw) ! *
DS. no. 309. A girl at Delligsen by Alfeld (Hildesheim
country) tells the tale : Mine mutter vertelle, dat de lielljager
dorch de luft ejaget herre (had been hunting) un jimraer eraupen
' ha ha ! tejif, tejaf, tejaf ! 1 De knechte (labourers) tau Hohne
ut'n ganzen dorpe keimen eins avens to hope, un brochten alle
de hunne (dogs) ut'n dorpe mit, urame dat se den helljager wat
briien wollen. Da kumte ok dorch de luft en ejaget, un wie hei
ropt ' ha ha ! ' sau raupt de knechte ok ' ha ha ! ' un wie de
hunne in'r luft jilpert, sau jilpert un bleft de hunne ut'n dorpe
ok alle ; do smitt de helljager on wat herunner (somewhat down to
them) un schriet : ' wil ji mit jagen, so konn ji ok mit gnagen !'
Ans se den annern (next) morgen tau seien dauet (went to see),
wat on de helljager henne smetten herre, da ist'n olen per-
schinken (an pld gammon of boar)/ An Austrian folktale in
Ziska's Marchen p. 37 tells of another fellow who, when the



Digitized by Google



FTJBIOUS HOST.



931



wilde gjoad swept past, had the audacity to beg for a piece of
game to roast ; the same in a Nethl. story, Wolf no. 259. On
the other hand, a W. Preussen tale in Tettau and Temme no.
2t>0 says, on the Bullerberg in the forest of Skrzynka, Stargard
circuit, the wild hunter carries on his operations on Bartholomew's
night, and once he flung a man's thigh out of the air into the
Lead forester's carriage, with the words : 1 Somothing for you
oat of our hunt ! '

A Meissen folk-tale calls the spectre Hans Jagenteufel and
pictures him as a man booted and spurred, in a long grey coat,
with a bugle over his back, but no head, riding through the
wood on a grey horse, DS. no. 309. They also tell of a wild
hunter named Mansberg, of what district I do not know.
Swabian stories about Elbendrbtsch** 1 hunting, about the
Mnotes heer 2 , I should like to know more fully ; the castle of
junker Marten, a wild hunter of Baden, stood at the village of
Singen by the Pfinz, and his tombstone is shewn in a chapel on
the way to Konigsbach ; the people in the Bahnwald see him at
night with his dogs (Mone's Anz. 3, 363). Johann Hiibner the
one-eyed, rides at midnight on a black horse, DS. no. 128.
Other tales of S. Germany give no names, but simply place at
the head of the wild host a white man on a white Itorse (Mone's
Anz. 7, 370. 8, 306) ; an old lord of a castle rides a white
horse, which may be seen grazing the meadows, ibid. 3, 259, just
as Oden pastured his steed (p. 155n.). Even Michel Beheim
(born 1416) made a meister-song on Eberhart, count of Wirten-
berg, who hears in the forest a 'sudden din and uproar vast,'
then beholds a spectre, who tells him the manner of his damna-
tion. When alive he was a lord, that never had his fill of
hunting, and at last made his request unto the Lord to let him
hunt till the Judgment-day ; the prayer was granted, and these
500 years all but 50, he has hunted a stag that he never can
overtake; his face is wrinkled as a sponge. 3 This is only another
form of the L. Saxon legend of Hackelberg (see Suppl.)

» Grater's Iduna 1813, p. 88 : 1814, p. 102. Conf. « elbentrotsch' p. 461.

2 Wagner's Madame Justitia p. 22. Schmid's Wortb. 391 ' sturmet wia 's
ifuthetkeer ' ' seia verschrocka wia wenn (scared as if) '« Muathesheer anen vor-
beizoga war,' Neflen's Vetter aus Schwaben (Stutg. 1837), pp. 154, 253. Is it a
corrup. of • Wuotea hor,' Schm. 4, 202, like potz, kotz (p. 15) ? or is it muot (ira) m
wuot ? Conf. Fromvot, p. 891.

* Von der Hagen's (etc.) Sammlung (etc.) 1, 43-4.

VOL. III. D



Digitized by Google



932



SPECTRES.



But in the same Swabia, in the 16th cent, (and why not
earlier ? ) they placed a spectre named Berchtold at the head of
the wiitende heer, they imagined him clothed in white, seated on a
white horse, leading white hounds in the leash, and with a horn
hanging from his neck. 1 This Berchtold we have met before
(p. 279) : he was the masculine form of white-robed Berhta, who
is also named Precht biter li (Grat. Iduna 1814, p. 102).

Here we get a new point of view. Not only Wuotan and
other gods, but heathen goddesses too, may head the furious
host: the wild hunter passes into the wood-wife, Wodan into
from Qaude. Of Perchtha touching stories are known in the
Orla-gau. The little ones over whom she rules are human
children who have died before baptism, and are thereby become
her property (pp. 918. 920). By these weeping babes she is sur-
rounded (as dame Gaude by her daughters), and gets ferried over
in the boat with them (p. 275-6). A young woman had lost her
only child ; she wept continually and could not be comforted.
She ran out to the grave every night, and wailed so that the
stones might have pitied her. The night before Twelfth-day
she saw Perchtha sweep past not far off; behiud all the other
children she noticed a little one with its shirt soaked quite
through, carrying &jug of water in its hand, and so weary that it
could not keep up with the rest ; it stood still in trouble before
a fence, over which Perchtha strode and the children scrambled.
At that moment the mother recognised her own child, came
running up and lifted it over the fence. While she had it in her
arms the child spoke : ' Oh how warm a mother's hands are !
but do not cry so much, else you cry my jug too full and heavy,
see, I have already spilt it all over my shirt.' From that night
the mother ceased to weep : so says the Wilhelmsdorf account
(Borner p. 142-3). At Bodelwitz they tell it somewhat differ-
ently : the child said, ' Oh how warm is a mother's arm,' and
followed up the request ' Mother, do not cry so ' with the words
'You know every tear you weep I have to gather in my jug. 1
And the mother had one more good hearty cry (ib. 152). Fairy

1 Historic Peter Leaen des andera Kalenbergers, von Achilles Jason Wid-
man (aus schwabisch Hall), Numb. 1660. Reprinted in Hagen's Narrenbucb, p. 853.
Peter Leu here plays a trick on peasants, p. 394, by disguising himself as Berch-
told.



Digitized by Google



FURIOUS HOST BERCHTA, HOLDA, POSTERLI. 933



tales have the story of a little shroud drenched with tears
(Kinderm. 109. Reusch no. 32. Thorn.. Cantipr. p. 501, conf.
Wolfs Wodana p. 153), and the Danish folktale of Aage and
Else makes flowing tears fill the coffin with blood; but here
we have the significant feature added of the children journeying
in Perhta's train. The jug may be connected with the lachry-
matories found in tombs 1 (see Suppl.).

With Berahta we have also to consider Holda, Diana and Hero-
dias. Berahta and Holda shew themselves, like frau Gaude
(p. 925), in the 'twelves' about New-year's day. Joh. Herolt,
a Dominican, who at the beginning of the 15th cent, wrote his
Sermones discipuli de tempore et de Sanctis, says in Sermo 11
(in die Nativ.) : Sunt quidam, qui in his xii. noctibus subsequen-
tibus multas vanitates exercent, qui deam, quam quidam Dianam
vocant, in vulgari ' die frawen unhold,' dicunt cum ttuo exercitu
ambulare. The same nocturnal perambulation is spoken of in the
passages about Diana* Ilerodias and Abundia p. 283 seq. It is
exactly the Vicentine wood-wife, who acts along with the wild
man, and to whom the people still offer up gifts. And as Berhta-
worship in the Salzburg country became a popular merrymaking
(p. 279), so a Posterli-hunt, performed by the country-folk them-
selves on the Thursday before Christmas, is become an established
custom in the Entlibuch. The Posterli* is imagined to be a
spectre in the shape of an old woman or she-goat (conf. p. 916).
In the evening the young fellows of the village assemble, and
with loud shouts and clashing of tins, blowing of alp-horns, ring-
ing of cow-bells and goat-bells, and cracking of whips, tramp
over hill and dale to another village, where the young men receive
them with the like uproar. One of the party represents the

1 Infantum animae flentes in limine primo,
quos dulcis vitae exsortes et ab ubcre raptos
abstulit atra dies et funere mersit acorbo. Virg. Aen. 6, 427.

In the Introd. to the Pentanieron the revival of a dead man depends on a cruse
hung upon his tomb being wept full.

5 With Diana agrees the Pol. Dziewanna, Dziewina (Linde 1, 599 b ), Dzievsiea ;
Liebusch has the foil, story about a Dziwitza in Up. Lausitz : she was a beautiful
young knenye or prinoess, who roamed in the woods, armed with the zylba (a jave-
lin) ; the finest of hounds accompanied, scaring both game and men who were in
the thick forest at midday. The people still joke. any one that spends the hour of
noon alone in the fir-woods : ' are you not afraid Dziwitza will come to you ? 1 But
she also hunts of a moonlight night.

» Isitsynon. with frau Fatte (p. 782 n.), and taken from the Slavic 1 post '«= fast,
jejuni um?



Digitized by Google



934



SPECTKES.



Posterli, or they draw it in a sledge in the shape of a puppet, and
leave it standing in a corner of the other village ; then the noise
is hushed, and all turn homewards (Staid. 1, 208). At some
places in Switzerland the Straggele goes about on the Ember-
night, Wednesday before Christmas, afflicting the girls that have
not finished their day's spinning (ib. 2, 405). Thus Posterli and
Striiggele resemble to a hair both Berhta and Holda. 1 At Neu-
brunn (Wiirzburg country) the furious host always passed through
three houses, each of which had three doors directly behind
one another, street-door, kitchen-door, and back-door; and so
wherever it finds three doors in a line, the furious host will drive
through them. If you are in the street or yard when it passes,
and pop your head between the spokes of a cart-wheel, it will
sweep past, else it will wring your neck. Old people at Massfeld
tell you, it used to come down the Zinkenstill by the cross-road
near Reumes bridge, and go over the hills to Dreissigacker.
Many will swear by all that is sacred, that they have seen it
(Bechstein's Frank, sag. no. 137). In Thuringia the furious host
travels in the train of frau Holla (DS. no. 7). At Eisleben and
all over the Mansfeld country it always came past on the Thurs-
day in Shrove-tide ; the people assembled, and looked out for its
coming, just as if a mighty monarch were making his entry. In
front of the troop came an old man with a white staff, the trusty
Echhart, warning the people to move out of the way, and some
even to go home, lest harm befall them. Behind him, some came
riding, some walking, and among them persons who had lately
died. One rode a two-legged horse, 2 one was tied down on a wheel
which moved of itself, others ran without any heads, or carried
their legs across their shoulders. A drunken peasant, who would
not make room for the host, was caught up and set upon a high
rock, where he waited for days before he could be helped down
again. 3 Here frau Holda at the head of her spirit-host produces
quite the impression of a heathen goddess making her royal pro-

i Conf. the nightly excursions of the Scottish elf -queen (Scott's Minstr. 2, 149,
161), and of the fays (Keightley 1, 166).

* Hel rides a three-legged one, p. 844.

* Agricola's Spr. 667. Eyering 1, 781—6. Headless figures, heasts two-legged,
three-legged, redhot, are in many ghost stories ; a headless wild hunter runs riot
in the Wetterau (Dieffenbach's Wett. p. 280), in Pomerania a headless horseman
(Temme no. 140).



Digitized by Google



STRAGGELE, ECKHART, VENUS* MOUNT.



935



gress : the people flock to meet and greet her, as they did to
Freyr (p. 213) or Nerthus (p. 251). Eckhart with his white staff
discharges the office of a herald, a chamberlain, clearing the road
before her. Her living retinue is now converted into spectres
(see Suppl.).

Eckhart the trusty, a notable figure in the group of Old-Teutonic
heroes (Heldensage 144. 190, reeve of the Harlungs, perhaps
more exactly Eckewart, Kriemhild's hammerer, Nib. 1338, 3) gets
mixt up with the myths of gods. The appendix or preface to
the Heldenbuch makes him sit outside the Venus-mount to warn
people, as here he warns them of the furious host ; so much the
plainer becomes his vocation here, as well as the meaning of the
Venusberg. Eckhart goes before the furious host with Holda, he
is also doomed to abide till the Judgment-day at the mount of
Venus : the identity of Holda and Venus is placed beyond ques-
tion. That mountain (some say the Hoeelberg or Horselberg near
Eisenach) is dame Hollas court, and not till the 15- 16th cent,
does she seem to have been made into dame Venus ; 1 in subter-
ranean caves she dwells in state and splendour like the kings of
dwarfs ; some few among men still find their way in, and there
live with her in bliss. The tale of the noble Tanhauser, who went
down to view her wonders, 2 is one of the most fascinating fictions

1 Conf. p. 456. Venusberg in the Nethl. chapbook Margareta van Limburg
c. 56. 82-4, also in the Morin. Keisersperg (Omeiss 36) makes witches fare to frau
Fenusberg. There must have been a good many of these Venusbergs, particularly
in Swabia : one near Waldaee, another by Ufhausen near Freiburg, in which the
Schnewburger takes up his lodging, like Tanhauser, H. Schreiber's Tagb. 1839, p.
348. Doubtless the original M. Nethl. poem of Marg. van Limburg (a.d. 1357) also
had Venusberg, as the later chapbook and Johan von Soest's paraphrase have
(Mone's Anz. 4, 168), so that its earliest occurrence is rather to be placed in the 14th
cent. A Dresden MS. of the 15th cent. (Hagen's Grundr. 336) contains a still
anprinted poem on the Venusberg, prob. composed in the 14th cent. Job. v. Soest
wrote in 1470, Herm. von Sachsenheim 1453, and before them Joh. Nider (d. 1440)
in his Formicarius names the Venusberg. Joh. Herolt speaks, as we saw, of Diana
and frau Unhold ; and next of kin is the mount that houses Felicia and Juno
(p. 961). There may have been similar stories in Italy, for Paracelsus (Strasb.
1616) 2, 291 c informs us : ' And by the same pygmaei was tho Venu*berg in Italia
occupied, for Venus herself was a nympha, and the Venusberg hath been likened
unto her realm ; but she also is past away, and her realm hath departed with
her and ceased. For who now heareth tell of them, as in the old time when Dann-
hauser and others were therein And the same is no fabled song of him, but a true
history.' Again, in the Chirurg. schriften (Strasb. 1618) p. 332b - « Some that be
very great thereat, do secretly practise nigromancia, as campisirer (strollers) that
come straight out of the Venusberg, who have dipped their art in the Veltliner, and
have said matins with brother Eckart, and eaten a black-pudding with DanMuser.'
Afzelius 2, 141 tells of a bridegroom who was 40 years among the elves. All the
legends place Venus and Holda in elf-mountains.

* Deut. sag. no. 170. As the pope by the dried up stick cuts off Tanhauser



Digitized by Google



936



SPECTRES.



of the Mid. Age : in it the hankering after old heathenism, and
the harshness of the christian clergy, are movingly portrayed.
Eeliliart, perhaps a heathen priest, is conrtier and conductor of
the goddess when she rides out at a stated season of the year. I
might even make him with his /crjpv/eeiov the psychopompos of the
mounted host of the dead (conf. the waggon of souls creaking in
the air, p. 833) ; only he conducts, not the departing, but rather
the returning dead.

As we can also prove Dietrich von Bern's participation in the
wild hunt (and Eckhart was one of his hero-band), he may stand
as our second native hero in this group. Now the Lausitz
people name the wild hunter Bemdietrich, Dietrich Bemhard, or
Diterbenada; the older Wends have many a time heard him
hunt, and can tell of unsavoury joints that he gives away for
roasting. 1 Bemdietrich too is the wild hunter's name in the
Orlagau (Borner pp. 213-6. 236), where his dogs rouse and chase
the wood-wives. Nay in the Harz, at the Bode-kessel (-crater)
over the Ros-trappe (horse's footmark), stands the wild hunter
turned into stone : ' wo call him Bernhart ' was a boy's account,
and the father of the Brunhild that leapt across the Bodethal on
her steed is called by the people 'he of Bdren' (von Bern) j this
is the more significant, as Gibicho also (p. 137) is placed in the
same mountains (Z. f. d. a. 1, 575). But from Fichte, himself a
Lausitz man, we derive the information that knecht Ruprecht (p.
504) is there called Dietrich von Bern (Deut. heldensage p. 40).
The two interpretations admit of being harmonized. Knecht
Ruprecht makes his appearance beside frau Berhta, as her ser-
vant and companion (p. 514-5), sometimes her substitute, and like

from all hope, so in Swed. tradition tho priest says to the musical * neck : '
1 sooner will this cane I hold in my hand grow green and blossom, than thou obtain
salvation ; ' the neck sorrowfully throws his harp away, and weeps. The priest
rides on, and presently his staff begins to put forth leaf and flower, he turns back
to tell the marvel to the neck, who then plays joyful tunes the whole night long,
Afz. 2, 156. But this myth of Tanhauser accords with many others, esp. Celtic
ones. Tanhatuer passes many a year with Holda in the mountain, so does Tamtam
with the queen of fays, Thomas of Ercildon with the fairy queen (Scott's Minstr. 2,
193. 3, 181—3), Ogier 200 years with fata Morgana in Avalon : she had pressed a
garland on his head, which made him forget everything, But the legend is Teu-
tonic for all that, it is told in Sweden of the elf-king's daughter (p. 466 and Afz. 2,
141), and in the kindenn. of frau Fortuna, Altd. bl. 1, 297. And so does Odygsetu
stay with Calypso and with Ciroe ; but who would think of deriving the story of
Tanhauser from that of Ulysses or Orpheus, as Mone does (Anz. 5, 168) ?

1 Job. Hortzschansky's Sitten u. gebr. der Wenden, part 3 (Dessau and Gdrl.
1782) 3, 258. Laus. monatBschr. 1797 p. 749. Liebusch's Skythika p. 287.



Digitized by Google



FURIOUS HOST: DIETRICH BERN.



937



her a terror to children. Add to this, that both Ruprecht
and Berhta appear at Christmas ; and, what is most decisive of
till, Wode in Mecklenburg, like Berhta in Swabia, runs through
the flax on the distaff, and Wode, like Ruprecht and Niclas,
apportions good or evil to infants. 1 So that Dietrich von Bern,
1 ike trusty Eckhart, is entitled to appear in Wuotan's, Holda's,
Berhta's train, or to fill their place. Then, in another connexion,
Dietrich the fire-breathing, painted superhuman, is in poems of
the Mid. Age fetched away, on a spectral fire-spirting steed, to
hell or to the wilderness, there to fight with reptiles till the Judg-
ment-day (D. heldensage 38 — 40). This agrees with our Altmark
story of Hackelberg (p. 922) ; and in the compound Hackd-berend,
the second half seems plainly to have led to Bereud Bernhart and
Dietrich-bern, as indeed the dreams of Hackelberg and Berend
were identical (p. 923). Lastly, perhaps the Nethl. Derk met den
beer (p. 213-4) ought to be taken into account here, not that I
would derive his epithet from a misapprehension of Dietrich von
Bern (see Suppl.).

We have come to know the wild host in two principal lights :
as a nocturnal hunt of male, and as a stately progress of female,
deities; both, especially the last, occurring at stated seasons.
The precise meaning of the word ' host ' calls for a third explan-
ation : it marches as an army, it portends the outbreak of war.

Wuotan (the old father of hosts, p. 817), Hackelbernd, Berhtolt,
bestriding their white war-horse, armed and spurred, appear
still as supreme directors of the war for which they, so to speak,
give licence to mankind. There is more than one legend of
enchanted mountains, in whose interior becomes audible, from
time to time, drumming, piping and the clash of arms : an
ancient host of spirits and gods is shut up inside, and is arming
to sally out. I do not know a finer, a more perfect legend in
this respect than that of the Odenberg in Lower Hesse, which
stands too in the immediate neighbourhood of a Gudensberg (i.e
'Wodansberg), but distinct from it, so that ' Odenberg 1 cannot
be explained by the ON. form OSinn; it may come from 6d
(felicitas), perhaps from 6di (desertus). This long while the
people have connected Odenberg not with the heathen deity, but

1 Franke's Alt und neu Meckl. 1, 57. In Silesia children are stilled with the
night-hunter, Deut. sag. no 270.



Digitized by Google



938 SPECTRES.

with Charles the great hero-king, and even with Charles V. 1
This emperor, owing to his treatment of Landgrave Philip, has
left a lasting impression in Hesse : Karle Quintes with his soldiers
is lodged in the Odenberg ; and as the Swabian mother threatens
her infant with the iron Berhta (p. 277), ' Be still, or the Prech-
tolterli will come/ and the Bavarian with c Hash, there's
Prechte coming to cat yoar belly open/ the Hessian of this
district stills it by the exhortation ' Du, der Quinte kommt ! '
But in earlier times they meant Charles the Cheat, as is suffi-
ciently proved by the legend of the thirsting army, known to the
annalists (pp. 117. 153), and itself a deposit of still older heathen
myths. Charles had moved his army into the mountains of the
Gudensberg country, some say victorious, others in flight, from
the east (Westphalia). His warriors pined with thirst, the king
sat on a snow-white steed ; then the horse stamped with his foot
on the ground, and broke away a piece of rock ; out' of the
opening gushed a bubbling spring (pp. 226. 584), and the whole
army was watered. GJ inborn is the name of the spring, to
whose clear cold waves the country-folk impute a higher cleans-
ing power than to common water, and women from surrounding
villages come to wash their linen there. The stone with the
hoof-mark may still be seen, let into the wall of Gudensberg
churchyard. After that, king Charles fought a great battle at
the foot of the Odenberg : the streaming blood tore deep furrows
in the ground (they have often been filled up, but the rain always
washes them open), the red waves rolled (wulchen) together, and
poured down all the way to Bessa. Charles won the victory :
in the evening the rock opened, took him and his exhausted
soldiery in, and closed its walls. Here in the Odenberg the king
rests from his valiant deeds ; but he has promised to come out
every seven (or every 100) years, and when that time is past,
you hear a rattling of arms in the air, neighing of horses and
tramp . of hoofs ; the procession passes by the Glisborn, where
the steeds are watered, then goes on its way till, having finished
its round, it returns at last into the mountain again. Once people
were going past the Odenberg, and heard the roll of drums, but

1 At Broterode they shew a fann (flag) of Karltt quintet, and connect with it
the bloody assize held at the place, really the MHO. « Kailes reht ' or 4 lot,'
Bechstein's Thiir. sag. 2, 95.



Digitized by Google



FURIOUS HOST : CHARLES, WUOTAN. 939

saw nothing. A wise man bade them look, one after another,
through the ring formed by his arm held a-kimbo : immediately
they saw a multitude of soldiers, engaged in military exercises,
go in and out of the mountain. 1 This looking through the arm
gives assurance of the genuine primitive legend. Saxo Gram,
p. 37 relates, that Biarco was unable to see Othin, who, mounted
on white steed and covered with white shield, was aiding the
hostile army of Swedes. Quoth Biarco to Ruta :

At nunc ille ubi sit qui vulgo dicitur Othin
armipotenSf uno semper contentus ocello ?
die inihi, Ruta, precor, usquam si conspicis ilium ?
Ruta: Adde oculum propius, et nostras prospice chelas,
ante sacraturas victrici lumina sigtio,
si vis praesentem tuto coguoscore Mortem.*
Biarco : Si potero horrendum Frigged spectare maritum,
quantumcunque alio clypeo sit tectus et album
flectat equum, Lethra nequaquam sospes abibit.
fas est belligeram bello prosternere divam.

Looking through the rounded arm (chela, ^Xt?) enables one to \
see spirits (Altd. blatter 1, 290), so does looking over the right I
shoulder (p. 459n., Superet. I, 996) or between a horse's ears. And [
this the Hessian folktale has preserved. Plainly as Wuotan is
indicated on the whole, the story seems at times to shift itself to
Donar, for we are also told of a red rider on a red horse and with
herou's plume of red wool, who on certain days of the year
gallops round the wooded fringe of the Odenberg : it is the ghost
of Carolus quintus. The description would better fit Frederic
Barbarossa who sits entranced in the Kifhauser, and red-haired
Donar (see Suppl.).

Similar to this Odenberg host are the excursions of the Rothen-
thaler in Aargau, 8 of the Rodensteiner to Schnellerts* of the grey
man over the Rockenstul near Geisa in the Fulda country (Bechst.

1 For this and other stories faithfully taken down from the lips of the
peasantry, I am indebted to a kind communication from Herr Pfister, artill. officer
of Electoral Hesse.

5 As there can be no donbt about Othin, it is singular that Saxo should call
him Man. It serves to establish the original nearness of Wuotan to Zio (p. 197).
* Wyps's Reise ins Berner Oberland 2, 420.

4 Deut. sag. no. 169. Schnellerts = house of Schnellert, Snelhart. A mon-
strous spirit named Snellaart in Marg. van Limb. 7 b .



Digitized by Google



940



SPECTRES.



Frank, sag. 1, 68), and of others in other parts, see Mone's Anz.
3, 259. 8, 806 ; as the host passed over Wolfartsweiler, one of
them shouted down : ' If thou suffer harm, bind thee with red
yarn ! ' 8, 307. We read in Heimreich's Nordfries. chron. 2, 93
that outside Tondern in 1637 armies were seen mustering in the
air and fighting, in clear weather. 1 An Irish folktale gives an
account of the ancient chieftain O'Donoghue, who yearly on the
first of May, mounted on a milkwhite steed, rises from the waters
of a lake, to revisit his realm. On an August night, an earl
of Kihlare shews himself armed, on a splendid war-horse, and
reviews the shades of his warriors (Elfenm. 192-3. 233).
Strikingly similar to the 'duris, durst ' on pp. 521. 920 is a
Finnic Turisas, god of war and at the same time a giant (turras,
turrisas, tursas), who, when a war is imminent, has his drum
beaten high up in the clouds. To the Lettons johdi or murgi
means ghosts, souls of the dead ; when the northern lights flicker,
they say ' johdi kaujahs/ ghosts are fighting, or f karru lauschu
dwehseles kanjahs/ the souls of fallen warriors fight. 3 They
connect the ghostly tumult with a shining phenomenon, as we do
with a sounding one ; it reminds one also of the war stirred up
by our landsknechts in heaven itself, and still more of the ON.
name for war and battle, ' Hiaffninga ve$r e<Sa el,' Hedaningorum
tempestas vel procella, Sn. 163. In a lengthened fight the
heroes had fallen, when Hildur the valkyrja came to the battle-
field at night, waked them all up, and let them fight it over again,
and so every day till the end of the world they shall do battle by
day and lie dead at night. This, I think, is the very earliest
example of an army warring in the clouds, which was a way of
explaining the natural phenomenon, as we see by the words 1 veSr,
h\J Of a battle between Swedes and Croats the Thuringians
. have a story, that on its anniversary, at 1 1 o'clock at night, all
the buried soldiers start up and begin to fight afresh till the clock
strikes one, then they sink into the ground and lie quite still
again for a year, Bechst. 4, 231 (see Suppl.).

1 Guicciardini's Hist, d'ltalia (1583) p. 22 : 1 Risuonava per tut to la fa ma.
essere nel territorio d' Arezzo passati vuibilmentc molti di per Varia ii\finiU huomini
armati, sopra groBsissimi cavalli e con terribile ttrepito di sucni di trombe e di
tamburi.' Conf. the Dan. legend of Klintehonig'$ or EVUk'6nig y t trooping out,
Thiele, 1, 98. 3, 65. Even children marching with pike and flag portend war,
Superat. I, 106.

3 Stender'a Lett. gram. (1783) p. 262-6. Bergmann p. 145.



Digitized by Google



furious host: durs, hedanings, hellequin. 941

But the Romance nations have no less their own traditions
of this aerial host, which on some points agree exactly with the
German.

In France such an air-picture of contending spirits goes by
the name of Hellequin, Hielekin (Bosquet 70 — 77), and in Spain
of exercito antiguo. 1 Guilielm. Alvornus (d. 1248) p. 1037 : 'de
equitibus vero nocturnis, qui vulgari gallicano Hellequin, et vul-
gari hispanico exercitus antiquus vocantur, nondum tibi satis-
f eci, quia nondum declarare intendo qui sint ; nec tamen certum
est eos malignos spiritus esse, loquar igitur tibi de his in sequen-
tibus/ P. 1065 : 9 de substantiis apparentibus in similitudine
cquitantium et bellatorum, et in similitudine exercituum innumera-
bilium, interdum autem et paucorum equitum. > P. 1067: ' nar-
ratur quoque, quod quidam videns hujusmodi exercitum (at a
parting of roads) terrore percussus a via publica declinavit in
agrum contigunm, ubi quasi in rcfugio, transeunte juxta ilium toto
illo exercitu, illaesus permansit et uihil mali passus est ab illis.
propter quod opinio inolevit apud multos, agros gaudere pro-
tectione Creatoris propter utilitatem hominum, et hac de causa
non esse accessum malignis spiritibus ad eos, neque potestatem
nocendi propter hanc causam hominibus existentibus in eis. Gens
autem idolatrarum tutelam istam et defensionem, si earn vel cre-
deret vel audiret, numinibus arvorum illam attribueret. opinor
autem, quod Cererem deam, quae agris praeest, hujusmodi homi-
nera protexisse crederent, exercitumque ilium intra fines regnum-
que Cereris nemini posse nocere/ P. 1073: 'nec te removeat
aut conturbet ullatenus vulgaris ilia Hispanorum nominatio, qua
maiignos spiritus, qui in armis ludere ac pngnare videri con-
sueverunt, exercitum antiquum nominant, magis enim anilis et
delirantium vetularum nominatio est quam veritatis/ Radulfus
de Presles ad libr. 15 cap. 23 De civ. Dei : ' la inesgnee de Helle-
quin, de dame Habonde (p. 286), et des esperis quils appellent
fees.' Ducange sub v. In the Jeu d'Adan, the maisuie Hielekin
is heard approaching with tinkling bells, the three fays (p. 411)
accompanying, and a sires Hellequins is named. Reiffenberg's
Renseign. p. 94. Vincent, bellov. lib. 30 cap. 118, and after him
Keisersp. (Omeiss 37-8) mention a certain Natalis, Alle quinti,

1 I.e. the vast throng of the dead (p. 847) : ' he geit in 't olde heer ' = he dies,
Xarragonia 84 b . * dem alten haufen zuschicken,' Keisersp. serin, on Brant, p. m. 43.



Digitized by Google



942



SPECTRES.



Karoli quinti, who when dead appeared again, and, being ques-
tioned on the furious host, reported that it had ceased ever since
Carolus quintus performed his penance. To the furious host is
here given the name Caroliquinti, some say Allequinti, obviously
-the same thing as Hellequin and our Hessian Karlequinte in the
Odenberg, p. 938. Nevertheless it seems a false interpretation
of the older Hellequin, whose mesnie is mentioned several times
in poems of the 13th cent. 1 as well as by Guil. Alvernus, and who
cannot therefore be the French king Charles V. of the latter half
of the 14th cent. That in France too they connect Charles the
Great with the furious host, appears from a Burgundian poem of
the 17th cent., in which Charlemagne bestrides his horse at the
head of the airy apparition, and Roland carries the standard
(Journ. des savans 1832, p. 496). But what if Hellequin were
after all the German helle (underworld) or its diminutive hellekin,
personified and made masculine? 2 At Tours they say chasse
brujuet (briguet is hound), and le carosse du roi Hugon* who
rides round the city walls at night, and beats or carries off
all that encounter him. Here also king Hugo Capet's carriage
represents that of a heathen god ; in Poitou they call it chasse-
gallerie. In the forest of Fontainebleau le grand veneur is
supposed to hunt.

In Gervase of Tilbury's time the British woods already rang
with king Arthur's mighty hunt (Ot. imp. 2, 12): 'narrantibus
nemorum custodibus, quos forestarios vulgus nominat, se alternis
diebus circa horam meridianam et in primo noctium conticinio
sub plenilunio luna lucente saepissime videre militum copiam
venantium et canum et cornuum strepitum, qui sciscitantibus se
de societate et familia Arturi esse affirmant/ The Complaynt of
Scotland p. 97-8 says : ' Arthour knycht he raid on nycht with
gyldin spur and candillycht.' The elf -queen and the fays have
already been spoken of (p. 934n.). Shakspeare (M. Wives of W.
iv, 4. v, 5) tells how 'Heme the hunter doth all the winter time
at still midnight walk round about an oak.' 4

1 E.g. in Richard sans peur, in the Roman de Fauvel ; conf. Jubinal's Contes 1,
284. Michel's The&tre fr. pp. 73—76.

3 Kausler's Chron. v. Flandern 8049 : 1 ten HalUhineJ at little hell (name of a
place).

* M6m. des antiq. 8, 458. Noei bonrguignons p. 237. Thuanus lib. 24 p. 1104.

* Heme too, if a myth, had got localized : 1 sometime a keeper here in Windsor
forest.'— Tkanb.



Digitized by Google



FURIOUS HOST I ARTHUR, WALDEMAR. 943

Boccaccio (Decani. 5, 8) has the story of a ghost who, having
been done to death by his false mistress, chases her naked
through the wood every Friday, and has her torn to pieces by his
hounds : every time she is slain, she rises again, and the grue-
some hunt begins anew. Manni says the tale is taken out of
Helinand; it may afford some solution of the wild hunter's
pursuit of the wood- wife (p. 929), even if we are bound, as is
fair, to trace the novelist's plot in the first instance to the simple
basis of a folktale. In the poem on Etzel's court, the Wunderer
shews himself almost exactly such a wild man and hunter ; he
chases /ran Scelde with his dogs, and threatens to devour her, as
the hunter does the fleeing wood-wife, or the infernalis venator
a departed soul (see Suppl.). Far more important is a story in
the Eckeulied : Fasolt hunts with hounds a wild maiden in the
forest, just as the wild hunter does the holzweiblein, Lassberg's
ed. 161—201, Hagen's 213—54, conf. 333. This becomes of
moment to our understanding of Fasolt, who was a storm-giant
(pp. 530. 636), and here turns up like Wuotan in the wild host.

Between the Norse legends and ours the links are not so far
to seek. The Danes have made a wild hunter of their famous
and beloved king Waldemar. The Zealand fable represents him,
like Charles the Great (p. 435n.), as irresistibly drawn, by a
magic ring, to a maiden, and after her death to a woodland
district. He dwells in the forest of Gurre, and there hunts night
and day ; 1 like Hackelberg, he uttered the presumptuous wish :
' God may keep his heaven, so long as I can hunt in Gurre for
evermore !' So now he rides from Burre to Gurre every night;
as soon as the ear can catch his ' hoho ' and the crack of his
whip, the people slink aside under the trees. Foremost in the
train run coal-black hounds, with fiery red-hot tongues hanging
out of their throats ; then appears Wolmar on a white horse, some-
times carrying his head under his left arm (conf. Superst. I, 605).
If he meets any men, especially old men, he gives them hounds
to hold. Ho follows one particular route, doors and locks fly
open before him, and his track is named Wolmar* s street, Volde- -
mars-vej (Antiqvariske annaler 1, 15) ; here one cannot help
thinking of Irmingstraat and Eriksgata (p. 356 — 361). Those

1 In hunting he practises cruelties on the peasantry ; he also chases a mermaid,
Thiele 1, 46. 52.



Digitized by Google



SPECTRES.



who have held his hounds he presents with seeming trifles, which,
afterwards turn into gold : he will give a ducat for a horse-shoe
(Thiele 1, 89 — 95). These stories are alike suggestive of Charles
the Great, of Hackelberg, and of frau Holla or Perhta; conf.
MiillenhofFs Schlesw. hoist, sag. nos. 485-6.

In the I. of Moen is a wood named Griinewald : there every
night the Gronjette hunts on horseback, his head tucked under his
left arm, a spear in his right, and a pack of hounds about him.
In harvest time the husbandmen leave him a bundle of oats far
his horse, that he may not trample their crops that night ; by this
one circumstance we recognise Wuotan (p. 155), and perhaps
Frey (p. 212). 1 He is here ajette, as in Switzerland he is a durst
(p. 940). The r grim/ I would explain, not by the green colour
of his hunting dress, but by the ON. grim (barba), Gronjette=
ON. graniot-unn, bearded giant ; and Orani (barbatus) is a name
of OSinn (p. 858). Gronjette, like Wolmar, makes the peasants
hold his dogs ; he also hunts the mer woman (conf. wood- wife).
One man saw him return with the dead merwoman laid across his
horse : 1 seven years have I chased her, now in Falster I have
slain her/ He made the man a present of the band with which
he had held the hounds, and the longer he kept it, the richer he
grew (Thiele 1, 95-97).

In Funen the hunter is Palnejiiger, i.e. the ON. Pdlnatoki
(Fornm. sog. 11, 49—99. Thiele 1, 1 10) : a far-famed hero (p. 381).

In some parts of Denmark, instead of naming Wolmar, they
say 'den flyuende jager,' flying huntsman, or 'den flyvende Mar-
kolfus ; * in Kallundborg district the hunt is transferred to a
later king : Christian tlie Second rides on a white Jiorse and with
black hounds (Thiele 1, 187).

In Schleswig hunts king Abel: 'in eo loco ubi sepultus est
, . . venatoris cornu inflantis vocem et sonum exaudiri, multi
fide digni referunt, et affirmant usque adeo similem, ut venatorem
ibi venari quis diceret, idquo saepe a vigilibus qui Gottorpii nocte

1 Still closer comes the statement in Thiele p. 192 : in olden days it was the
custom in the I. of Moen, when they were harvesting, and had tied the last sheaf
of oats, to throw it on the field with the words : 'this for the jode of Upsala, this
let him have for his horse on Yule-eve ! ' and if they did not do it, their cattle died.
The ' jotunn of Upsala ' is a christian euphemism for Wodan or O'Sinn, whose divine
image is set up at Upsala. The phraseology might originate at a period when
Denmark was converted and Sweden remained heathen.



FURIOUS HOST : GRONJETTE.



94S



vigilare solent audiri : sed et Abelem multia nostra aetate ap-
paruisse et visuin esse constans omnium est rumor, ore et corpora
tit rum, equo pusillo vectum, comitatum canibus tribus venaticis,
qui et saepe specie ignea et ardere visi sunt/ Cypraei Ann. episc.
slesvic. p. 267; conf. Thiele 2, 63. 142. Dahlmann's Dan. gesch.
1, 403. Miillenhoff nos. 487-8.

With Swedish traditions of the wild hunter I am imperfectly
acquainted, but they may safely be inferred from what is told of
the stromkarls-lag (p. 492), that its eleventh variation is reserved
for the use of the night spirit and his host ; and we found a point
of agreement between the ' neck ' and our elf-natured Tanhiiuser
(p. 936n.). Sweden retains too the primitive fashion of referring
the natural phenomenon to the god (p. 919). Tales are told of
two ardent sportsmen, Nielus Hog and Jennus Maar (Arwidsson
2,71).

One Norwegian story offers rich material. Souls that have not
done so much good as to win heaven, nor yet harm enough to
merit hell, drunkards, scoffers, tricksters, are doomed to ride about
until the end of the world. At the head of the cavalcade comes
Gurorysse or Reisarova 1 with her long tail, by which you may
kuow her from the rest ; she is followed by a great multitude of
either sex. Rider and steed have a stately appearance in front ;
from behind you see nothing but Guro's long tail. The horses
are coal-black, have glowing eyes, and are goverued with fiery
rods and iron reins : the noise of the troop is heard from afar.
They ride over water as over land, their hoofs scarce skimming
the surface. When they throw a saddle on a roof, some person
will presently die in that house; where they expect drunken
revelry, rioting and murder, they come and sit over the door; 2
they keep still so long as no crime is committed, but when it is,
they laugh out loud? and rattle their iron rods. They make their
journeys at Yule-tide, when there is much carousing. If you
hear them come, you must get out of the way, or throw yourself
flat on the ground* and feign sleep, for there have been cases of

1 •Guro ry8nerova=»Gudran horse-tail.' — Suppl.

* 'Quia Mors secus introitum delectationis posita est.' Regula Bonedicti,
cap. 7.

" Conf. 4 manes ridere videns ' in the Waltharius 1040.

* Ab on p. 922: a precaution prescribed in all the folktales (Bechfltein's Thiir.
sag. 4, 231 and Frank, sag. 1, 57). It is practised in Italy when hot winds blow.



Digitized by Google



946



SPECTRES.



living men being dragged along with the moving mass. An up-
right man, who takes that precaution, has nought to fear, save
that each of the company spits upon him ; when they are gone,
he must spit out again, or he will take harm. la some parts, this
ghostly array is called aaskereia, aaskerej, aaskereida, in others
hoskelreia ; the former corrupted from asgard-reida, -reid, the
Asgard march, whether as a passage of souls to heaven, or as a
journey of gods, of valkyrs, visiting earth ; or may it not be more
simply explained by aska (lightning) and reid (thunder) ? in
which case it would be confined more to a manifestation of Thor.
Sometimes you do not see the procession, but only hear it rush
through the air. Whoever does not make the sign of the cross
on his stable-doors the three nights of Yule, will in the morning
find his horses blown and dripping with sweat (p. 661), because they
have been taken and ridden (Faye 70 — 72).

Guro is apparently the same as gurri, ON. gifr (giantess, p.
526); but gurri is also huldra (Faye 10), who is described as a
beautiful woman with a hideous tail (ib. 25. 39). Huldra may be
likened to our Holda all the more, because she takes unchristened
infants with her. Guro, as a leader of the furious host, answers
perfectly to the description given of all the others 1 (see Suppl.).

If we now review the entire range of German and Scandinavian
stories about the Furious Host, the following facts come to the
front. The myth exhibits gods and goddesses of the heathen
time. Of gods : Wuotan, and perhaps Fro, if I may take 1 Berh-
tolt' to mean him. We can see Wuotan still in his epithets of
the cloaked, the bearded, which were afterwards misunderstood
and converted into proper names. Saxo Gram. p. 37 says of
Othin : ' albo clypeo tectus, album (s. 1. pro 1 altum ') flectens
equum.* Sleipnir was a light gray horse (Sn. 47), what was called
apple-gray (oomniele, AS. seppelfealo). Then we see both the
name and the meaning [m. or f.] fluctuate between fro Wodan
audfrowa Gode. A goddess commanding the host, in lieu of the
god, is Holda, his wife in fact. I am more and more firmly con-
vinced, that ' Holda 1 can be nothing but an epithet of the mild

1 Can the 4 Gurre wood ' in the Waldemar legend have arisen, like ' Hakel
wood,' out of the personal name ? Conf. Halja and hell. In Schmidt's Fastelabend-
samml. p. 76 we find the combination ' der M oor, die Goor, der wiliUjdger.



Digitized by Google



furious host: guro.



947



'gracious' Fricka; conf. Sommer's Thiir. sag. 165-6. And
Berhta, the shining, is identical with her too ; or, if the name
applies more to Frouwa, she is still next-door to her, as the Norse
Freyja was to Frigg. It is worth noting, that here Norweg.
legend also names a ' Huldra/ not Frigg nor Freyja. The dogs
that surround the god's airy chariot may have been Wuotan's
wolves setting up their howl. A Scand. story not well authen-
ticated 1 makes O&inn be wounded by a boar, like Hakelbernd,
and this wounding seems altogether legendary (p. 921-2) ; when
the boar sncked the blood out of the sleeping god, some drops
fell on the earth, which turned into flowers the following spring.

These divinities present themselves in a twofold aspect. Either
as visible to human eyes, visiting the land at some holy tide,
bringing welfare and blessing, accepting gifts and offerings
of the people that stream to meet them. Or floating unseen
through the air, perceptible in cloudy shapes, in the roar and
howl of the winds (p. 632), carrying on war, hunting or the game
of ninepins, the chief employments of ancient heroes : an array
which, less tied down to a definite time, explains more the natural
phenomenon (conf. Haupt's Zeitschr. 6, 1291. 181). I suppose
the two exhibitions to be equally old, and in the myth of the wild
host they constantly play into one another. The fancies about
the Milky Way have shewn us how ways and waggons of the
gods run in the sky as well as on the earth.

With the coming of Christianity the fable could not but
undergo a change. For the solemn march of gods, there now
appeared a pack of horrid spectres, dashed with dark and
devilish ingredients. Very likely the heathen themselves had
believed that spirits of departed heroes took part in the divine
procession ; the christians put into the host the unchristened
dead, the drunkard, the suicide (conf. p. 822), who come be-
fore us in frightful forms of mutilation. The ' holde ' goddess
turns into an ' unholde/ still beautiful in front, but with a tail
behind. 2 So much of her ancient charms as could not be stript
off was held to be seductive and sinful : and thus was forged
the legend of the Venus-mount. Their ancient offerings too the

1 Wassenberg p. 72. Creozer's Symb. 2, 98. I fear Rudbeck had the boldness
to adapt the legend of Adonis (p. 949n.) to Oden.

* Conf. ' frau Welt,' dame World, in Conrad's poem p. 196 seq.

VOL. III. K



Digitized by Google



SPECTRES.



people did not altogether drop, but limited them to the sheaf
of oats for the celestial steed, as even Death (another hunter,
p. 845-6) has his bushel of oats found him (p. 844).

When born again ait heroes, the gods retained their genuine
old character undimmed. Thus we see Dietrich, Ekhart, Arthvr,
Charles, Waldemar, Palnatoke, nay, king Christian, significantly
incorporated in the roving company, without the slightest detri-
ment to their dignity or repute among the people. At the same
time its due weight must be allowed to another view, which
degrades the gods into devils, the goddesses into hags and
"* witches : here the devil might easily spring out of the giant of
old.

The last lodgment found by the fable is when it settles on
individual hunters and lovers of hunting of modern times, such
as Hackelberg, the heath-rider Baren, squire Marten, Mansberg
the baron, &c. These look almost like historic personages,
but narrowly examined they will in every case melt into mythic
ones. The people's conscientious care to point out Hakeln-
bernd's tomb seems to indicate a heathen worship, to which
even monuments of stone were consecrated.

The similar course taken by the history of the myth in Scandi-
navia and in Germany is a fresh guarantee that the same heathen
faith prevailed there and here. Saxony, Wostphalia, Mecklen-
burg, Hesse have still several features in common with the
North ; South Germany has retained fewer. So there come out
points of agreement with Celtic legend ; none with Slavic, that
I can discover, unless the nocturnal rides of Svantovit (p. 662)
are to be taken into account.

I have yet to mention an agreement with Greek fable, which
seems to prove the high antiquity of that notion of a giant and
hunter. To the Greeks, Orion was a gigantic (TreXwpios) hunts-
man, who in the underworld continues to chase the quarry on
the Asphodel-mead (Od. 11, 572), and forms a brilliant con-
stellation. Homer speaks of Orion's hound (II. 22, 29) seen in
the sky below him; in flight before him are the Pleiads (a bevy
of wild doves, Od. 12, 62), and the Great Bear herself appears
to watch him {Bokcvci, Od. 5, 274) . ! Did our ancestors connect

1 0. MiUler on Orion (Bhein. mus. f. pliilol. 2, 12).



Digitized by Google



FURIOUS HOST : ORION



949



the same group of stars with their myth of the wild hant? t
have left it doubtful on p. 727. We might, for one thing,
see such a connexion in Orion's AS. name of boar-throng
(eoforbryng) ; and secondly add, that the three stars of his belt
are called the distaff of Fricka, who as ' Holda ' heads the
furious host, and looks after her spinsters just at the time of
his appearing at Christmas. Can it be, that when the constel-
lation takes name from Fricka, her spindle is made prominent;
and when VVuotan or a giant-hero lends his name, the herd of
hunted boars is emphasized ? The Greek fable unfolds itself yet
more fully. Orion is struck blind, and is led to now light by
Kedalion, a marvellous child who sits on his shoulders. Might
not we match this blind giant with our headless wild hunter? 1
A feature that strikes me still more forcibly is, that Artemis
(Diana) causes a scorpion to come up out of the ground, who
stings Orion in the ankle, so that he dies : 3 when the sign Scorpio
rises in the sky, Orion sinks. This is like. Hackelberend's foot
being pierced by the wild boar's tusk, and causing his death (pp.
921. 947). Orion's [cosmic] rising is at the summer, his setting
at the winter solstice : he blazes through the winter nights, just
when the furious host is afoot. Stormy winds attend him
(nimbosus Orion, Aen. 1, 535) ; the gift is given him of walking
on the sea (Apollod. i. 4, 3), as the steeds in the aaskereia skim
over the wave. Orion's relation to Artemis is not like that of
Wuotan to Holda, for these two are never seen together in the
host ; but Holda by herself bears a strong resemblance to Artemis
or Diana (p. 207. 270), still more to the nightly huntress Hecate,
at whose approach dogs whimper (as with frau Gaude), who, like
Hel, is scented by the dogs (p. 667), 3 and for whom a paltry
pittance was placed (as for Berhta and the wild woman, p.

1 A malefactor, whose crime is not divulged before his death, is doomed to
wander with his head under his arm (Snperst. I, 605). Can the being struck (or
growing) blind be meant to express ghostly wandering?

5 Aratua Phaeuom. 637. Ov. Fast. 5, 541. Lucan Pilars. 9, 832. Adonis
got his death-wound from the boar. Nestor (Jos. Miiller 101) tells us, it was
prophesied to Oleg that he would die of his horse ; ho still had it fed, but would
not see it again. Five years after, he inquired about it, and was told it was dead.
Then he laughed at soothsayers, and went into the stable, where the horse's
skeleton lay, but when he trod on the skull, a snako darted out of it and stung
him in the foot, whereof he sickened and died (see Suppl.).

3 Apparently a slip ; for that was Athena.— Thins.



Digitized by Google



950



SPECTRES.



432) at the trivium (OHG. driwikki), 1 conf. Theocr. 2, 15 and
Virg. Aen. 4, 609 : ' nocturnis Hecate triviis ululata per urbes.'
Lucian's $t\oi/reu$?7? cap. 22. 24 tells us how such a 'E/ed-n)
appeared in the wood to Eucrates, and the yelping dogs are there
too (see Suppl.).

Tacitus Germ. 43 thus describes the Harii, a people of N.E.
Germany : ' truces insitae feritati arte ac tempore lenocinantur ;
nigra scuta, tincta corpora, atras ad proelia noctes legunt, ipsaque
formidine atque umbra fetalis exercitus terrorem inferunt, nullo
hostium sustinente novum ac velut infernum aspectum' (see
Suppl.). Is this about 'host of the dead' and 'hellish array'
Roman rhetoric, or was it contained in descriptions of this people
given by Germans themselves? An airy host (p. 940) is also
spoken of by Pliny 2, 57 : ' armorum crepitus et tubae sonitus
auditos e coelu Cimbricis bellis accepimus, crebroque ot prius et
postea; tertio vero consulatu Marii ab Amerinis et Tudertibus
spectata arma coelestia ab ortu occasuque inter se concurrentia,
pulsis quae ab occasu erant.'

1 Cross-roads, the parting of ways, are a trouble to frau Gaude. Festus sub
v. «pilae, effigies' says these were hung up at such places for the Lares.



Digitized by Google



CHAPTER XXXIL



TRANSLATION.

An idea specially characteristic of our mythology is that of
Entrurkung (removal), which, while extending to the subjects of
the foregoing chapter, has a wider rango besides.

Verwuiuchen (ill-wishing) is the uttering of a curse or ban,
maledicere, diris devovere, Goth, fraqvipan, OHG. farwdzan,
MUG. verwdzen ; as I do not find verwiinschen in our older
speech, I explain it simply as the opposite of wiinschen (fausta
apprecari), and refrain from supposing in it a reference to the
old ' wunsch/ the perfection of felicity. 1

This banning differs from metamorphosis, inasmuch as it doos
not transform, but rather throws a spell upon things in their
natural shape, only removing them into a new position ; though
common parlance calls whatever is transformed ' verwiinscht '
(banned). Further, what is metamorphosed remains, till the
moment of its emancipation, in the new shape given it, visible
to all eyes, e.g. the stone or tree into which a man has been
changed; whereas, when a thing is banned, in the sense in
which I use the word, it seems to me essential that it be with-
drawn from our senses, and only re-appear from time to time,
and then in the same shape as before. In other words : what is
metamorphosed remains corporeal, what is banned becomes im-
perceptible, and can only on certain conditions become corporeal
again, in the same way as invisible spirits can at will assume
grosser material shapes. Vanishing 2 is therefore voluntary trans-
lation (to another sphere), a prerogative of gods (p. 325) and
spirits, also of some heroes that are possessed of a magic mask
(grima) or concealing helmet ; translated men are spirit-like,

1 Note the 0. Fr. antithesis between iouhait (wish) and dehait (verwiinschung) ;
both words are wanting in the other Bomauce tongues, they have their root in
OHG. heiz, ON. heit (votum).

* 4 Frau Saelde remount,' vanished, Etzel'a hofh. 210.



Digitized by Google



952 TRANSLATION.

and another expression for it is : ' they sleep' they only wake
from time to time 1 (see Suppl.).

And not only persons, bat things, are translatable. Persons
that vanish and re-appear are precisely in the condition of the
spectres dealt with in the last chapter : just as souls of dead men
there got identified with heroes and gods, so here we come upon
the same gods and heroes again. Vanished gods get confounded
with enchanted spell-bound heroes.

With our people a favourite mode of representing translation
is to shut up the enchanted inside a mountain, the earth, so to
speak, letting herself be opened to receive them. 2 More than one
idea may be at work here together : motherly earth hides the
dead in her bosom, and the world of souls is an underground
world; elves and dwarfs are imagined living inside mountains,
not so much in the depths of the earth as in hills and rocks that
rise above the level ground ; but popular forms of cursing choose
all manner of phrases to express the very lowest abyss. 8 The
Swed. bergtagen (taken into mountain) means sunken, bergtagning

1 See the famous legends of the Seven Sleepers (Greg. Tar. mirac. 1, 95. Paul
Diac. 1, 3), and of Endymion, who lies in eternal sleep on Mt. Latmos. Conf.
Pliny 7, 52 : Puernm aestu et itinere fessnm in specu septem et quinqnaginta
dormisse annis, rerum faciem mutationemque mirantem, velut postero experrectum
die; hinc pari numero dierum senio ingruente, nt tamen in septimum et quin-
quagesimum atque centesimam vitae duraret annum ; 1 and the German story of
the three miners. Shepherds slept in caves 7 years, or 7 times 7 (Mone's Anz.
7, 64).

s An impatient longing to disappear we express by the phrases * I should like
to creep into the earth,' and 'jump out of my skin,' the same thing that is called at
the end of the Lament (Nib.) : ' sich versliefen und uz der hiute triefen in locher
der steinwende,' trickle away, so to speak. 0. iv. 26, 43 has : 4 ruafet then-it bergon,
bittet sie thaz sie fallen ubar iuih, job bittet oah thie buhila tbaz sie iuih the ken
obana, ir biginnet thanne innan erda sliafan, job suintet tilu thrato.' Hel. 166, 3 :
4 than gi sd gerna sind, that iu hier bihlidan hoha bergos, diopo bidelban,' U -lid
and deep be-dolve you. Much of this language is Biblical (Isa. 2, 19 ; Hos. 10. 8 ;
Luke 23, 30; Rev. 6, 15, 16), but the sentiment of many nations will run alike in
such matters. Nib. 867, 2 : • mir tronmte, wie obe dir ze tal vielen zicene berge,' I
dreamt, two mts fell on thee. That jumping out of one's skin, like a snake casting
his slough, may also come of joy and anger, O.Fr. 'a poi n' ist de sa pel,' is well
nigh out of bis skin, Ogier 6688. Nethl. 4 bet is om uit zijn vel te springen.' So
in our Elis. von Orleans, ed. Schiitz p. 223 ; ' for joy,' Ettn.'s Unw. doctor 856.
Not unlike is that jumping into stone spoken of on p. 652; as early as Alb. von
Halb. 143 b : * at one leap be turned into stone.'

3 They wish you 4 100,000 fathom under ground ; ' 4 as far down as a hare can
run in two years ' (p. 179) ; 4 so low, that no cock crows after (or to) thee,' and the
like. What does the last formula mean ? that the cock's crow can no longer, even
in the hush of night, reaoh the sunken man ? or that those above ground cannot
hear the cry of the fowl that has sunk with him to the subterranean dwelling? In
Kinderm. 2, 32 it is said of the princesses : 4 se versiinken alle drei so deip unner
de eere, dat kien haan mer danach krehete.' 4 So kreet doch kein han nach mir,*
and ' kein han fort da nach krehen thut,' H. Sachs iii. 2, 178 b . 213°.



Digitized by Google



HEROES INSIDE HILLS.



953



translation, Sv. visor 1, 1. Afz. 1, 28. 33. In Asbiornsen and
Moe no. 88 'indtagen i bierget;' and Faye 35-6 quotes striking
instances of this ' indtages i hoie og fjelde/ being taken into
height and fell. ON. gdnga inn i Jiallit, Nialss. cap. 14. 135 (see
Suppl.).

We understand now, why frau Holda, frau Venus and their
following dwell in mountains : they are sequestered there, till the
time come for holding their progress among men. So live Wodan
and king Charles in the Odenberg.

Here and there a man has gained entrance into such mountains ;
Tanhauser sojourned many years at the court of Venus. A black-
smith was looking in the underwood on the Odenberg for a haw-
thorn to make his hammer-helve, when suddenly he saw a gap
he had never noticed before in the face of the cliff ; he stept in,
and stood in a new world of wonders. Strong men were bowling
balls of iron, they challenged him to play, but he declined, the
iron balls, he said, were too heavy for his hand. The men were
not offended, they told him to choose what present he would have.
He begged for one of their balls, took it home, and put it among
his stock of iron. Afterwards, wanting to work it, he made it
red hot, but it burst in pieces on the anvil, and every piece was
sheer gold. 1 He never again found the opening in the Odenberg ;
he had happened that time to hit the day when it stands open to
men, as it does on certain days of the year to Sunday children.
They see an old man with a long beard, holding in his hand a
metal goblet (as Charles in Romance epic always has the epithet
* a la barbe florie/ and OSinn too was called Ldngbar&r, Harbarffr,
Sifokeggr). Inside the mountain they have presents given them,
as in the Kifhauser.

In the Quckenberg* near Frankischgemiinden, a kaiser dis-
appeared with all his army a long time ago ; but when his beard
has grown three times round the table at which he sits, he will
come out again with all his men. Once a poor boy, who went
about the neighbourhood selling rolls, met an old man on the
mountain, and complained that he could not sell much. ' I will

1 This skittle-playing sounds like rolling thunder (p. 167). They say in N.
Germ, when it thunders, ' the angels are playing at bowls.'

3 Not Gouchsberg nor Kaukasus (p. 681) ; but rather the mt of the progenitor
Guogo (guggani, Z. f. d. a. 1, 23), or of the beetle (guegi, p. 183). Meicbelb. 1182
ad Ouoginhusun; Trad. fuld. 2, 33 in Gougeleibu.



Digitized by Google



954



TRANSLATION.



shew thee a place/ said the man, ' where thou canst bring thy
rolls every day, but thou must tell no man thereof/ He then led
the boy into the mountain, where there was plenty of life and
bustle, people buying and selling; the kaiser himself sat at a
table, and his heard had grown twice round it. The lad now
brought his rolls there every day, and was paid in ancient coin,
which at last the people in his village would not take; they
pressed him to tell how he came by it, then he confessed all
that had taken place. Next day, when he wished to go into
the mountain, he could not so much as see it, let alone find the
entrance (Mone's Anz. 4. 409, and thence in Bechst. Frank, sag.
p. 103). So between Numberg and Fiirt stands kaiser Carls
berg, out of which in former times came the sound of singing,
and of which a similar tale is told about carrying bread ; in
a vaulted chamber the baker's boy saw men in armour sitting
(Mone's Anz. 5, 174).

In Westphalia, between Liibbecke and Holzhausen, above
Mehnen village on the Weser, stands a hill called die Babilonie, 1
in which Wedekind (Weking) sits enchanted, waiting till his
time come; favoured ones who find the entrance are dismissed
with gifts (Redeker's Westf. sag. no. 21).

An older myth is preserved in the Chron. nrsbergense
(Auersperg) ad an. 1223 (Perte 8, 261) : In pago Wormaciensi
videbantur per aliquot dies non modica et armata multitudo
equitum euntium et redeuntium, et quasi ad placitum colloquium
nunc hie nunc illic turbas facere, circa nonam vero horara cuidam
monti, quo et exiisso videbantur, se reddere. Tandem quidam de
incolis regionis illius, non sine magno timore hujusmodi tarn pro-
digiosae concioni, crucis signaculo munitus appropinquat. Mox
quandam ex illis occurrentem sibi personam per nomen omnipo-
tentis Domini nostri, manifestare causam populi qui sic apparuerit,
adjurat. Cui ille inter cetera ' Non sumns ' inquit, 'utputatis,
fantasmata, nec militum, ut vobis cernimur, turba, sed animae
militum inter fectorum, arma vero et habitus et equi, quia nobis
prius fuerant instrumenta peccandi, nunc nobis sunt materia
tormenti, et vere totum ignitum est quod in nobis cernitis, quamvis
id vos corporalibus oculis discernere non possitis.' In hujusmodi

1 Several times in MHG. poems ' diu wiiette Babilone:



Digitized by Google



HEROES INSIDE HILLS. 955

co mi tat a dicitur etiam Emicho comes ante paucos annos (an.
1117) occisus apparuisse, et ab hac poena orationibus et elee-
mosynis se posse redimi docuisse.' Donnersberg, Tonnerro (p.
170) was then in the Wormazfeld, it must therefore be the
mountain in and out of which tho ancient ghosts kept riding :
souls of fallen and resuscitated heroes (p. 940), but by tho
christian eye seen here in hell-fire.

In the old mountain castle of Geroldseck Siegfried and other
heroes are supposed to dwell, and thence they will appear to tho
German nation in its time of utmost need, Deut. sag. no. 21. A
cleft in a rock by the L. of Lucerne, some say on the Griitli, holds
in sleep the three founders of the Swiss Federation; they will
tcake when their country wants them, ibid. no. 297. At tho
Kifhauser in Thuringia sleeps Frederic Barbarossa : he sits at a
round stone table, resting his head on his hand, nodding, with
blinking eyes ; his beard grows round the table, it has already
made tho circuit twice, and when it has grown round the third time,
the king will awake. On coming out he will hang his shield on
a withered tree, which will break into leaf, and a better time will
dawn. Yet some have seen him awake: a shepherd having
piped a lay that pleased him well, Frederick asked him : f flij the
ravens round the mountain still ? 1 the shepherd said yes : ' then
must I sleep another 100 years J 1 The shepherd was led into

1 Similar questions are put by the blind giant in a Swed. folktale, which I
insert here from Bexell's Halland (Gotheborg 1818) 2, p. 301 : Nigra sjdman ifrin
Getinge blefvo pi hafvet af stormarne forde emot en okand o (seamen from G.
driven by storms to an unknown isle), omgifne af morker uppBtiga de dor (landed
in the dark). De blefvo varse en pa afst&nd upptand eld (saw a lighted fire), och
skynda dit. Framfor elden ligger en ovanligt l&ng man, som var blind ; en annan
af lika jattestorlek (another of like giant size), star bredvid honom och ror i elden
med en iarnstang. Den gamle blinde mannen reser sig upp, och fr&gar de ankomne
framlingarne, hvarifran de voro. De svara, if ran Halland och Getinge socken.
HvarpA den blinde fr&gar : 1 lefver ennu dm hvita qvinnan (lives the white woman
still ) ? * De svarade ja, fast de ej viste hvad han harmed menade. Ater sporde
han : 4 m&nne mitt gethut star annu qvar (stands my goat-house yet) ? * De
svarade aterigen ja, ehuru de afven voro okunnige om hvad han menade. D& sade
han : • jag fick ej hafva mitt gethut i fred for den kyrkan som byggdes p& den
platsen. Viljen I komma lyckligt hem, valan, jag lemnar er dertill tvenne vilkor.'
De lofva, och den gamle blinde fortfor : 1 tagen detta tdlfbalte, och car I kommen
hem, s& spannen det p& den hvita qvinnan, och denne ask statten den pi altaret
i mitt gethut.' Lyckligen aterkomne till hembygden, r&dfraga sig sjomannerne
hum de skulk- efterkomma den gamle blinde mannens begaran. Man beslot at
spanna baltet omkring en bj'drk, och bjdrken for i luften, och at satta asken pi en
kulle (grave-mound), och strait ttdr kullen i Oiutan Idga. Men efter det kyrkan ar
bygd der den blinde mannen hade sitt gethus, bar hon f&tt namnet Getinge. The
'blind giant' banished to the island is a spectral heathen god (conf. Orion, p. 949),
the ' white woman ' a christian churoh or an image of Mary ; had they fastened the



Digitized by Google



956 TRANSLATION.

the king's armoury, and presented with the stand of a hand-
basin, which the goldsmith found to be slieer gold (ib. nos. 23.
296) } Others make Frederick Bit in a cam of the rock near
Kaiserslautem (ib. no. 295), or at Trifels by Anweiler, or else in
the Unferberg near Salzburg (ib. no. 28), though some put Charles
ihe Great here, or Charles V. ; the growing of the beard round the
(able is related just the same. When the beard has for the third
time reached the last corner of the table, the end of the world
begins, a bloody battle is fought ou the Walserfeld, Antichrist
appears, the angel -trumpets peal, and the Last of Days has
dawned. The Walserfeld has a withered tree, which has been
cut down three times, but its root has always sprouted and grown
into a perfect tree again. When next it begins to leaf the terrible
fight is near, and will open when the tree bears fruit. Then shall
Frederick hang his shield on the tree, all men shall flock to it, and
make such a slaughter that the blood will run into the warriors'
shoes, and the wicked men be slain by the righteous (ib. nos. 24.
28). In this remarkable tradition may be recognised things old
and very old. — A religious poem of the 16th cent. (Grater's
Odina p. 197) speaks of duke Frederick, who is to win back the
H. Sepulchre, and hang his shield on a leafless tree ; and Ante-
christe is brought in too. — A fragment of an older lay of the
14th cent. (Cod. Pal. 844) says of Emp. Frederick : r An dem
gejaid er verschwant (in the hunt he disappeared), das man den
edeln keiser her sind gesach (saw) nyemer mer ; also ward der

silver belt rotund it, it would have shot up into the air as the birch did. Another

account makes the blind giant ask the sailors if the jingling-cow by the church
(meaning the bell or belfry) were ttill alive t They answered yes, and he challenged
one of them to hold out his hand, that he might see if the inhabitants had any
strength left. They handed him a boat-bar made redhot, which he crushed
together, saying there was no great strength there (Faye p. 17). A story in Od-
man's Bahuslan 153-4 has similar variations : A ship's crew, driven out of their
course to an out-of-the-way coast, see a fire burning at night, and go on shore. By
the fire sits only one old man, who asks a sailor : ' Whence be ye? ' From Hisin-
gen in Safve pastorate. 4 Ken ye Thorsby too ? ' Ay, that I do. ' Wot ye the
whereabout of Ulfveberg ? 1 Ay, it's many a time I've passed it, going from Gothe-
borg to Marstrand by way of Hisingen. ' Stand the great $tonet and harrow i there
yet unremoved f ' Ay, but one stone leans and is like to fall. ' Wot ye where
Olosshed-altar is, and whether it be well kept up? ' I know nothing about that.
' Say to the folk that dwelleth now at Thorsby and Thorsbracka, that they destroy
not the stones and mounds on Ulfveberg, and that they keep in good condition
Glosshed-altar, so shalt thou have fair weather for thy home-return.' The sailor
promised, but asked the old man his name. ' My name is Thore Brack, and there
dwelt I of yore, till I was made to flee : in the great mounds of Ulfveberg lies all
my kin, at Glosshed-altar did we sacrifice and serve our gods.'

1 The Kiihauser legends now stand collected in Bechst. 4, 9—54.



Digitized by Google



DRY TREE TURNING GREEN.



957



hochgeporn keiser Friederich do verlorn. Wo er darnacli ye bin
kam, oder ob er den end da nam, das kund nyemand gesagen
mir, oder ob yne die wUden tir (beasts) vressen habn oder zerissen
(eaten or torn), es en kan die warheit nyemand wissen, oder ob er
noch lebendig sy (be yet alive), 1 der gewiszen sin wir fry und der
rechten warheit ; iedoch ist uns geseit von pawren (yet we are
told by peasants) solh mer, das er als ein waler (pilgrim) sich oft
by yne hab lassen sehen (seen by them) und hab yne offenlich
verjehen (declared), er sull noch gewaltig werden (he should yet
become master) aller romischen erden, er siill noch die pfaffen
storen, und er woll noch nicht uf horen, noch mit nichten lassen
abe, nur er pring (nor rest till he bring) das lieilige grabe und
darzu das heilig lant wieder in der Christen hant, und wol sine
schildes last hahen an den dorren ast (his shield's weight hang on
the withered bough) ; das ich das fur ein warheit sag, das die
pauren haben geseit, das nym ich mich nicht an, wan ich sin
nicht gesehen ban, ich han es auch zu kein stunden noch nyndert
geschribn funden, was das ichs gehort han van den alton pauren
an wan.' — A poem of about 1350 (Aretin's Beitr. 9, 1134) says :
' So wirt das vrlewg also gross (war so great), nymand kan ez
gestillen, so kumpt sich kayser Fridrich der her (high) vnd auch
der milt, er vert dort her durch Gotes willen, an einen dtirren
pawm (withered tree) so henkt er semen schilt, so wirt die vart hin
uber mer . . . er vert dort hin zum diirren pawm an alles
widerhap, dar an so henkt er seinen schilt, er grunet unde pirt
(bears) : so wirt gewun daz heilig grap, daz nymmer swert darup
gezogen wirt/ — Again, in Sibylle's prophecy, composed in Ger-
man rhyme soon after the middle of the 14th cent. : 1 Es kumet
noch dar zuo wol, das Got ein keiser geben sol, den hat er be-
halten in siner gewalt und git (gives) im kraft manigvalt, er wirt
genant Fridrich, der usserwelte furste rich, vnd sament daz
Christen volgan sich vnd gewinnet daz helge grap uber mer, do
stat ein dor bourn vnd ist gros, vnd sol so lange stan bios, bicz
der keiser Fridrich dar an sinen schilt gehenken mag vnd kan, so

1 At the end of the Lament for king Etzel ; ' Des wundere wird ich nimmer
vrl, wed. r er tich vergienge, oder in der luft enpfienge, oder lebende umrde begraben,
oder ze himele iif erhaben, and ob er uz der hiute trilffe oder sich veniajfe in ldcher
der steinwende, oder mit welhem endo er von dem libe quceme, oder waz in zuo zim
name, ob er filere in daz apgrunde, oder ob in der tiuvel verzliinde, oder ob er sas $i
temcunden, daz en-hat niemen noh erfunden.'



Digitized by Google



958 TRANSLATION.

wirt der bourn wieder gruen gar, noch kument aber guete jar, vnd
wirt in aller der welt wol stan, der Heiden glouben muos gar
zergan ' (Wackern. Basel MSS. p. 55)

That the common people disbelieved the death of Emp. Fred-
erick, and expected him to coino back, is plain from the passages
which expressly refer to ' old peasants ' ; it had most likely been
the same in the preceding (13th) cent., and was long after.
Impostors took advantage of tho general delusion ; one chronicle
(Bohmer 1, 14) relates: ' Ecce quidam truphator surrexit in
medium, qui dixit se esse Fridericum quondam imperatorem, quod
de so multis intersignis et quibusdam prestigiis scire volentibus
comprobavit/ King Rudolf had him burnt on a pile in 1285.
Yet Detmar has under the year 1287: 'By der tid quam to
Lubeke en olt man, de sprak, he were heiser Vrederic, de vor-
drevene. Deme beghunden erst de boven (lads) und dat mene
volk to horende sines tusches {fraud), unde deden eme ere
(honour). He lovede en (promised them) grote gnade, oft he
weder queme an sin rike ; he wart up eneme schonen rosse voret
de stat umme to beschowende . . . darna cortliken (shortly
after) quam de man van steden, dat nenman wiste, wor he hennen
vor (fared). Seder (later) quam de mer (news), dat bi deme Rine
en troner (trickster) were, de in dersulven wise de lude bedroch,
de ward dar brand in ener kopen.' A more exact account in
Ottocar cap. 321 — 6, and the chron. in Pez 1, 1104. The legend
may also confound the two Fredericks, I and II (see Suppl.). 3

1 In the MS. * Historio trium regum 1 by Job. von Hildesheim (d. 1875) is
mentioned a temple of the Tartars. Behind walls, locks and bolts stands & withered
tree, guarded by men at arms : whatever prince can manage to hang his shield on
the tree, becomes lord of all the East ; the Great Ebandid succeed, and is therefore
irresistible (Goethe's Kunst u. alt. ii. 2, 174-5. Schwab's Account of the book
p. 181-2). The tree stands at Tauris, form. Susa. On the other hand, Montevilla
reports that • in the vale of Mambre, as one journeys from Ebron to Bethlehem,
stands the woful withered tree that they call Trip, but we name it tree of victory;
'tis an oaktree, and thought to have stood from the beginning of the world ; and
before Our Lord suffered, 'twas green and well-leaved, but when God died on the
cross, it withered up . . . 'Tis found written in prophecies, Out of Netherland shall
come a prince with many christians, he shall win these lands, and Ut sing the mass
under the dry tree, then shall it gather green leaves again, and bo fruitful, and Jew
and Heathen all turn Christian. Therefore do they shew it great honour, and over
it keep good ward.' This is from the transl. by Otto von Diemeringen ; the Nethl.
edition names the tree Drip, the Latin one Dirp, and has nothing about the pre-
dicted singing of mass. Was this a German interpolation, and is the whole a
Western legend transported to the East ? Or are the German popular traditions
due to reports of Eastern travel? In 0. Fr. the tree is called le sec-arbre,Varbre sech
or supe ; see passages quoted in Theatre Fr. au moyen age, p. 171.

' There is a remarkable phrase : ' auf den alien kaiser hinein dahin leben,' to



Digitized by Google



HEROES INSIDE HILLS



959



As Charles's white beard points to Wuotan, so does Frederick's
red to Donar, and the like mythic meaning has been put on OlaFs
red beard (p. 548) in Norway.

Frederick Redbeard in the Kifhauser and Unterberg, Charles
Ixmgbeard in the Unterberg and Odenberg, Holda in the Horsel-
berg, all express one mythic idea, but with a different story
tacked to it in every case. Charles fights a stupendous battle,
and is then gathered up in the Odenberg, whence he will issue
one day to new war and victory. Frederick is coming out of the
Unterberg to fight such a battle. In the 13-14-15th centuries
the people associated with it the recovery of the H. Sepulchre :
the heroes of Odenberg and Kifhauser have no such purpose set
before them. The older programme is, that upon their awaking
comes the great world-battle, and the Day of Judgment dawns :
of this the mention of Antichrist leaves no doubt. Here we see
connexion with the myth of the world's destruction (p. 810-2).
The suspended shield may signify the approaching Judge (RA.
861) ; even the sign of the tree turning green again looks to mo
more heathen than christian. It might indeed be referred to
Matth. 24, 32. Mark 13, 28. Luke 21, 29-30 (Hel. 132, 14),
where the omens of the Great Day are likened to the budding fig-
tree as a sigu of approaching summer ; but to apply the simile to
the Judgment-day would clearly be a confusion of thought. I
prefer to think of the neivly verdant earth after Muspilli (SaBm.
9 b ), or of a withered and newly sprouting World-tree, the ash
(p. 796-9) ; we might even find in this of the witliered tree 1 some
support to my interpretation of muspilli, mudspilli as = arboris
perditio (p. 809). And what if Frederick's asking after the
Hying ravens should be connected even with the eagle flying over
the new world (Saora. 9 b ), or the one sitting on the ash-tree ? It
might also suggest the cranes which at the time of the great over-
throw come flying through the bread-stalls (Deut. sag. no. 317).

live in hope of the old k., Simplic. 3, 20. 4, 11 ; *ati/ den alten kaiser hinein
stehlen,' Springing!, cap. 6 ; i.e. reckoning on a possible change in the nature of
things.

1 In other cases too the withering or greening of a tree is bound up with the
fate of a country. In Dietmarsen stood a marvellous tree, that flourished before
the conquest, and withered on the loss of liberty. There goeBa prophecy that 4 when
a magpie builds on it and hatches Jive white chickens, the country will bo free again,'
Neocorus 1, 237, conf. 662.



Digitized by Google



960



TRANSLATION.



In the same way Fischart (Garg. 266-7) couples the enchanted
king's return with the coming of the cranes}

The myth of the sprouting tree and the battle near it is set
before ns with important variations in a Low Saxon legend
(Miillenhoff nos. 509 — 512.605; Pref. L.). An ash, it is believed,
will one day grow up in the churchyard of Nortorf in the middle
of Holstein : no one has seen anything of it yet, but every year a
small shoot comes up unnoticed above the ground, and every New-
year's night a white horseman on a white horse comes to cut the
young shoot off. At the same time appears a black horseman on a,
black horse to hinder him. After a long fight, the black rider is
put to flight, and the white one cuts the shoot. But some day he
will not be able to overcome the black one, the ash tree will grow
up, and when it is tall enough for a horse to be tied under it (RA.
p. 82; conf. the Dan. legend of Holger, Thiele 1, 20), the king
with mighty hosts will come, and a terribly long battle be fought.
During that time his horse will stand under the tree, and after
that he will be more powerful than ever. In this story one can
hardly help recognising the World-tree and the battle at the
world's destruction : the white horseman seems to be Freyr, or
some shining god, struggling with Surtr the black, and striving
to delay the approaching end of the world by lopping off the
sprout. Heathen gods the two champions are for certain, even if
they be not these. The king, whose horse stands tied up under
the tree, is the same as he whose shield is hung upon the tree, a
future judge of the world.

As the past and the future, the lost paradise and the expected,
do in the people's imagination melt into one, 2 they come to
believe in a re-awaking of their loved kings and heroes out of
their mountain- sleep : of Frederick and Charles, of Siegfried and
doubtless Dietrich too. This is the true hall-mark of the epos, to
endow its leading characters with a lasting inextinguishable life.
But Siegfried is also Wuotan (pp. 26n. 134), Dietrich is Wuotan

1 Other signs that the end of the world is at hand : when the swan drops the
ring from his bill (p. 429) ; when the giant's rib, from which a drop falls once a year,
has nil trickled away (Dent. sag. no. 140) ; when the tongue of the balance stands in
(ib. 294) ; when, says a Swed. song, the stone in the green valley falls; when the
ship made of men's nails is built (p. 814).

1 P. 822-3 ; even the particles ever, once, one day, olim, apply to both states
of being.



Digitized by Google



HEROES INSIDE HILLS.



9G1



future. In the castle-cellar of Sal urn, in the Silesian Zobtenberg,
(p. 937), Charles is Wuotan (p. 394) ; and Wuotan, after Mus-
pilli, rises on the world anew, a god alive and young again.
Once before, OSinn had departed out of the land to GoSheim
(Yngl. saga, c. 10) ; they supposed him dead, and he came back.
And with long-bearded Wuotan the older legend of a red-bearded
Donar may have started into consciousness again.

Arthur too, the vanished king, whose return is looked for by
the Britons, 1 is believed, ridiug as he does at the head of the
nightly host, (p. 942), to be lodged in a mountain with all his
massenie : Felicia, the daughter of Sibylle, and the goddess Juno
live in his fellowship, and his whole army lack neither food nor
drink, horses nor raiment. 2 That Gralent continues to live, wo
are assured at the end of the Lais de Graelent. In a vaulted
chamber near Kronburg in Denmark, mail-clad men sit round a
stone table, stooping down, resting their heads on their crossed
arms. When Holger danske, sitting at the end of the table,
raised his head, the table, into which his beard had grown, went to
pieces, and he said : ' we shall return when there are no more men
in Denmark than there is room for on a wine-butt/ (Thiele 1, 23.
168). The Danes applied every myth to Olger, who does not
belong to them at all, but to the Netherlands ; he is the same
Ogier (Otger, perh. Otacher) that haunts the Ardennes forest, and
is to come back some day. 3 The Slavs too believe in the return
of their beloved Svatopluk (Sviatopolk), and some parts of
Moravia still keep up the custom of going in solemn procession
to seek Svatopluk (Palacky 1, 135). With this I couplo Svegdir's
going forth ' at leita Offin' to look for 0., Yngl. saga 15. The
• seeking God 1 on p. 145 was another thing (see Suppl.).

Often the banished one bears no name at all : the shepherd
from the Ostenberg found in the cavern of the Willberg a little
man sitting at a stone table, which his beard had grown through
(Deut. sag. no. 314) ; and a grizzled man conducted the shepherd
of Wernigerode to the treasures of the mountain ca ve (ib. no. 315),
The beard's growing round or into the stone expresses forcibly
the long duration of the past time, and the slow advance of the

1 1 Et priua Arturus veniet vetus ille Britannus,' Hear. Soptimell. in Leyser,
p. 460. ' cajas in Arturi tempore fructus erit,' ib. p. 477.
1 Wartb. kr. jen. hs. 99. 100 (Dooen 1, 132*3).
» Barroia, preface p. xii. Pulci28. 36.



Digitized by Google



9G2



TRANSLATION.



were found three men sitting at the table (ib. nos. 15. 143), who
are represented as malefactors enchanted. It is easy to trace
the step from heroes shut up in mountains to such as, having
died naturally, sleep in their tombs of stone, and visibly appear
at sundry times. At Steinfeld, in the Bremen Marschland, a man
had disturbed a hiine-grave, and the following night three men
appeared to him, one of them one-eyed (an allusion to Wuotan) ,
and conversed in some unintelligible language ; at last they
hurled threatening looks at him who had rummaged their tomb,
they said they had fallen in their country's cause, and if he broke
their rest any more, he should have neither luck nor star (Harrys
Nieders. sag. 1, 64).

But as Holda is spell-bound in the mountain, so it is preemi-
nently to white women, white-robed maidens, (pp. 288. 412-8) that
this notion of mountain banishment becomes applicable : divine
or semi-divine beings of heathenism, who still at appointed times
grow visible to mortal sight ; they love best to appear in warm
sunlight to poor shepherds and herd-boys. German legend
everywhere is full of graceful stories on the subject, which are all
substantially alike, and betray great depth of root.

On the Lahnberg in Up. Hesse sat a white maiden at sunrise;
she had wheat spread out on sheets to dry in the sun, and was
spinning. A baker of Marburg was passing that way, and took
a handful of grains with him ; at home he found nothing but
grains of gold in his pocket. And the like is told of a peasant
near Friedigerode.

A poor shepherd was tending his flock at the Boyneburg, when
he saw a snow-white maiden sit in the sunshine bv the castle-door :
on a white cloth before her lay pods of flax ready to crack open.
In astonishment he steps up, says f oh what fine pods ! ' takes up
a handful to examine, then lays them down again. The maiden
looks at him kindly, but mournfully, without a ward of reply.
He drives his flock home, but a few pods that had fallen into his
shoe, gall his foot ; he sits down to pull off the shoe, when there
roll into his hand five or six grains of gold (Deut. sag. no. 10;
conf. Wetterauische sagen p. 277. Hone's Anz. 8, 427).

In tho Otomannsberg near Geismar village, a fire is said to
burn at night. Every seven years there comes out a maiden in



Digitized by Google



WHITE LADIES IN HILLS, ETC.



9G3



snowy garments, holding a bunch of keys in her hand. Another
white woman with a bunch of keys appears on the castle-rock at
Baden at the hour of noon (Mono's Anz. 8, 310).

In the castle- vault by Wolfartsweiler lies a hidden treasure,
on account of which, every seventh year wlien may-lilies are in
bloom, a white maiden appears ; her black hair is plaited in long
tails, she wears a golden girdle round her white gown, a bundle of
keys at her side or in one hand, and a bunch of may-lilies in the
other. She likes best to shew herself to innocent children, to
one of whom she beckoned one day from beside the grave below,
to come over to her : the child ran home in a fright, and told
about it; when it came back to the place with its father, the
maiden was no longer there. One day at noon, two of the goose-
herd's girls saw the white maiden come down to the brook, comb
and plait up her tails, wash her face and hands, and walk up the
castle hill again. The same thing happened the following noon,
and though they had been told at home to be sure and speak to
the maiden, they had not the courage after all. The third day
they never saw the maiden, but on a stone in the middle of the
brook they found a liver- sausage freshly fried, and liked it better
than they ever did another. Another day two men from Griin-
wettersbach saw the maiden fill a tub with water from the brook,
and carry it up the hill; on the tub were two broad hoops
of pure gold. The way she takes, every time she goes up and
down, was plainly to be distinguished in the grass (Hone's Anz
8, 304).

At Osterrode, every Easter Sunday before sunrise, may be seen
a white maiden, who slowly walks down to the brook, and there
washes ; a large bunch of keys hangs at her girdle. A poor
linen-weaver having met her at that season, she took him into
the castle ruins, and of three white lilies she plucked him one
which he stuck in his hat. When he got home, he found the
lily was pure gold and silver, and the town of Osterrode had not
the money to buy it of him. The Easter-maiden's marvellous
flower was taken by the Duke in return for a pension to the
weaver, and placed in his princely coat of arms (Harrys 2,
no. 23).

One Christmas night, when all lay deep in snow, a waggoner
walked home to his village by a footpath. He saw a maiden in a
vol. in. ?



Digitized by Google



9G4



TRANSLATION



summer bonnet stand not far off and turn over with a rake some
pods of flax that lay spread out on the ground. ' I say, lass, is
that the way ? ' he cried, and took a handful of the pods ; she
made no answer, but cut him over the hand with the rake. The
next morning, when he remembered what he had brought home,
the flax-pods had all turned into gold. He then hurried back to
the spot, where he could see his footprints of the night before
deep in the snow, but damsel and flax had disappeared (Mone's
Anz. 5, 175).

On a hill near Langensteinbach in the forest is the long-ruined
church of St. Barbara, where the white woman walks by buried
treasures. One leap-year in the spring a young girl went into it,
and saw her step out of the choir, she cried sh ! and beckoned
the girl to her : her face and hands were white as snow, her
raven hair was thrown back, in the hand she beckoned with she
held a bunch of blue flowers, on the other were ever so many gold
rings, she wore a white gown, green shoes, and a bunch of keys at
her side. The terrified girl ran out of the church, and fetched in
her father and brother who were at work outside, but they could
not see the white woman till they asked the girl, who pointed
and said 'there I ' Then the woman turned, her hair hung over
her back to the ground, she went toward the choir, and then
vanished (Mone's Anz. 5, 321),

Into the convent garden of Georgenthal a maid was going
about the hour of noon to cut grass ; suddenly, high on the wall
there stood a little woman as white as lawn, who beckoned till
the clocks struck twelve, then disappeared. The grass-girl sees
on her way a fine cloth covered with flax-pods, and wondering
she pockets two of them. When she gets home, they are two
bright ducats (Bechst. Thiir. sag. 2, 63).

About the underground well near Atterode many have seen
in the moonlight the white maiden dry either washing or wheat
(ib. 4, 160).

At the deserted castle of Frankenstein near Kiosterallendorf, a
maiden clothed in white appears every seven years, sitting over the
vault and beckoning. Once when a man wished to follow her,
but stood irresolute at the entrance, she turned and gave him a
handful of cherries. He said ' thank you/ and put them in his
pouch ; suddenly there came a crash, cellar and maiden had dis-



Digitized by Google



WHITE LADIES IN HILLS, ETC



965



appeared, and the bewildered peasant, on examining the cherries
at home, found them changed into gold and silver pieces (ib. 4,
144).

A fisherman in the neighbourhood of the Highwayman's hill
near Feeben was throwing out his nets, when he suddenly saw
the white woman stand on the bank before him with a bunch of
keys. She said, ' thy wife at home is just delivered of a boy, go
fetch me the babe, that I may kiss him and be saved.' The
fisherman drove home, and found everything as she had said, but
he durst not take his child out at once, the clergyman advised
him to have it christened first ; after which, when he repaired to
the hill, the white woman sat weeping and wailing, for it was one
of the set conditions that her redemption should be wrought by
an infant unbaptized. So ever and anon she still appears on the
bill, and waits the deliverer's coming (Ad. Kuhn. no. 67).

By Hennikendorf not far from Luckenwalde, two shepherds
pastured their sheep. A woman half white, half black, shewed
herself on the mountain, making signs to them. One of them
tardily went up, and she offered him all the gold in the mountain,
if he would come in and set her free. When this entreaty failed
to move him, she said that if he did not release her, there would
not be another born for a hundred years that could; but the
shepherd did not get over his fear till the hour of deliverance
was past, and the woman sank into the mountain, whence he
could for a long time hear heartrending plaints and moans (ib.
no. 99).

A peasant who kept watch on the bleaching-floor near
the ruins of Chorin monastery, saw the white woman (known
there as the uigebersclie, housekeeper, from her carrying a large
bunch of keys) step in suddenly, and was not a little frightened.
Next morning he told the other men, one of whom asked him
if he had noticed her feet. He said no : ' then ' said the other,
'let's all go to-night and have a look.' At midnight they sat
down in the floor, and watched : before long the white woman
came slowly striding, they all looked at her feet, and observed
that they were in yellow (some say, green) slippers. Then the
other man called out, laughing, ' why, she has yellow slippers
on ! ' She fled in haste, and was never seen again (ib. no. 199).

Beside the brook of the Biitow castle hill, a peasant was



Digitized by Google



966 TRANSLATION.

ploughing, and often noticed a maiden draw water from it in a
golden bucket and wash herself. At length he summoned up
courage to ask her, and was told that she was a king's daughter,
and had sunk with the mountain-castle into the ground; she
could only be saved by one who, without halting or looking
round, would carry her to the Wendish burial-ground at Biitow,
and there throw her down with all his might. The ploughman
ventured on the enterprise, and had safely got to the church-
yard, but before he could fling her off his shoulders, something
clutched his hair from behind, and he was so startled that he
looked round and let his burden fall. The maiden flew up into
the air, complaining 'that she must suffer more severely now,
and wait another hundred years to be saved by a steadier hand.'
Since then she has not as yet appeared again (Tettau and Temme
no. 267).

The Pillberg is a castle that was banned. In the evil hour
from 11 to 12 at noon a woman used to shew herself on it,
smoothing her hair in the sunshine, and begging the shepherds to
lay hold of her: no harm should come to whoever did so, only
let him hold her tight and not say a word. A man of thirty,
who was still employed as a cowboy, mustered up all his courage
for once, and grasped the hand of the castle-dame; while he
held, all sorts of jugglery were played upon him, dogs were just
going to bite him, horses to run over him, still he held fast ; but
anguish forced from his breast the moan ' herr Gott, herr Jesus ! '
In a moment the dame was loose from his hand, sobbed out that
she was lost for ever, and vanished (Reusch's Sagen des Sam-
lands no. 8).

On the hill near Kleinteich a castle is said to, have stood, which
has long been swallowed up. The people say their forefathers
still saw with their own eyes a king's daughter come up every
day between 11 and 12, and comb her golden locks over a golden
trough (ib. no. 12).

The Hunenberg by Eckritten was once a holy mount, whereon
the Prussians sacrificed to their gods ; there a dame shews herself
now. A peasant, having heard a good deal about her, rode up
the hill to see her. He did see her too, combing her hair, but
turned tail directly, and was only prevailed on by her prayers
to turn back again. She addressed him kindly, and gave



Digitized by Google



WHITE LADIES IN HILLS, ETC.



9G7



hi m what she had combed out of her hair. He felt so daunted
that he thanked her, popped the present into his pocket, and
rode off; hut when he was out of her sight, he threw it away.
He had better have kept it, for at home he found a few grains of
gold still, which had stuck in the corners of his pocket (ib.
no. 13).

I could fill sheets with this kind of stories : with all their
similarity, they differ in details, and I had to pick out what was
characteristic. 1 Then, as to locality, they occur not only in
Alamannian, Pranconian, Hessian or Thuringian districts, but I
believe all over Germany, notably in Westphalia, L. Saxony, the
Marks, and further Bast ; no doubt also in Switzerland, Bavaria
and Austria. Schmeller 1, 33 mentions the Loferer jungfrau of
Salzburg country, and remarks that the story has spread far into
Bavaria. And the people of Friesland, Drenthe and the Nether-
lands have just as much to tell of their witten wijven or juffers in
hills and caverns (J. W. Wolf no. 212), though here they get
mixed up with elvish personages. Thiele's Danske folkesagn 4,
33 cites a white woman, ' den hvide qvinde * of Flensburg, who
watching a treasure waits for deliverance; and 4, 96 a gold-spin-
ning damo in black dress near Veilefjord in North Jutland. The
Swed. hvita qvinna above, p. 955n., seems to be of another kind.

Sometimes the narrative becomes fuller and like a fairytale :
e.g. that in Bechstein 4, 221 no. 39 of the couple who had set
down their child of five years in the forest while they gathered
wood, but could not find it again, and looked a long time, till the
child came running up with flowers and berries which the white
maid had given it out of her garden. The parents then set off to
see this garden : it was all out in bloom, though the time of the
year was cold ; the white maid beckoned to them, but they were
afraid. The child wished every day to go to her, wept and
moped, sickened and died : it was forfeited to the sky-folk, the
elves (conf. Kinderlegenden no. 3). Again, a man who puts up
at a lonely huntingbox, hears at midnight a scuffing of shoes, the
white woman comes to his bedside, bewails her woe, and craves

l See farther D. Sag. no». 11. 12. 316. Mone's Anz. 3, 149. 258-9. 4, 162. 7,
370. 476. 8, 313. Bechst. 1, 121 6. 2, 61. 93. 164. 3, 180-1-7. 4, 167-8. 187.
209. 221-4-9. Frank, sag. 157. 285. Tettau and Temme 166. 189. Harrys 1, 19.
30. 2, 19. 23. Kuhn nos. 64. 119. 206.



Digitized by Google



968 TRANSLATION.

deliverance, as Condwirumurs did of Parzival (Mone's Anz. 6,
396—8; andSuppl.).

For the origin of these White Women we need not go to the
Celtic matrons and fays (pp. 410-7) who are closelj related to
them; our own antiquity brings us to beings nearer still. Elfins
and swan-wives appear in white shining garments ; among god-
desses may be named three in particular, of whom the ' white
woman* and finally the 'nun* might be the outcome: Eolda,
who in the very same way combs and bathes in the midday sun,
Berhta, white by her very name, who spins and weaves, Ostara
(pp. 290. 780), to whom the people offered up may-lilies (p. 58).
Hoida and Berhta bestow trifling gifts, which turn into gold ; the
white women are fond of gold rings and wands (Mone 7, 476),
heaps of gold lie on their laps (8, 185), they give away boxfuls of
gold sand (5, 414). Berhta as the white ancestress appears when
a death is at hand (p. 280) j so does the white maid (Bechst. 4,
158). Berhta' s misshapen foot (p. 280) lies at the root of the
white maiden's goat- foot, her long nails (Mone 7, 476), her green
or yellow slippers (p. 965) ; else why should these have seemed
so strange ? The woman half-white, half-black, resembles Hel
(p. 312), unless one would trace them to the garb of a nun (Mone
3, 259). Even the white man's occasionally displacing the white
dame (6, 69) is like Berhtolt by the side of Berhta. Allegoric
females like those in chap. XXIX evidently have in their manner
of appearing much in common with white women.

Now the pervading thought in all this of being banned and
longing for release I take to be just this, that the pagan deities
are represented as still beautiful, rich, powerful and benevolent,
but as outcast and unblest, and only on the hardest terms can
they be released from the doom pronounced upon them. The folk-
tale still betrays a fellow feeling for the white woman's grief at
the attempted deliverance being always interrupted and put off
to some indefinitely distant date.

The traditional mode of expressing this is peculiar and assuredly
ancient : He that shall some day speed in achieving the deed and
upheaving the hoard (his predestined reward), must be rockeol as
a babe in the cradle made of the wood of the tree that now, but
a feeble twig, shoots out of the wall of a tower: should the sapling
wither or be cut away, the hope of release is put off till it sprout



white ladies: redemption.



969



anew and be grown a tree (D. sag. nos. 107, 223). Other con-
ditions aggravate the difficulty : The cherry-stone, out of which
the seedling is to sprout, must be carried into the chink of the
wall by a little bird (Bechst. Franken 191) ; among the stones a
double firtree must spring out of one root, and when it is 100 years
old, two unmarried persons must hew it down on St. Wunibald's
day, the stouter stem shall slide down the hill in a sledge on St.
Dagobert's day, and out of its planks the deliverer's cradle be
made (Mone's Anz. 3, 91) ; the walnut-tree is now but a finger
high, whose planks are to form the cradle in which the future
deliverer must lie (7, 365). Sometimes it is merely said, the tree
is yet unplanted, the timber unhewn (6. 397. 7, 476. 8, 63). In
Ad. Kuhn no. 94 the formula runs thus : A lime-tree shall bo
planted, that will throw out two plantschen (boughs) above, and
out of their wood is a poie (buoy) to be made : the first child that
therein lies is doomed to be brought from life to death by the
sword, and then will salvation ensue. In all these tales the ar-
rival of the future event is linked with the germinating of a tree,
just as the World-fight was made to depend on the sprouting of
the ash (p. 960), or on the dry tree breaking into leaf (pp. 955-7).

Another difficulty put in the way of deliverance is, that the
maiden in some disgusting shape, as a snake, dragon, toad or frog,
has to be kissed three times (D. sag. no. 13. Mone's Anz. 3, 89.
7, 476). Already in the poem of Lanzelot we have this kissing
of the dragon's mouth, who after that turns into a fair lady
(7881. 7907-90).

Now and then the apparition of the white dame basking in the
sun, beaming and bathing, melts into the notion of a water-holde
and nixe (p. 491), a Scand. hafs-fru, (Afzelius2, 150), spirits that
likewise need redemption (p. 493). Twelve white sea-maids come
and join in the dancing of men (Mone's Anz. 5, 93) ; add the
Romance legend of Meiusina. But such mer-women generally
assume, wholly or in part, the shape of a fish or snake ; and some
white women have a fish's tail, a snake's tail imputed to them :
a king's daughter was immured in the golden mount as a snake,
and only once in three nights recovered her human form (Kin-
derm, no. 92) ; in the Oselberg by Dinkelsbiihl dwells a snake
with woman's head and a bunch of keys about the neck (D. sag.
no. 221 ; and Suppl.).



Digitized by Google



970



TRANSLATION.



With the notion of mountain-banishment is commonly asso-
ciated that of an enchanted, yet recoverable treasure. Where the
ancient hero or god sits in his mountain cavern, just as in the
hero's grave or barrow, lies hidden a huge hoard ; and the white
woman, the snake woman, or simply snake and dragon, are they
that guard it.

The Goth, huzd, OHG. horl, AS. heord, ON. hodd, seems to be
letter for letter the Lat. eust in custos, custodia, and this from
euro (for cuso), so that our hus (what harbours, shelters) and the
Lat. curia (house and court) will come under the same root; thus
huzd already contained the notion of keeping watch and ward.
From thesaurus, It. Sp. tesoro, Fr. tresor, was taken the OHG.
treso, dreso. The Goth, skatts, OHG. seaz meant simply numus,
and has only gradually acquired the sense of our schatz, thesaurus,
gaza; as late as the 13th cent, schatz had simply the meaning of
money, wealth (Flore 7749. Troj. 2689. 3171. MS. 2, 146*),
not of depositing and guarding.

The generally diffused belief that treasures sleep in the bosom
of the earth causes 0. v. 4, 23, in speaking of the earthquake at
the Saviour's resurrection, to say : 'sih scutita io gilicho thiu erda
kraftlicho, ioh si sliumo thar irgab thaz dreso thar in iru lag,'
gave up the treasure that in her lay.

The treasure being buried deep down, it follows, that whoever
would gain possession of it, must dig it up (heben, heave). It is
supposed that the treasure moves of itself, i.e. slowly but steadily
strives to come to the surface, it is commonly said, at the rate of
a cock's stride every year (D. sag. no. 212). We saw how the
thunderbolt, Donar's priceless hammer, after plunging far into
the ground, pushed its way up in seven years (p. 179). At an
appointed time the treasure is up, and waiting to be released ;
if then the required condition fails, it is snatched away into the
depths once more. Its nearing the surface is expressed by the
phrase ' the treasure blossoms ' (as fortune blossoms, p. 866), ' it
gets ripe'; then 'it fades' (Simpl. 2, 191), has to sink again.
This may refer to the blowing of a flower above or beside it. In
MHG. they spoke of the treasure coming forth: 1 wenne kumt
herviir der hort, der mich so riche mohte machen ? ' MS. 1, 163 .
It ripens in most cases every seven years, in some only every
hundred, and that especially under a full moon, or during the

0



Digitized by Google



nOARD LIFTED : WUNDER-BLUME



971



Twelves. Another phrase is, 'the treasure suns itself: on the
Fridays in March it is said to rise out of the ground to sun itself
(Mone's Anz. 8, 313), and that spreading-out of the wheat and
the flax-pods (p. 962-4) was this kind of sunning ; the treasure
heaves itself up in cauldrons, and then indicates its presence by
a clear blaze shining on it, as fire flickers over a ghost's barrow
(p. 915-6) ; a blue flame is seen upon it (Reusch no. 46) ; it has
the appearance of glowing embers, of a brewing-copper full of red
gold (nos. 7. 25-6); when a fire burns over it, they say 'the
treasure airs itself.* Nevertheless many treasures do not move
toward the surface at all, but have to be sought in the cavern
itself.

Two requisites for raising the treasure are silence and innocence.
Holy divine tasks endure no babble : thus, heilawac must be
drawn in silence (pp. 229. 586), in silence herbs of magic power
be picked ; cry out over a treasure, 'twill sink that moment out
of sight (Superst. 214). The harmless hand of childhood is fit
to lay hold of it, as it is to draw lots ; poor village boys, shepherd
lads, are they that find it (D. sag. 7. 157-8) ; he that is stained
with vice can never come near it (ib. 13).

Whoever spies the treasure should hasten to throw something
on it, both as taking possession, and to ward off danger. It is
recommended to throw quickly over the treasure either bread,
or a piece of clothing worn next the skin, or a three-halfpenny
piece (Superst. I, 218. 224. 612). See the passages on fire,
quoted p. 602-3.

But the hoard is indicated and guarded. Indicated by the
re-appearance of those vanished heroes and white dames ; indi-
cated and watched by dogs, snakes, dragons. Also the flickering
flame (waver-lowe, p. 602) or the flower in bloom bewrays it, and
swarming beetles (p. 694) are a sign of it (see Suppl.).

To get into the mountain in which it is concealed, one usually
needs a plant or root to clear the way, to burst the door.

The folktales simply call it a beautiful wonderflowcr, which the
favoured person finds and sticks in his hat : all at once entrance
and exit stand open for him to the treasure of the mountain.
If inside the cavern he has filled his pockets, and bewildered
at the sight of the valuables, has laid aside his hat, a warning



Digitized by Google



I



972 TRANSLATION.

voice 1 rings in his ear as he departs : ' forget not the best ! 3 but it is
then too late, the iron door shuts with a bang, hard upon his heel,
in a twinkling all has disappeared, and the road is never to be
found again. The same formula comes up regularly every time
in the legends of the Odenberg, of the Weser mountains and the
Harz, and in many more (D. sag. nos. 9. 303. 314. Becbst. I,
146. 3,16. 4,210-1. Dieffenbach's Wetterau pp. 284-5. 190) ;
it must be very old. 1 The flower is commonly said to be blue,
the colour most proper to gods and spirits, yet also I find
'purple flower' and 'white flower' mentioned. Sometimes it
is called schlusselblume (key-flower), because it locks the vault,
and as symbol of the key-wearing white woman, whom the
bunch of keys befits as old mistress and housekeeper, and who
has likewise power to unlock the treasure ; also luck-flower
(Bechst. 3, 212), but most frequently wunderblume. When three
wonderflowers are named, it seems to mean three on one stalk
(ib. 1, 146. 4, 209). The sudden violent springing- to of the door
is remarkably like the Edda's 'hrynja honom fa d heel )>eygi
hlunnblick hallar,' Saem. 226*; ' begar laukst hurSin a hcela
honum,' Sn. 2 ; ' eigi fellr honum ha hurS d hcela/ Fornald. sog.
1, 204; and twice of the slamming of hell's door (p. 315). A
shepherd boy has the heel of his shoe carried away (D. sag. 157),
as another who hastens away has his lieel cut off (Kinderm. 3, 75).
When a shepherd mistook the order, the vault broke down, the
door closed behind him with a crash, but caught him by the heel
of one foot and smashed it, he was long a sufferer, and spent the
money he had brought away on the cure of his foot (Bechst. 4,
211); or, he rushes out, the door slams behind him, and both
his heels are cut away (Harrys 2, 14). I set some value on the
recurrence of these formulas, and should like to trace them in
MHG. poems. A 13th cent, phrase, ' die berge sint nu ndch mir
zuo ' (mountains closed behind me now), MS. 2, 145 b , seems to
mean that former chances are now forfeited.

1 As if that of the flower itself. Several flowers, esp. the germander (speed-
well) and myosotis, are popnl. called forget-me-not, clearly with reference to their
miraculous power. The sentimental explanation arose later.

2 Other formulas : ' je mehr du zerstrcust, je mehr du bereust ! * or, ' je mehr
du verzettest, je minder du hottest ! 1 esp. when the gold given or gathered has the
appearance of foliage or charcoal. In the cavern, where gold lies on the table, the
three old men sitting by it cry to the astonished visitor : ' greif einen grif, streich
einen strich, und packe dich ! '



Digitized by Google



HOARD LIFTED : SPRING- WURZEL.



973



Instead of wonderflower or keyflower, other stories name tbe
spring wurzel (explosive root), a herb that can be procured in the
following manner : The nest of a green or black woodpecker, while
she has chicks, is closed tight with a wooden bung ; the bird, on
becoming aware of this, flies away, knowing where to find a
wonderful root which men would seek in vain. She comes
carrying it in her bill, and holds it before the bung, which im-
mediately flies out, as if driven by a powerful blow. Now if you
are in hiding, and raise a great clamour on the woodpecker's
arrival, she is frightened, and lets the root fall. Some spread a
white or red cloth under the nest, and then she will drop the
root on that, after using it. Mone's Anz. 8, 614 gives a pretty
old passage out of Conrad von Megenberg : ' Ain vogel haist ze
latin merops, und haist ze tutsch hdmJieckel (tree-hacker), und
nist in den holen bomen, und wenn man im sinii kint verslecht
(nails up) mit ainem zwickel, so bringt er ain krut (herb) und
halt das fur den zwickel, so vert (starts) der zwickel her dan.
Das krut haist 1 herba meropis/ daz spricht bomJieckelkrut, und
haist in der zoberbuch 'chora/ und wer nit guet daz man es
gemainklich erkant, wan es giint sloss gegen im uff (not good
to be generally known, for locks fly open before it) , damit smidet
nieman, wan der ge van gen lyt uf den lip.' The pecker was
esteemed a sacred and divine bird (p. 673); even Pliny 10, 18
reports the myth : ' Adactos cavernis eorum a pastore cuneos,
admota quadam ab his herba, elabi creditur vulgo. Trebius
auctor est, clavum cuneumve adactum quanta libeat vi arbori,
in qua nidum habeat, statim exsilire cum crepitu arboris, cum
insederit clavo aut cuneo/ 1 That the woodpecker specially is
acquainted with the magic virtues of herbs, appears from other
tales : he guards them, and flies at the eyes of the man that
would pull them up. Thus Pliny says 25,4,10 of the pajony :
' praecipiunt eruere noctu, quoniam si picus martins videat, tuendo

1 Conf. Aelian De nat. An. 3, 25, on the hoopoe. Rabbinic legend mentions
the rock-splitting nhamir, which Solomon procured in the following way [to get
stone] for his buildings. He had search made for the nest of a woodcock (grouse?)
with chicks in it, and had it covered over with white crystal. The woodcock came,
and finding it could not get at its yonng fetched the thamir, and was placing it on
the glass, when Solomon's messenger set up a loud cry that startled the bird and
made it drop the shamir, and the man took it with him (Majer's Myth. wtb. 1, 121).
The Gesta Roman, tells nearly the same story of the oatrich and his fetching the
blaster worm thumare (Grass's transl. 2, 227).



Digitized by Google



974 TRANSLATION.

in oculos impetum faciat;' and 27, 10, 60: 'tradunt nocta
effbdiendas, qaoniam pico martio impetum in oculos faciente,
interdiu periculosum sit.' That root of explosive power is
supposed to be the euphorbia lathyris, which the Italians call
sferracavallo, because its power over metals is so great, that a
horse stepping on it has to leave the shoe behind (see Suppl.).

But, beside these plants that make doors fly open, another
very ancient means of discovering and obtaining the gold or
treasure buried in the earth is the wishing-rod. Why should an
OHG. gloss at once render 'caducous' by wumcili-gerta (Granim.
2, 510. Graff 4, 257), but that this term was thought to come
nearest the sense of Mercury's magic wand ? The Latin name
carried nothing on the face of it about wish or wishing (Notker
in Cap. 16. 37 translates it fluge-gerta, virga volatilis). The
notion then of a magic rod with a German name of its own was
of very old standing, and that name moreover is one connected
with the meaning I have more than once mentioned of the word
' wunsch,' which, like stelde, signified both the sum total of hap-
piness and a personal being Wunsch or Saelde. The diminutive
form of it in wunscili-gert& leads me to see in this compound
no reference to a person, but to a thing : it is the gerta (yard,
rod) by possessing which a man becomes partaker of all earthly
bliss. The bestowal of that bliss proceeds from Wuotan the
supreme (p. 419).

The 13th century poets also use the term. Conrad in his
Schmiede 664 (614), comparing the Virgin to the rod of Moses :
' du bist diu wiimchel-gerte, dar mit (wherewith) uz einem steine
wazzer wart gestagen; ' and 1306 (1261) : 'du saelden (Sselden ?)
wiinschelgerte ; ' in his Troj. 19888, of Helena: 'schcene als ein
uriinschelgerte kam sie geslichen (gliding) ufreht,' as Danish
folk-songs use lilje-vaand (lily-stalk) in a like sense; Troj. 2215 :
' alles heiles ein wiinschel-rU (-spray).' Gotfried in a minnesong
2, 9 : ' der gnade ein wunschel-ruote (-rod).' Nithart in Eosenkr.
3 : ' gespalten nach der wiinschelruote stam,' cleft like the w.'s
stem. Albr. Titur. has more than once wiinschelgerte, wunschel-
ruote 4146, and f wunschel-same des varmen ' 4221, because varm,
our farn (the fern, filix), is a healing plant. But the weightiest
passage is that in Nib. 1064 (even if the stanza be an interpola-
tion), just where the hoard of the Nibelungs is described :



Digitized by Google



HOARD LIFTED : WTSHING-ROD. 975



i



Der umn*ch lac (lay) dar under, von golde ein ruetelin,
der (whoso) daz het erkunnet, der mohte meister sin
wol in al der werlte iiber islichen (every) man.

Among the gold and gems of the hoard lay a rod, whose miracu-
lous virtue (wunsch) included every good, every joy ; and he that
knows its worth (I put only a comma after riietelin, and make
1 daz ' refer to it, not to the whole sentence) has power given him
over all men ; the wishing-rod not only made treasures come, it
intensified and continually increased their value.

Here the wishing-rod is called golden. It was commonly picked
off a hazel-bush ; according to Vintler it is ' that year's shoot
(sumer-lato) of a wild hazel-tree/ To have it, one must cut by
right-hand moonlight (crescent moon) a bough with a zwisele,
zivispel (furca), and twist it three times round itself. 1 Others
demand a white shoot of hazel or holy-thorny one that has a twiele
or fork, has shot up in one year, and has not a speck of old wood
in it ; it must stand so that the sun from east and west shines
through the fork, else it is no good. He that would gather it
walks in silence to the shoot, between 3 and 4 in the morning
of a Sunday in full moon, turns his face to the east, bows
three times to the shoot, and says : 1 God bless thee, noble spray
and summer's bough ! ' Then follow seven spells, given in the
Meckl. jb. 5, 1 10 — 7. That simile of Conrad's makes us imagine
a single slender rod. Several sorts were distinguished, at least
in later times : fire-rod, burn-rod, burst-rod, strike-rod, quake-
rod. The hazel was not used for all, some were made of brass
wire, and perhaps of gold. In Lower Germany they say wicke-
rode, from wicken, to play the witch, tell fortunes. It is all-
important to hold the rod correctly in the hand (grasping tho
two tips, so that the stem out of which they spring shall look
upwards) ; it will answer then, the stem will turn toward the
objects it has to point out, and if there are none at hand, it will
keep still. Some say that one point of the fork is held up firmly
in each hand, and if nevertheless one of them bends with irresist-
ible force to the ground, a bed of ore is not far off. There were
also spells to be spoken during the process : 1 Rod, rod, I ask of

1 Ettner's Unwiird. doctor pp. 3 — 8. Conf. the forked fir and lime (p. 969), and
the three flowers on one stalk (p. 972) ; a twig with nine tips (Superst. I, 950), a
lime bongh with nine branches (Rhesa dainos 30).



Digitized by Google



976



TRANSLATION.



thee, where may the best treasure lie ? 1 By means of the wish-
ing-rod men thought they could discover hidden treasures, veins
of ore, springs of water (hence in Switzerland they call it spring-
taster, Tobler 80*), nay, even murderers and thieves. 1

In Aushelm's Bern, chron. 2, 8, I fiud the name glucks-stablin,
as we had a flower of luck above. The French name is baguette
ilivinatoire : acc. to the Mem. de Tacad. Celtique 4, 267 ' de
coudrier, fourchue d'un coteV

Does the ON. gambanteirin, Ssem. 77 b , 85 b contain a similar
notion ? Teinn is ramus, virga (Goth, tains, OHG. zein, AS. tan,
OS. ten),* gamban resists all interpretation hitherto. In the last-
named passage gambanteinn is gathered in the forest :

Til holtz ec gecc (I went) oc til hras viSar
gambantein at geta. gambantein ec gat.

Another passage Saem. 60 b deals with a ' gamban -sumbl umgeta/
which might very well mean a wishing-banquet of the gods. I
would adopt the variant ' gaman-sumbl/ and explain gaman as
bliss, just as wunsc seems to belong to wunna. Yet in AS. we
find gomban gyldan, Beow. 21, a distinct word from gomen
(gaudium). Again * tains vendi ec J?ic dr6p/ with wand of taming
I thee smote, Saem. 84 b , is worth weighing : tains vondr is un-
doubtedly a rod of magic influence.

A story in full detail of a wishing-staff that St. Columban gave
away to a poor man, and which he smashed at the bidding of his
wife, may be found in Adamanni Scoti vita S. Columbae cap. 24
(Canisii Lect. antiq., torn. 5).

And now our surest guide to the original meaning of the wish-
ing- rod is the Krjpv/ceiop of Hermes (the caduceus of Mercury) : a
staff with two snakes twining round it. But these snakes appear
to have been first formed by the boughs of the olive, so that the
older pd/38o<t (Od. 24, 2) probably had the forked figure of our
wishing-rod [' three times twisted/ p. 975], The Hymn to Merc.
527 calls it oXySou tca\ ttXovtov pdfiSov, xpvo-ei'rjv, rpiTrerrfKov
golden (as in the Nib. Lay), three-leaved, bringing luck and

1 Literary history of the wishing-rod in the New Lit. Anz. 1807, pp. 345—477;
oonf. Braunschw. Anz. 1752, p. 1625 ; Ooth. taechenb. 1809, pp. 1—19. The asser-
tion that it has only come into use in Germany since the 11th cent, seems false.

a It might also mean sagitta, which recalls Martin von Amberg's 4 nach schatre
mit p/ilen suocheu.'



Digitized by Google



noARD guarded: dog



977



wealth. Now, seeing that Mercury wears the winged petasus too,
as Wuotan was recognisable by his pilei umbraculum, that in this
again there dwells the idea of a wishing -hat (p. 869), and that the
bliss-bestowing wishing-rod must be referred to a personal Wish,
consequently to Wnotan ; I think, in the concurrence of all these
resemblances there lies an incontrovertible proof of the primitive
unborrowed identity of Wuotan with Mercury. Rudolf in his Barl.
274, 25 may very well have meant ' des Wunsches bluome,* as the
numerous examples from his Gerhart (p. 140) shew how familiar
this personification was to him. So in Tit. 5161-9 : 'gezwiet vil
der wumtchelrise 9 and ' wiinscliel-berndez ris' (see Suppl.).

The mythical aspect of mountain-prisoned treasures, as of
7H ounta in -prisoned heroes and gods, has led us to Wuotan the
supreme maker and giver of all things, 'to whom are known
all hidden treasures/ Yngl. saga, cap. 7.

Some other things, beside flowers, herbs and rods, are helpful
to the lifting of treasure. Thus a black he-goat that has not a
light hair on him is to be sought out and tied to the spot where
money lies hidden, like a sacrifice to the spirit who guards it
(Mone's Anz. 6, 305). Some prescribe a black fowl without even
the smallest white feather, else the devil breaks the lifter's neck
for him (Bechst. 4, 207). Enchanted money has had the curse
pronounced on it, that he alone shall find it who ploughs it out
with a pair of black cocks ; one man carved himself a tiny plough
for the purpose, and accomplished the lifting, Reusch's Samland
p. 29 (see Suppl.).

But on the hoard lie dogs, snakes, dragons to guard it, DS. no.
13. 159. Schm. 2, 209.

In Annales Corbej. ad an. 1048 (Pauilini p. 386) : ' Aiunt in
Brunsberg magnum thesaurum absconditum esse, quern niger
canis custodit cum oculis igneis ; ' and in the Carmen de Bruns-
bergo (Pauilini p. 599) :

Horrendus canis est tenebrosum vinctus ad antrum,

thesauri custos, qui latet imus ibi ;
igneus est visus, color atque nigerrimus ill i,

08 patulum, et cunctis halitus usque gravis.

Under the pear-tree men saw burning coals, and at night a



Digitized by Google



978 TRANSLATION.

black poodle lying (Mone's Anz. 7, 227). On one chest in the
vault lay a toad, on the other a white dog : when the peasant's
wife struck about with a rod she had got from the white woman,
the dog turned black as coal, at which the woman was so fright-
ened she broke silence, and the deliverance came to nothing
(ib. 5, 320).

No beast has more to do with gold and treasures than the
snake, which coils itself down on the gold-heap (p. 689), shakes
off sparkles (p. 690-1), wears gold crowns (p. 686). We saw the
white woman herself appear half or wholly in serpent shape. By
the water outside the gold cavern a huge hissing snake keeps
watch : hit him boldly on the head, he will arch himself into a
bridge over the water for you, and you may step over it with a
stout heart, and bring away as much golden earth as you will
(Bechst. 4, 1 74) . Fani-gold seems to be gold that has lain in
fens with the snakes and dragons (p. 531).

Our earliest antiquity has famous legends of snakes and dragons
on the gold (p. 689-90). It is worth noting, that men were fond
of giving the shape of the snake to costly golden ware in the way
of ornaments and weapons. A heap of gold glittered in the sun,
and a black vx>rm lay coiled around it, yet so that he did not
reach quite round, and a span's breadth was left open : at this
spot the labouring man who had spied the hoard stept in and
gathered gold. When he had crammed his pockets full and even
the smock he had pulled off, it came into his head to call up a
companion and bid her load herself with the rest of the treasure ;
but his voice was drowned in the terrible roar that suddenly
arose : ' out with the coin, out with the coin ! ' was the cry, and
the terrified man flung all the money away, and began to flee ;
in a moment worm and treasure sank into the mountain, and the
earth closed up again, the uproar was over and the sun shone
sweetly ; only a few coins remained, which when thrown away
had fallen outside the serpent ring (Reusch's Samland no. 3).

The great hoard on which Fdfnir lay was made up of gold that
the gods had been obliged to hand over for the covering and
cramming of Otter, but which Loki had previously taken from
the dwarf Andvari. SigurBr, having got it into his power after
slaying the dragon, conveyed it all safely away on Grant's back,
hence gold was named byr&r Grana (Granonis sarcina, OflG.



Digitized by Google



NIBELUNGS* HOARD.



979



would be Kranin purdi), Sn. 139. It is remarkable that in a
Swed. folksong (Arvidsson 2, 193) the maiden awaiting her
betrothed says :

Vore det den ungersven (were he the swain) som jag skulle ha,

sa fbrde han det guldet pa gangarens bak !

According to our lay of the Hiirnen (horny) Sifrit, 1 though the
hero still wins the hoard by slaying the dragon of Drachenstein,
and loads it on his steed (166, 4), the origin of the gold is related
differently. It is the Nibelinges hort, and Nibling king of dwarfs
leaves it to his three sons (13, 4. 14, 3. 134, 3. 168, 2), two of
whom, when their mountain began to move (in an earthquake ?)
and threatened to fall in, carried it away without telling their
brother Eugel, 3 and hid it in a cave under the 1 dragon-stone/
where Siegfried afterwards found it (133, 4. 134,3. 135, 1). A
dragon that always after five years and a day takes human shape
for one day 3 at Easter, had charge of the treasure and of a beau-
tiful princess, a white woman, whom Siegfried set free together
with the treasure.

Some things are left obscure in this account, which are cleared
up in the epic of the Nibelungs itself. Siegfried acquires the
hort Niblunges not when he kills the lintrache (lithe-dragon), but
when Schilbunc and Niblnnc asked him to divide the treasure, a
thing they could not manage themselves ; and neither could he
(94, 5) . The hoard is carried ' uz eime holn berge ; ' apparently
it belonged to dwarfs, so that Schilbunc and Niblunc were of the
elf kindred. Thus in both lays the hoard originates with dwarfs,
and in the Edda with dwarf Andvari ; as elvish beings they are
by nature collectors and keepers of subterranean treasure, haunt-
ing the mountains as they do (pp. 448. 452), and they delude
(pp. 464. 915) like spectres. Then the wishing-hat is brought
to mind by the cover-capes and mist- mantles of dwarfs (p. 915) ;
the dwarf race, like the dragons, 4 cherishes and guards treasures,

1 The Seifriedsburg in the Rhon mts fWeisth. 3, 535) is another place abont
which the hero-legend is told among the common people (Mone'a Anz. 4, 410, and
thence Bechst. Franken 144).

5 Eugel's prophecy and his conversation with Siegfried (159 — 164) leave no donbt
of his identity with Gripir in the Edda, bat in point of name with Gripi's father
Eylimi. This Eylimi (insulae, prati ramus, almost a Laufey reversed p. 246) con-
tains ey = OHG. onwa, augia, which must be in Eugel too.

3 Km tac in der helle hat leng ein ganzez jar 28, 2.

4 Mountain-sprites guarding treasure are found in the Schenkofen cavern, in
the Reichenspitz, in the Ziller valley. Muchar's Gastein p. 145.

VOL. III. G



Digitized by Google



980



TRANSLATION.



and as Dame Holda travels with the Furious Host and sits locked
up in the mountain, she too is connected with the elves (p. 452).
Entrance into the caves of dwarfs is found as into enchanted
mountains, and men are carried off to spend some time in the
society of elvish sprites (p. 494), as they do in Dame Venus'
mount (p. 935).

That Nibelung and Schilbung wished to have their father's
property divided, is asserted also in Bit. 80* ; that they could
not divide the treasure, is a highly mythic feature, which I shall
illustrate further on, when I come to treat of Wishing-gear.

As a union with goddesses, wise-women, white-women, results
in danger to heroes, so does their winning of the hoard turn to
their misfortune. He that has lifted the treasure must die soon
(Hone's Anz. 7, 51-3). Because Andvari laid a curse upon the
ring that Loki extorted from him, the same riug brought destruc-
tion upon HrerSmar and his sons, who insisted on having it, and
upon Sigurft and Brynhild, whose betrothal was accomplished by
it (Sn. 140).

An ON. name for gold is ' orms be$r ' or ' Fafnis bceli,' worm's
bed, dragon's couch, who lies brooding on it, so to speak. Bui
turns into a worm, and lies on his gold-chests, Fornm. sog. 11,
158. draco thesauri custos, Saxo Gram. 101. 'incubas gazae ut
magnus draco, custos Scythici luci,' Martial 12, 53; miser and
dragon have little joy of their wealth.

Dragons guarding treasure were also known to the Orientals
and Greeks. The hundred-headed sleepless one guarded the
golden apples of the Hesperian grove (Scythici luci), Photius,
Bekk. 150, 6. 16. The ancients were equally familiar with the
notion of griffins watching over gold : * grifen golt,' Parz. 71, 17
seq.

Sometimes, on the spot where treasures sparkle, a calf is said
to lie (Reusch no. 47), not in my opinion as keeper, but as part,
of the treasure. For treasure-diggers profess to look for the
golden calf, and for the golden hen and twelve chickens, 1 by
which plainly something mythical is meant (see Suppl.).

A statement in the Renner 5100 deserves attention, that all
buried, i.e. unlifted unredeemed treasures will one day be Anti-

1 riuquet's Contes populaircs dc Bayeux. Rouen 1834 p. 21.



Digitized by Google



ENCHANTED CASTLE. SUNKEN HOARD.



981



christ's, whose coming we have already seen mixing itself up in
many ways with the fable of the Furious Host and mountain-
prisoned heroes.

The legends largely run over into each other : what is told of
the doings of elves and dwarfs in mountain-clefts is also related
of noisy sprites haunting deserted houses (p. 514). In one
enchanted castle a maiden with her treasures waits deliverance
(Kinderm. no. 4), another is possessed with devils (ib. no. 81).
And here again comes up the feature, that the spirit unblest
carries his head under his arm (ib. 3, 15) like the leader of the
Furious Host, and that he gets his beard shaved by the stranger
who is to take off the ban (ib. 3, 9. Mone's Anz. 7, 365. Baader's
Bad. sagen no. 275) ; conf. the well-known fairytale in Musaaus,
and Simpliciss. 1713. 1, 617, who also knows the legend of the
waste castle and the beard-shaving (see Suppl.). The old fable
of the water-bear lodges schrats (night-hags) in the forsaken
house, and Beowulf rids the royal hall of Grendel's nightly visits.
A house like this, in which all is not right, seems to be called
in MHG. wunder-burc: 'ich sunge ouch wie der (trache ?) lit,
der manigen in der wunderburc verslunden hat dur sinen git/
MS. 2, 177'.

Similar to removal into mountains or banishment into the
ground, and proceeding from like causes, there is also a sinking
into the waters. What the elves get hold of in one case, nixes and
sea-sprites do in the other. Holla dwells not only in the hollow
mountain, but in the fountain and the lake.

Accordingly, to spirits of heroes and to treasures we shall see
a residence assigned in water as well as in a mountain. King
Charles sits in the fountain at Niirnberg, with his beard grown
into the table (Deut. sag. no. 22). 1 The Nibelungs* hoard lies
sunk in the Rhine : * Rin skal ra^Sa rogmalmi, i veltanda vatni
tysaz valbaugar/ Saem. 248*. In the Siegfried's Lay 167, 4 the
hero himself spills it into the stream, that it may not work the
ruin of his Recken, as Eugel has foretold; the Epic however
makes Hagen destroy it, and not till after Siegfried's murder
1077, 3:

er sancte in da ze Loche alien in den Rin ;
1 Conf. Ettner's Unwiird. doctor 1720-1.



Digitized by LiOOQle



982 TRANSLATION.

this he did secretly, without the knowledge of Chriemhilde, who
to the last supposes it to be in his hands, till he answers
2308, 3 :

den schatz weiz nu nieman wan (but) Got unde mm.

No doubt there were other legends which placed it in moun-
tains : the account given by a woman living in Nerike was, that
it lay inside the Kilsberg there, and the key to the cavern was
kept under a rosebush (Iduna 10, 269). The Ms. 2, 169 b has :
der Imelunge hort lit in dem Burlenberge in bi (by them, i.e. the
Rhine-folk) ; but the MsH. 2, 241 s reads 'der Nibelunge hort'
and * in dem LurlenbergeS Imelunge may be corrupt for Nibe-
lunge, as Imelut for Nibelot (p. 385 n.), and Lurlenberg shall
have its due, if such be the reading, though I had taken Burlen-
berc for Burglenberg, Biirglenberg, OHG. Burgilunberc on the
Rhine near Breisach (Dumbeck p. 339), where the Harlungs, per-
haps Amelungs, dwelt with their treasure (Heldens. p. 186 — 8).
One of the Venus-hills in the Breisgau and Eckart may also
have to do with it. But the Harlunge golt (Dietr. 7835) enters
into Gothic Amelung legends, and there might be an 'Araelungo
hort' like the famous 1 Ermenriches hort' of which so much is told.
Again, the Vilk. saga cap. 381 makes Etzel the avaricious first
get at Siegfried's gold which is locked in a mountain, and then
significantly die of hunger, so that the Niflunga skattr drags him
also to destruction ; while Danish lays have it, that Gromild,
immured in the mountain, pines to death in presence of Noglings
(i.e. Nibelung's) pelf (Heldens. p. 306). So many conflicting yet
connected accounts may justify us in conceding even to that far
older aurum Tolosanum, which the Tectosages sunk in the lake of
Tolosa, some influence on old Gothic legend. 1

Stories of submerged castles are found in abundance. When
the waters are at rest, you may still descry projecting pinnacles
of towers, and catch the chiming of their bells. Scarcely can
enchanted men be dwelling there ; all life is grown dumb beneath
the waves. Three legendary features I will single out. Tho
approaching doom is commonly announced by talking beasts : the
enormity of the crime whose punishment impends has lent them
speech, or some magic has opened to man the meaning of their

1 Jnstinus 32, 3 ; conf. Duncker's Origines Germanics?, p. 31.



Digitized by Google



SUBMERGED CASTLE.



933



tones. The serving-man tastes a piece off a silver-white snake,
and immediately knows what the fowls, ducks, geese, doves and
sparrows in the yard are saying of the speedy downfall of the
castle (DS. no. 131). This is told of Isang's castle near Seeburg,
a similar story of Tilsburg near Dahlum (p. 774), and no doubt
in other neighbourhoods as well. Another thing we come across
is, that a good man who is sick sends his son out to observe the
weather, and is told first of a clear skv, next of a tiuv cloudlet on
the mountain's edge, and by degrees of a cloud as big as a hat,
as a washtub, as a barn-door ; then the old man has himself
carried in all haste up a hill, for the judgments of God are now
let loose on the Suggenthal, Sunkenthal (Mono's Anz. 8, 535 ;
couf. Schreiber's Tagb. for 1840, p. 271). That is a forcible
description of the swift advance of an unforeseen calamity. The
same legend presents us with yet a third feature full of meaning.
When the water had wrecked and swamped all the houses in
Suggenthal, there remained alive only that old man and his son,
and one small infant. This child, a boy, floated in his cradle all
through the flood, and with him was a cat. Whenever the cradle
tilted to one side, the cat jumped to the other, and restored the
equilibrium ; in this way the cradle safely arrived below Buch-
hok, and there stuck fast in the dttld or crown of a tall oak.
When the water had subsided, and the tree was accessible again,
it was fetched down, and child and cat were found alive and un-
hurt. As nobody knew who the boy's parents had been, they
named him after the tree-top Duld, and the name is borne by his
descendants to this day (Mone's Anz. 6, 69 and more completely
8, 535). The story perfectly tallies with that Welsh one quoted
p. 580, where, in spite of all difference of detail, the main thing,
the child's being saved in the cradle, is related just as it is here ;
which also seems to me to confirm the sense I ascribed to the
OX. luSr p. 559n. A pretty adjunct is the companionship of tho
auxiliary cat, who together with cock and dog was required by
simple-minded antiquity to give evidence (RA. 588). From the
name of this foundling Dold (OHG. Toldo, i.e. summit-born) I
understand now what the common people mean by being born ou
an oak or walnut-tree (p. 572n.) ; how exactly the myths of Crea-
tion and Deluge fit in together, is past doubting (see Suppl.).



Digitized by Google



CHAPTER XXXIII.
DEVIL.

The notion of the Devil and of devilish spirits, which has by
degrees acquired so wide a compass and struck such deep root
even in the popular religion, was unknown to our heathenism.

It seems a general rule, that a Dualism dividing the Supreme
Being into opposites, where it is not [already] based on the
earliest profound thought of a system, (such as the Zendic),
never gets established at a later period except by abstract
philosophizings. To the sensuous mythologies lying in the
great middle it is ill-adapted.

An all- pervading idealistic distinction between a good and an
evil spirit, Ormuzd and Ahriman, 1 is known neither to the Indian
and Greek theologies, nor to the Teutonic. Before the might of
the one all r governing God the kakodaemon's power fades away.
Then out of this nnity there grow up trilogies (Brahma, Vishnu,
Siva; Zeus, Poseidon, Pluto; Wuotan, Donar, Fr6; Har, Iafnhar,
Thri"5i), dodecalogies, and the plenitude of pantheism. But it is
to my mind a fundamental feature of polytheism, that the good
and beneficent principle in the Divine preponderates ; only some
isolated deities, subordinate to the whole, incline to the evil
or hurtful, like the Norse Loki, whose nature even then is more
on a par with that of Hephasstus (Vulcan) than of the christian
Devil. Goodness predominates even in elvish sprites : To the
nix, the homesprite, nay the giant, it is but partially that cruelty
and malice are attributed. In harmony with this is the mild
way in which our antiquity pictures death and the underworld.

But for all that, amid the vast variety of character and colour-
ing in these mythologies, the Dualistic antagonism need not
altogether be silent: it does break out in individual features,
without greatly affecting the whole. Under this head come, e.g.

1 The genuine forms are Ahurdmazdao and Agrdmainyns, but the former is
often called ^pf-ntomainyus, dyadbs iaifxuv, in contrast to Agrdmainyus the kokos
daifjuv. 1 uruouf t> Comm. bur le Yacna \>\k 90. 92.

Ml



Digitized by Go



ORIGIN. 985



the myths of Day and Night, of Elves light and dark (p. 444),
of Summer and Winter. 1

The Jewish monotheism accorded to its Satan (1^*?) on ^y fcne
subordinate part of a tempter and traducer, as is plainly shewn
in the book of Job, and confirmed by the Greek term 8id&o\o<;
which the LXX and New T. use alternately with aarav, <rarava<;
(Arabic shaitan) or Batfioviop (usually for Hebr. shed "Ttf). After
the Captivity the Jews were more familiar with the idea of
Dualism, and in N.T. times their whole demonology had largely
expanded ; Beelzebub is spoken of as prince of all evil spirits, •
whom the 0. T. knows merely as a heathen idol : so that, even
as early as that, false gods come to mean demons or devils.

It pertains to the history of Christianity to explain how there
came to be added the notion of Lucifer, 8 a rebel spirit of light
who took up arms against God, and with his adherents (in Matth.
25, 41 the devil has already 'his angels') was banished into
darkness. Luke 10, 18 : idevpovv rov aaravav d>? aarpaTrrjv etc
tov ovpavov ireaovra, as the lightning darts into the ground,
whereas a falling star usually affords a pleasing image (p. 722).
At the same time, this revolt of the Devil and his companions
must be supposed to have had a higher antiquity. Thus arose
the doctrine of a satanic empire in rivalry with the celestial, a
doctrine that daily met with more acceptance: the evil spirits
may be the weaker side and suffer defeat, but they go about
enlisting wicked men, and seek thereby to replenish their host.
Compacts are made with the Devil, and he aids his confederates
even during their earthly life.

From another side, the conversion of the Heathen itself con-
tributed to expand and diversify the prevailing conception of
the Devil's agency. It has been remarked more than once, that
the deserted heathen deities were declared vanquished and shorn 4r ( K ^
of their strength, yet not downright powerless : their once kindly
benignant sway had turned into a fierce fiendish one. Thus
what the Christians believed about the Devil received at the

1 The old faith of the Slavs set up a white and a black god : Belbogh and
Chernibogh. But this dualism seems to me neither thoroughgoing nor primitive.

3 It arose out of Isa. 44, 12 : ' how art thou fallen from heaven, fair Morning,
star 1' But it appears first in Eusebius (Demonstr. evang. 4, 9), not in Tertullian,
nor Irenreus nor Lactantiu*. Even Jerome and Augustine never call the devil
Lucifer.



Digitized by Google



98G



DEVIL.



hands of the Heathen a twofold enlargement : heathen gods and
spirits already malign and gloomy in themselves readily dropt
into the christian category of devilish beings ; with greater diffi-
culty and more resistance from public opinion, was effected
nevertheless the transmutation of the good gods of old into
spectres and demons. In this process names for the most part
got suppressed or disguised ; myths and stories were not so easily
to be abolished.

In not a few cases the Devil may be regarded as a parody
or aping of the true God, as the left or wrong-side (taken mildly,
the foil p. 515) of the Divine Being 1 : he wants to have the
same power, enjoy the same honour, and mimic God in every-
thing ; but his contrivances miscarry and come to nought. So
the idea of a Devil's-mother might have arisen as counterpart
to Mary the mother of God, though she had an earlier prototype
in the giant's-niother (see Suppl.) .

All these influences so diverse in kind have joined to produce
such popular notions of the Devil's being and character, as have
existed from the N. T. to our own times. Tho Devil is Jewish,
Christian, Heathen, a false god, an elf, a giant, a spectre, all
in one. By the addition of him, Christianity could not but
receive, just as heathen Polytheism was expiring, a visible bent
towards Dualism, which afterwards philosophy tried to resolve
into a general principle of good and another of evil. When wo
compare tho cheerful tone of Greek myths with the harshness
and grimness imparted to the legends of our Mid. Ages by the
intrusion of an ail-too positive Devil, we see that the contrast
comes out not so much in the original texture of the popular
beliefs, which is everywhere the same or similar, as in the colour
laid upon it ; and therefore our inquiry is entitled to resolve
a whole mass of devil-phenomena back into the milder forms of
ancient spirits and gods.

Before I attempt to isolate so much of these traditions as
is due to our Teutonic paganism, or at least that of our next
neighbours, it is even more than usually necessary to make sure
of the various names employed.

* Got fried of Viterbo 1, 23 propounds the query : 4 Quare creavit Deus diabo-
lum, cum sciret eum malum ease futurum ? Respondeo, quia propter opens sui
oruatum, sicut pictor nigrum colorem substcruit, ut albus apparentior fiat, sic per
praevaricatiouem malorum justi clariores fiunt.'



Digitized by Go



TOE WORD DEVIL.



987



The wonl teufel, devil, is un-Teutonic, being simply Sid/3o\o<;
retained. 1 Ulphilas, following the Greek text, distinguishes
diabauliis, satana and unhulpo, translating haifioviov by the last,
to which I shall have to come back. In OHG. satanas is kept
unaltered, but the diabolus of the Vulgate is cut down to titibil,
tieval, or to diuval (T.), diufal (0. ii. 4, 101), neut. pi. diufilir (iii.
14, 53), which likewise renders the Lat. daemonium (Fragm.
theot. ii. 14). By this extension of meaning and contraction of
form, we see that the word was getting naturalized and gradually
driving the others out of the field: MHG. tievel, tiuvel, tied, our
teufel; AS. deofol, Eng. devil; M. Nethl. duvel, now duivel ;
Icel. djbfull, Sw. djefvid, Dan. djdvel. It spread through nearly
all Europe : It. diavolo, Sp. diablo, Fr. diable, O.Fr. deable ; Pol.
djabel, Boh. d'abel, Russ. diavol, Serv. diavo ; the Lettish and
Finnish nations, the last to be converted, have alone forborne
the appellation. And, as in the case of God (p. 15), there occur
euphemisms : HG. deichel, deixl, deigel, deiker, deukcr, 2 Swiss
dyggeli, tuggeli (Staid. 1, 325); Nethl. duker ; Swed. djakul,
kndkul, kndfvel (Hire's Prov. lex. 93*), also Westph. kniivel for
duvel ; Fr. diacre, Pol. djachel, djasek, djablko and many more. 3
Noticeable is N. ps. 90, 13 : 'urtiefel, chuninch anderro tiefelo/
diab. rex daemoniorum. 4 Satan is used rarely in MHG., very
often in modern German ; in the Anegenge 218 b and in Strieker
I find f der satanat,' the later MLG. Zeno often repeats satanas.
O.Fr. goufre de satenie, eaternie, Ren. 20224, 28429, the last
form stretching out a hand to Saturn (p. 249, and Suppl.).

All other names for the Devil can be brought under three
points of view, according as they are drawn from his Character,
his Figure, or his place of Abode. And to these may be added
Disguised forms of name.

I. From his intrinsic nature the Devil is called the evil, hostile,

1 So is oar engel, angel borrowed, both name and thing. Mone, who thinks
' teufel ' is unborrowed, and identifies both it and diabolus with Dionysua (Anz. 6,
354. 8, 449), will hardly boggle over the Oermauness of ' engel 1 either. It is true
iidfioKot (the slanderer), which the LXX does not yet have, might in the N. T.
spring out of an Oriental word allied to Pers. div and Lat. divus (p. 161).

' And even ' der dcutscher, as the Poles say Niemiaszek ( = German) of the
Devil, which may really go back to the Slav deity Nemisa ?

» Zabulxu, zabolon, which Mid. Age dictionaries and glosses give for diabolus,
and render ' contrarius, arena,' is the same word , 1 zabulones buoch,' Ms. 2, 13*.

4 Notker's interpretations of diabolus, ' vidrrri*, nidcrfal, chuning widerfluzze,'
turn upon the fall, the down-rush, of tho devils, Gramni. 2, 703



Digitized by Google



988 DEVIL.

unlovely (unholde), as antithesis to the good kind gracious God.
The thought is often expressed in roundabout phrases or in
adjectives, often enshrined in appropriate appellatives : ' der nio
guot genet/ who never counselled good, Dietr. 40*; 'der ie
tugende storte/ ever thwarted virtue, Kolocz. 254; like the Edda's
' sa er flestu illu raeSr ' of Loki, Sn. 46, or the epic periphrase in
Reinh. xxxii. xxxvi to describe the fox and wolf as beasts of
devilish nature, 'dich hat niht gxwtee uz gelan/ 'twas nothing
good (= the devil) that left us you, Dietr. 8347 ; as wo still
say ' I have looked for him like nothing good.' der iibele tiuvel,
Iw. 4670. Nib. 215, 4. 426, 4. 1892, 4. Ms. 1, 59 b der iibel
vient, Gregor 2849. The evil foe, evil spirit, evil one ; der ubile
geist, Fundgr. 102,34. 105, 2. der bose geist 105, 7. Nethl.
de booze vyand. 'The crooked devils' in Kinderm. 1, 422 means
the unrighteous, evil ones. A sermon in MHG. has ' der ubile
buman der tivel/ Grief shaber 277. It is remarkable that in ON.
we even come upon ' hinn Mi O&inn,' Fornm. stfg. 5, 172. 10,
171. The O.Fr. poets often put maufez, malfez, maufes (pi.
maufS, malfe) for devil; later maufais, maufaiteur, which leaves
no doubt as to the sense being evildoer, evildoing. 1 As early as
585 we have adversarius boni operis (Pertz 3, 3), It. aversiera*
O.Fr. aversiers, devil. OS. the balowiso, malus, dirus, Hel. 33,
2; conf. ON. bolvis, Seem. 77 b .93» (bolvlsar konor 197 b are
witches) ; Goth. balvavSsei, i.e. balvaveisei fcatcia, 1 Cor. 5, 8 ;
but our pilwiz on p. 472 can hardly be connected. Then OS.
the ledo, invisus, dirus, Hel. 33, 9, leda wihti, maligni spiritus 48,
14; M. Nethl. de lede duvel 3 ; OHG. der leidige tiefal, Diut. 3,
59; AS. se laffa. Again, OS. the hutola, odiosus, Hel. 110, 9;
hetteand herugrim 142, 12, cruel hater and persecutor. AS. se
grimma gcest, M. Nethl. lede gast, Rein. 2841. Of special im-
portance here are names denoting a hostile being, resisting God

1 Here belongs particularly the Slav. W&r, bis (devil), from which even OHO.
p6si, O. Fris. base seems to have come, being unknown to other Teut. tongues ; and
Slav. fff, z/y, zlo (evil), Boh. zley-duch (evil spirit), Sloven. sl6di (zlodi, Glagolita
xxxix), slo-dey (evil-doer), slom, slomik, to which again our ichlimm (OGH. slimb,
Graff 6, 793 obliquus) may be allied ; Sloven, hudizh, hudir (from hud, malus, Pol.
chudy, miser), Ac. Ac. [Are not two roots confounded here: zol, zlo ■» bad, and
s-lom, iz-16m, raz-16m«dis-ruptio, from lomfti, to break ? And is zl6di conn, with
Goth, sleidja fierce, 6lei>jan to hurt ?]

* Maratori's Antiq. 2, 1090, and la Verriera in Pulci 5, 42. 21, 27(Vocab. della
Crusca sub v.), arutaria Biondelli 249.

* Rein. 1280 intslOts duvels name -» in des lets (leden) duvels.



Digitized by Google



NAMES TAKEN FROM HIS NATURE



989



and persecuting men. The Latin Fathers favour the use of
the term antiquus hodis (Greg. Magni opp., ed. Bened. Paris
1705. 1, 1019; his Moral. 31, 50 and Dial. 2, 30. Bonif. epist.
6, anni 723. Jonas Bobbiens. p. 5 ; Vita S. Romani 744*. Capi-
tulare in Georgisch 795, and many later records, e.g. one of 1121
in Kremer's Beitr. 3, no. 24). And this our OHG. authorities
imitate: alt-fiant (Muspilli 49) ; fiant entrisk (Hymn 24, 9), but
here we cannot help thinking of the AS. for giant, ent (p. 524),
as giants in general are supposed to be old, stone-old (p. 529) .
AS. se ealda deofol, se ealda, Ctedra. 267, 5. So 1 then altan
sat&nasan wilit er gifahan (he wants to catch)', 0. i. 5, 52. der
satonas altist, Musp. 25. In MHG. : der alto, Geo. 3376-85 ;
der elteste 3368. In N. Friesland to this day 'de ual (old)
diiivel,' Geizh. p. 112; in England 'old Nick, old Davy;' in Den-
mark 'gammel Erich' (Holberg's Uden hoved oghale, sc. 5), which
it would be allowable to trace back even to the divine Erik of
heathen times (p. 361) ; Norweg. gammel Sjur (Hallager 102*) ;
ON. kulski, both senex and diabolus. In the same way God is
called the old (p. 21). Beside 'antiquus hostis ' we also find
persequutor antiquus, Vita S. Rom. 743, and callidus hostis, Jon.
Bobb. p. 5. hostis generis humani (fiant mannaskines chunnes),
Hymn 24, 3. A simple hostis I find but . rarely used, and the
Goth, fijands is never anything but e'xfyo? : in OHG., fiant by
itself can be devil; so AS. feond (of Grendel), Beow. 202. 1444-
89; MHG. vient, En. 2525; M.Nethl. viant, Huyd. op St. 3,
38; O.Fr. ennemi ; OS. craftag fiund, Hel. 142, \2,unhiurifiund
32, 1. 164, 14; MHG. der leidige vient, Fundgr. 66, 4. der baese
vient, Geo. 345, like our bose feind [while Engl, fiend is nothing
but devil], gerfiund, Hel. 32, 2 seems to be a strengthened form
(ger=jaculum, hasta). Out of the ON.fiandi, taken in the senso
of devil, arose the Dan. fanden, Sw. fanen, fan 1 ; but in ON.
itself andskoti was both hostis and diabolus. A word whose
meaning approaches that of hostis is the OHG. scado (homo
nocivus, latro), which in earlier times was also applied in a good
sense to heroes (p. 342). AS. sceaSa, OS. skatho, not standing
alone, but in such compounds as AS. hellscea&a, Coedm. 56, 24.
Thorpe's Anal. 126, 28, leodscea&a, Caedm. 56, 24, J>eodscea&a,

1 Conf. p. 916 dolgr for spectre, devilish spirit.



Digitized by Google



990



DEVIL.



Beow. 1550, nhtscea&a 4536, mansceafta 1417-68, and OS. men-
scado, Hel. 32, 1. 33, 15. 142, lh, wamscado 31, 17. 164, 4,
Uud8cado 32, 14. thiodscado 33, 1, it designates the Devil. Now
this hostile, hating, harmful being the Goths named the 'unhold, *
ungracious one, by which Ulphilas translates, not as a rule
SiaftoXos, but Saifioviov, yet with a vacillation of gender that
claims attention. A masc. unhulfia stands for Baifiovtov, Salfioav
in Luke 4, 35. 8, 29. 9, 42 ; for caravan in 1 Cor. 5, 5 ; for
om/3o\o? in Eph. 4, 27. and prob. ought to be so in Matt. 9, 33.
A fern. unhulj>6 occurs, always for Saifioviov, in Mk. 7, 26-9. 30.
Lu. 4,33. 7,33. John 7,20. 8,48-9.52. 10,20-1. The plur.
Baifiovia is only once rendered by masc. vnhulfians, Lu. 8, 33, and
everywhere else by fern, unhulfions, Mat. 7, 22. 9, 34. Mk. 1, 32-
4-9.3,15. 5,12. 6,13. 9,38. 16,9. Lu.4,41. 8,27.30-5-8. 9, 1.
49. The inference is, that the notion of female demons was the
favourite one with the Goths, and very likely with other Germans,
for in Hymn. 24, 3 the word for diabolus is the OHG. fern.
unholda. 1 If as heathens they had worshipped a goddess Holda,
how natural, in contrast with her mildness, to regard a malignant
being as a female unholda ! Thus Ulphilas's preference for the
term goes far to prove a Gothic worship of Hul|>6 ; and the trans-
lation of Diana by Holda and unholda (p. 267) is worth noting. —
Again, the notion of malice and ill-will carries with it that of
fierceness and wrath : so the Devil is in AS. ' se wrafta/ Caedm.
39, 24, in OS. ' the wretha,* Hel. 106, 3. 164, 4 ; AS. ' se roffa '
(trux, saevus), Caedm. 271, 12, the OS. would be ' the ruodlio ' ;
AS. 'se grama/ OS. 'the gramo,' Hel. 32, 16; also prob. AS.
' se modega* OS. f the muodago* conf. ' muodaga wihti ' for evil
spirits in Hel. 120, 9 ; and all four of these epithets denote the
wrathful, furious. 3 It should not be overlooked, first, that they
are found only in Saxon poets, never in OHG. writers ; secondly,
that they express, especially in the plural, more the idea of
demonic spirits than of the Devil : ' ]?& graman gydena,' Bth. 35,
6 (dira numina) are the Parcae : gromra (gramra), Cod. Exon.
49, 5 = diabolorum ; gramono hem (daemonum habitatio) in Hel.

1 O. Slav, nepriylzn' 1 (fern.) the ungracious =» diabolus ; even Sotond himself
occurs as a fern.

2 Our MHG. poets never give their Tinvel the epithets 1 grimm, grimmig,'
these thpv reserve for Death (p. «4Uj. But in AS. I tiud tirendel called ' se grinitna
gast,' Beow. 204.



Digitized by Google



NAMES TAKEN FROM HIS NATURE. 991

■

103, 10 stands for hell. Of Judas at the Last Slipper receiving
the sop and taking it into his mouth, the Hel. 141, 11 says; 'so
afgaf ina tho thiu Godes craft, gramon in-gewitun an thene licha-
mon, leda wihti,' so forsook him then the strength of God, demons
and devils lodged themselves in his body ; 1 ' gramon habdun thes
mannes hugi undergripan/ demons had got the mastery over his
mind 157, 19; 1 gramo (no) barn, fiundo barn' are the devils 1
household 161, 23. 157, 18; ' gramono' or ' wretharo willio/
devils' will and pleasure 106, 3 ; ' modaga wihti ' are unholdd 120,
8, conf. modage 157, 18.

This application of gram, wreth, muodag to daemons is, to my
mind, a relic of heathen times, which clung to the converted
Saxons as unhulpo had done to the Goths before them. Grendel
is called gram, Beow. 1523, and yrremod 1445 ; an ON. impreca-
tion was ' bic hafi allan gramir ! ' Seem. 80 b , and ' gramir hafi
Gunnnar!' 208 b , gramir being daemonia and exactly equiv. to the
AS. gramon. Another time Srem. 255* has ' eigi hann ibtnar 1 9
where the prose Vols, saga (Fornald. sog. 1, 214) gives gramir,
so that here again comes up the affinity of devils to giants. The
use of modag (iratus) for diabolic spirits rather confirms an ex-
planation of 'Muotes her' suggested on p. 931n.

One name, which I have held back till now, is of frequent
occurrence in MHG. poets of the 12-1 3th cent. : ' der volant,' S.
Uolrich 54*. 69 b . 74\ Anegenge 218 b . 219*. 220 b . Tundal 56,
31; 'diu vdlantinne Herodia' (see p. 283), Fundgr. i. 139,6;
4 der volant,' ii. 109, 42. Roth. 3106; 1 vdlandes man,' Roth.
3227. 3366; vdlant, Rol. 289, 7; * vdlantes man' 111, 5. 189, 16;
'der \ibel vdlant,' Nib. 1334, 1 ; vdlandinne (she-devil) 1686, 4;
vdlentinne 2308, 4. Gudr. 629, 4; ' der volant,' Nib. Lam. 625.
Er. 5555. Herbort 7725. Eilhart's Trist. 2837 ; vdlant, Wigal.
3994. 6976. 7022 ; er het geh caret den vdlant, er (the sentry)
sprach : ' seht, bi der mure (wall) da hort ich in schrien lut, owe !
er fuor die rise als6 zetal (down), daz im die stein vast walgten
nach (stones rolled after him), ich weiz nicht war im ist s6 guch
(hasty)/ Frauend. 375, 12—24; 'daz in der volant riten sol/
Welsch. gast 67* ; ' bi siner stimme (voice) ich han erkant, daz
ez waere der vdlant,' ibid. (Reinh. 384, 50) ; ' der leide vdlant,'
Trist. 8909; 'des vdlandes rat' 11339; 'vdlandes man' 6217.

1 4 Aftar tbemo muase, so kleib er Satanase,' 0. iv. 12, 39.



Digitized by Google



992



DEVIL.



G910. 16069 ; ' vdlandes barn* 10965 ; ' tiuvels vdlant, schrat unci
wazzerber ' 92 ; 'do geriet in der valant/ Moneys Anz. 8, 52 ;
vdlant, Ottoc. 453 b . 1 Certain poets abstain from the word :
Wolfram, Rudolf, Conrad. In Mod. Germ, it still lives as a
proper name (Faland, Phaland, Foland, Volland), otherwise it
rarely occurs : ' der bose volant, 1 Chr. Weise's Comodienprobe
219; 'junker Volland.' Berthold's Tageb. p. 54. In Henneberg-
they say 'der bose fahl' or 'fahl,' Reinw. 1, 30, at Frankfort
'der fold, /MS* In MLG. once only in Zeno 1166 : ' du arge
volant ! ' and nothing like it in M. Nethl. But neither do I find
fdlant, vdlant in OHG., even as a proper name; yet one can
hardly doubt its having existed, for the participial ending, as
in viant, heilant, wigant, etc., points to an early formation. A
MHG. verb valen, vrolen, occurs only in the Martina 145. 177.
215 and Alb. Titurel, and there it means to fail, err, conf. Schm.
1, 519. Fdlant must either have meant the same as the adj.
' irri/ iratus, infensus, or else misleading, seducens (Goth, airz-
jands, nslutonds) ; the AS. faBlian or faelan is scandalizare,
aeducere, and its partic. faelend would answer to valant. Some
such meaning may lie in the ON. fala (Sa3m. 143 b . 210 b gigas
femina) and the verb faola (terrere) ; in that case it would be
credible that fdlant also referred originally to giants. But now
that Phol (pp. 224—9. 614) has come upon the scene, he must not
be left out of sight in attempting to explain a word so incorpor-
ated with our language : the change of a, o into a does occur in
some instances, e.g. talanc, tolanc, and the popular forms ' voland,
fold, fuld ' are in its favour ; the participial ending must remain
an open question till further light be thrown on the obscure name
of this ancient god. Even the fierce Unfalo in Teuerdank may
be taken into the reckoning, as the ' un-' seems merely a prefix
added to intensify the ill-repute of the word ; an Unfahl occurs
elsewhere too as a proper name. 8 Compare what is said of the
pfahl-mauer (s^tke-wall) further on 4 (see Suppl.).

1 Hagene was known as tbe vAlant aller kunige, Gudr. 168, 2. 196, 4 ; all kings
feared him like a devil. Mone in Ndrl. volkslit. 67 makes it mean « vaUlant de tous
les roia ' t

9 In the Mehlwardein, a local farce 1837, p. 16 : • ei der Fuld I ' = devil ; so in
another, the Bernemer Kerb p. 13.

* In the Nordlingen witch-trials p. 47 an Apollonia Unfahlin.

* I fear some will tako it into their heads to explain phol. phal by aphtcresis of
the first syllabic in deofol, diufal, pretty much as Eblis is derived from diabolus.



Digitized by Google



NAMES TAKEN FROM HIS FIGURE. 993



II. Many names of the Devil turn upon bis outward Form.
The most striking feature is his lame foot : hence the hinkende
Uufel (diable boiteux), hinke-bein (limpiug-leg) ; the fall from
heaven to the abyss of hell seems to have lamed him, like
Hephaestus hurled down by Zeus (p. 241 J. 1 He further re-
sembles that god and the lame smith Wieland (Volundr p. 37<>)
by his skill in working metals and in building, as also by his
dwelling in a sooty hell. Here the antithesis to clear shining
white Deity demands a dingy black hue, as the dark elves were
opposed to the light. We may therefore balance the white
Baltac (p. 228), the radiant Berhta (p. 272) against the gloomy
powers, light-elves against black-elves, though the two principles
touch, and even generate one another. The word alp seems to
contain the notion of white, night and day come out of one
another, Night was the mother of Day (p. 735), Halja, Demeter,
Diana, Mary (p. 312-3 n.) present themselves half black or wholly
darkened. 2 The dark diabolic principle may be regarded as one
not original, as a falling away from divine light.

The Devil is called the black : OS. nwrki (tenebrosus), Hel. 31,
24. der swarze, Renner 36 d . Satan exit ore torvus colore tanquam
corvus, S. Gallenlied, 1 1, 3. er was swarz ah ein robe, Tund. 51,
17. diabolus in effigie hominis nigerrimi, Caesar Heisterb. 7, 17.
der swarze hellewirt, Ms. 2, 254*. der hellewirt der ist swarz, Parz.
119, 26. der heUe-wor, Walth. 33, 7. der helsce more, Fundgr.
1, 25. der helle-^rdue, Anegenge 39, 46. As a dark colour hides,
the evil spirit gets the name of the hidden, the secret : OS.
dernea wihti (spiritus latentes), Hel. 31, 20. 92, 2. But in our
folktales he is also indicated as gray man , graymanikin, conf.
graa told, Dan.V. ], 169. 180, which reminds of Wuotan and of
Berhtold ; I therefore lay stress on the fact, that as Berhta and
Berhtolt hand empty spindles (pp. 274-9), the Mark legend tells
exactly the same of the Devil : ' You must not spin of a Thursday
evening, for the evil one would throw an empty spindle into your
room, and call out, Spin that full as well ! ' Ad. Kuhn p. 379.
Of shapes of animals, some are ascribed to the Devil chiefly on
the ground of their black colour (see Suppl.).

1 II. 1, 592. Thor threatens to lame Loki, Sn. 130, and the lightning-flash has
a maiming power.

3 The Romans called Piuto Jupiter niger, the black god. Silius Ital. 8, 116.



Digitized by Google



994



DEVIL.



Such animal shape was often not made complete, but merely
indicated by some addition to a configuration mainly human,
much as the Greeks and Romans represented their satyrs, fauns
or Pan, and to Dionysns, ActaBon or Io simply added horns. The
Devil then approximates to those wood-sprites, skrats and pilosi
treated of in p. 478 seq. ; shaped like a man in the rest of his
limbs, he is betrayed by his goat's ear, his horn, tail or horse's
foot. A valant is thus described in Tund. 51, 33 : 'er het vil der
kende, 1 an des libes ende einen vreislichen zagel (tail), der het
manigen isnin nagel (iron nail), manigen haken chrumben, damit
er die tumben cholt unde stichet.' Even in heathen times the
gods and ghostly beings could imitate beasts in some parts of
their body : the Triglav of the Slavs had three goat's-heads, and
a mixture of human with animal forms is extremely common in
the Indian mythology; in the Greek and Teutonic it is rare,
and then but barely hinted at. Huldra comes before us with a
tail (p. 271), Berhta with the goose-foot (p. 281), the nix with
a slit ear, and the nixie with wet skirt (p. 491), the hero with
a swan's wing (p. 428) like Hermes with his winged feet, the
water-wife with a snake's or fish's tail ; even the giant has [only]
a finger and toe above the common (p. 527n.). The Devil's
horse-foot may suggest the semi-equine centaurs, as well as the
ON. nennir (p. 490).

Conversion into complete animal form might easily arise out
of this ; or it might be regarded as a prerogative of the higher
being to transform himself into an animal for a time.

The Devil in retiring is compelled unawares to let his horse-
foot be seen (p. 326) ; a kobold (home-sprite) is also horse-footed
(p. 511). To the water-sprite the whole or half of a horse's
figure is attributed ; that is why horses are sacrificed to rivers.
A British demon Grant, possibly connected with Grendel (p. 243),
shewed himself as a foal, Gerv. Tilb. in Leibn. 980. Loki
changed himself into a mare, and bore Sleipnir to Svaftilfbri, Sn.
4G-7. The Devil appears as a horse in the stories of Zeno and of
brother Rausch,aud in legends (Zappert pp. 68 — 71) ; black steeds

1 This many-handednen agrees with that of giants, hut I do not remember to
have seen the Devil represented with more head* than one, except in the shape of
a dragon. Antichrist however was pictured with seven head* and a horte'* /oof,
conf. Zappert ubi supra 73-4.



Digitized by Google



I

I



NAMES TAKEN FROM HIS FIGURE. 995

fa a ch away the damned, and even convey heroes like Dieterich to
hB% Vilk. saga 393. Otto Frising 5, 3 (see Suppl.).

*The representation of the Devil in the shape of a lie-goat
go*es back to a remote antiquity?; what can have given it such a
vi porous growth among heretics and witches ? The witches all
i -magine their master as a black he-goat, to whom at festal gather-
ings they pay divine honours ; conversely, the white goat atoned
/ for and defeated diabolic influence (Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 35). In
oaths and curses of the 15-1 6th cent, the he-goat apes the true
God : ' dass in der pock schend ! ' is a frequent formula in Hans
Sachs ; they swore ' bei bocks schedel,' skull, ' bei bocks lid/
limbs, as by the limbs of saints, ' bei bocks hulde/ grace. 1 Or
can bocks here be a mere variation of ' botz, potz, kotz 9 for
Gotts (p. 15) ? It does seem singular that the 13th cent, poets
never use bock in such a sense; only Martina 156 b . 184 b has
helleboc clearly for the Devil. According to Schm. 1, 151, bock-
schnitt means that bilwez-schnitt [cut through a neighbour's
corn, p. 475-6], which the people ascribe to spirits and the Devil.
Now the he-goat was the sacred beast of Donar, whom the
modern notions of the Devil so often have in the background.
In Switzerland the people will not eat goats* feet, because the
Devil appears with such, or you see them when he pulls his boots
off (Tobler 214); it might equally well be explained by Donar's
he-goats, whom he served up for dinner, then brought the bones
to life again, and was angry when one of them was broken. But
in fairy-tales the Devil himself appears as a bleating goat, and
already in Gregory the Great's Dial. 2, 30 as ' cornu 2 et trepidi-
cum ferens/ which I interpret, in the shape of a three-legged
goat and horned ; three-legged animals being spectral and diabolic
(pp. 920. 934) . The posterli also shewed itself as a goat (p. 933).
May it not be that the figure of the he-goat sacrificed by the
heathen (p. 52) was afterwards by the christians transferred to



' Appcnzeller reimchr. 14. 37-9. 51. 72. 95, and Senkenberg sel. 1, 46. bocks
angst and gut ! Er. Alberus 21. bocks martcr ! 33. dass dich bocks esel schend !
23. dass dich box sners schende I Schreiber's Freib. urk. 2, 67. durch bocks
tod ! 3, 404. bock* lid answers to « tiufel und sin lit,' Mone's Anz. 8, 41.

8 ' To curse one leg off the devil's body, and the left horn off his head,' Garg.
232*. People still say : 1 he'll deny one of the devil's tart off him and on again,'
Haupt 3, 368 ; i.e. to curse and lie so hardily as to do the very devil's figure
a damage. Bat what means the expression : 1 ir lieget dem tiuvele an daz bein '
(Roth. 3137)? you swear falsely? (p. 1008).

VOL. III. H



Digitized by Google



996 DEVIL.

the false god ? In the goat-hallowing of the ancient Prussia:
the victim was lifted up high.

Next to the goat the boar, which was sacred to Fr6 amoj
the ancient gods, which affords food to the heroes in Walhal
and moreover, far from irrelevantly, mingles in the storm-
march of the Wild Host (p. 921-3), is a devil's anil
hence in the roar of the whirlwind, people cry su-stert an*
sau-zagel (sow-tail), rebuking the Devil by that name (p. 632)
In devils' buildings the sow plays another and perhaps more
prominent part. The Evil One appears as a grunting sw
(Schweinichen 1, 31). But the main point is, that hsre we
again stumble on the name Phol : the MHG. fol, fal, ful in
the compound urful signifies a boar, as is clear from the
Schwabensp. 315 Wack., 204 Lassb., where the readings 'erfaul,
urfaul, urfol, urval, wurffel 1 are all against ' ursul,' which makes
no more sense than 'halpswuoP in Nib. 878, 3, the variants
' halbfwol, halpfuol, helfolen ' shutting us up to the combination
halp-ful, halp-fol, i.e. half-swine as opposed to the full swine
ur fol, the old boar of five years. 8 Not that the god's name is
to be explained by the beast's; on the contrary, in both the
compounds it has been transferred to the beast, and so preserved ;
and as Phol is Paltar, it may now appear less venturesome to
bring in as belonging here Baltero the boar's name in Reinardus.

A soul-snatching wolf the Devil was already to the Fathers
(Greg. M. opp. 1, 1486). In the Laws of Cnut he is 'se icod-
freca werewulf (Schmid. p. 148) ; Ditmar of Merseb. p. 253
calls him lupus vorax, and Loki's son is Fenris ulfr ; out of
MHG. poets I have not noted down a hellewolf, but I hardly
doubt their having used it, as Simplic. 2, 72 still does hbllenwolf.
And a Slavic name for the Devil, Pol. wrog, Boh. wrah, Serv.
Slov. vrag, Russ. vrag, vorog, though it means malefactor, enemy,
latro, is the same as the OHG. warg (lupus), Reinh. xxxvii. The
Devil has monstrous jaws and throat in common with the wolf
and hell : ' des tiuvels hiuwe, 1 Warnunge 540.

A canine conformation of the Devil is supported by many
authorities: hellehunt in the old lay on Georio, Fundgr. 1, 13;



1 Luc. David 1, 87. 98. Joh. Voigt 1, 616.

■ In MSS. it is hard to distinguish the long f from f.



i

Digitized by Google



NAMES TAKEN FROM HIS FIGURE.



997



des hellehundes list (cunning), Hartm. Greg. 163. Renner 289.
unnt (greyhound) in des tiuvels biunt, hunt in der helle grunt,
Ls. 3, 124. hellerude, Martina 32* (Diat. 2, 143), and hellewelf
111*, as the Edda already supposes a hvelpr in hell, Seem. 94*,
and the Greek religion a Cerberus (p. 814n.). A fight with the
hell-hound is described in Fundgr. 178, and as a dog the Devil
guards treasures (p. 977). black dog, Superst. Denm. no. 149.
des tiuvels riiden, Renner 23343. H. Sachs iv. 3, 31 c provides
hira with a quail-hound (pointer, setter, to catch souls for him ?). 1
May not the Latin latro (robber) have come from the barking
animal, like our warg from the wolf? It makes the Devil re-
semble both animals more (see Suppl.).

Foremost amoDg birds comes the raven, whose form the Devil
is fond of assuming, Ls. 3, 256. 'der ungetriuwe hellerabe*
Ottoc. 296 b . 803 b . r volgen wir niht dem swarzen raben ! ' Rol.
33, 23. * volget dem swarzen raben niht ! 1 Karl 19 b . 1 e'est uns
deables, nns corbiax/ Ren. 28284. The black raven sent out
by Noah is called the foe (feond), Cffidm. 87, 11. Not only the
bird's colour, cunning and quickness, but his old connexion with
Wuotan (p. 671) might, as in the case of the wolf, confirm the
notion. In Caedm. 188, 6 the full Odinic epithet ivcelceosig
(stragem eligens), pertaining to the god's messenger-maidens
(p. 417), seems archaically applied to the raven; it is true, even
Jerome's commentary on Job 38, 41 had already in a far-fetched
way made the (black) raven mean the Devil. In Danish folk-
songs the vilde ravn, vilde val-ravn (the corvus stragis, OHG.
walahraban) takes exactly the place of the diabolic trold, DV. 1,
186-7. In the puppet-play of Dr. Faust, it is remarkable that
the raven, who is bearer of the written covenant with the Devil,
is called the bird of Mercury, which would be exactly right of
Wuotan. Within the last few centuries only I find the vulture
(geier) put for the Devil, 2 still more frequently the cuckoo, whose
connexion with magic was spoken of, p. 679. Another bird

1 WahUlbein (quail-bone, decoy-whistle) des tiuvels,' Berth. 225. ' Bust verir-
ret (so misleads) ez als ein vDahtelbeinJ Jiingl. 1210. ' in korne wart ein kiindie
tcahtel nie so sanfte erbeinet,' was ne'er a quail so neatly boned, Ms. 2, 206b.

1 1 The vulture take you 1 * Gryphius p. m. 746. * Where the vulture . . . ? '
Ettner's Unw. doctor 335. 4 dass dich der geier schende ! ' Wackern. Lesebuch
788.21. Fundgr. 2, 320.



Digitized by Google



098



DEVIL



whose figure is assumed is the cock: chanticleer and swine bnild
together at the devil's dike (p. 1023), and from under the cloak
of the human-shaped Devil peep out cock's claws in the same
way as the cloven hoof.

Incomparably Older and more widely diffused is the manifesta-
tion of the Devil as a snake, worm, or dragon. The serpent that
beguiled in Paradise was taken for the Devil himself. Beside
antiquus hostis, he is antiquum anguis, anguifer hostis, leli/er
anguis, serpent (Greg. M. opp. 1, 111. Jonas Bobb. pp. 5. 15.
Vita Burgundofarae p. 427. Vita S. Romani p. 743), serpens
antiquus, Caes. Heisterb. 7, 35, the old dragon, AS. draca, El.
765. The belief is founded chiefly on Rev. 20, 2, and on the
interpretations the Fathers gave of Leviathan. A dragon is
mentioned in Rev. 12, 4, who with his tail drew the third part of
the stars from heaven. 1 It is in this Biblical sense that our old
poets call the Devil slange, hellewurm, Lohengr. 141, helletracke,
Mart. 141 d ; but there also went with it an inkling of the native
superstition about venomous fire-spitting worms, treasure-guard-
ing dragons (p. 978) and wonderful serpents (p. 684). As a
dragon the Devil appears in numberless folktales, e.g. Deutsche
sag. nos. 520. 858. Here I draw particular attention to that
fairytale, in which it is variously the Devil, or the dragon, or the
bird griffin, that has feathers plucked out of his tail in his sleep,
Kinderm. nos. 29.57. 165. Norske folkev. 1,31—33. Mailath's
Magyar, m. 1, 179. The dragon of misfortune dogs mankind, and
one whom everything goes against will say, ' On all my luck
the Devil puts his tail.* To the dragon also may be traced the
Devil's wings, 0. Fr. diables enpomez, Meon's Nouv. rec. 1, 250,
like angres enpanez 1, 272. When the church represented
Leviathan as an enormous whale, whose cheek Christ pierced
with his hook (Greg. M. 1, 110 ; conf. supra p. 182), that was an
echo of the huge hostile world-serpent whom Th6rr fished up
from the bottom of the sea (p. 689) . As snake or dragon, the
Devil has enormous jaws and throat (MHG. kewen, Ms. 2, 166 b ),
like hell itself (pp. 314. 806-7. 996).

Fly-shape. The LXX translates Baal-zebub, the name of the
god of Ekron, by Bda\ jivta, fly-god (2 Kings 1, 2). Ahriman in

1 Der alu tlange mit slnen genGzen von himel wart her abe gestozen, sins libes
wesen ttilt er eudriu (divides in three), ete. Renner 3100 seq.



Digitized by Google



NAMES TAKEN FROM HIS FIGURE.



999


the shape of a fly pervaded all nature. Lith. mussu birbiks, fly-
god (Mielke 231), birbiks usu. blowing, buzzing. Fairytales
have diabolic spirits imprisoned in phials as flies. 1 Loki turns
into a fly (fluga), when he wants to defraud Freyja of the
brisinga-men. Connect with this a Lombard story in Paul Diac.
6, 6 of the ' malignus spiritus ' who settles on the window as a
fly, and gets a leg chopped off ; and one in Acta BenejtL e#et. 1,
p. 238 of a devil being cast out: 'in muscae 4luxn^tiid\n9ta
prorumpens cum sanguine de naribus egressus cs^ti&tipa^ As'
a fly, Loki finds his way into locked rooms thropgk' t^e keyhole,
be can slip even through a needle's eye (Norsl^e folkev. no. 31),
which puts me in mind of his insinuating mother (p.' 21(5) . The .
Devil, like the giant (p. 555), has the power to maW hiinsyi\ r
great or small, N. folkev. 1, 134. 192. Of the elvish nature of"
butterflies, which as psyches (p. 829) may be spirits bf^ood^
evil, we have more to say in the sequel. When stagbeetles and
dungbeetles are taken as devils, it gives assurance of a heathen
point of view (see Suppl.).

But also, and that from early times, the Devil has been likened
to two implements, the hammer and the bolt, in which I have
pointed out (pp. 180. 243) the reference to heathen gods. We
have still to .consider here what countenance they receive from
the Bible or the Church. Malleus is reckoned among names of
the Devil already in Jerome's epistle to pope Damasus (366 — 384),
where he expounds the parable of the prodigal son ; Jerome may
have picked up the expression from heathens in Dalmatia, Italy
or Gaul ; and he had been on the Rhine. Greg. M. (d. 603) opp.
1,1125): ' in scriptura sacra mallei nomine aliquando diabolus
designatur, per quern delinquentium culpae feriuntur, aliquando
vero percussio coelestis accipitur . . . nam quia in appellatione
mallei antiquus hostis exprimitur, propheta testatur, dicens :
quomodo confractus est et contritus malleus universae terrae ! '
(Jerem. 50, 23. conf. 51, 20). The two notions of a chastising
God and of a hostile heathen power seem here to meet. In
Donor's hand the hammer was at once a consecrating and a
crushing tool : stormwind, whirhoind, phenomena which old
heathenism ascribed to the lord of thunder, and later superstition

1 Danish story of a devil shut up in a box, Thiele 1, 18. KM. no. 99.



Digitized by Google



1000 DEVIL.

to giants or devils (p. 635-6. Superst. I, 522, and Esth. 100),
are in some parts of Germany called hammer, either from their
violent destructive action, or because the Devil is imagined to
have stirred them up. 1 In Rhenish Westphalia, when the wind
suddenly throws the doors open, or whistles through the house
by fits, they say : ' do es der aul van terjohren ! ' there goes the
old one of last year, you know who, we need not mention names.
As the name hamer for devil never occurs to my knowledge in
poets of the Mid. Ages, I hesitate to derive those imprecations of
the vulgar (p. 181-2) from the malleus of the Fathers; I would
rather believe in an original connexion between the heathen and
Jewish beliefs. And the same might be the case with Hegel
(bolt) : vectis is not only a thing to fasten doors with, but to
shove and thump with, lever, pole, almost malleus over again.
Leviathan is called vectis, quia usque ad necem percutit (Greg.
M. 1, 111). The MHG. hellerigel, AS. grendel (p. 243) might be
an imitation of this vectis, and also have an older relation to
Loki.

I think I have often noticed that the Devil unwinds himself
out of a ball of yarn. One fairytale makes him roll down the
mountain as a millstone, Altd. bl. 1, 297. This displays his
affinity to giants, for Swedish legend tells of giants who, when
frightened at Thor's lightning darting through the air, come
rolling down the mountain into the meadows in various shapes,
mostly as bundles of thread or balls, and seek shelter with the
mowers ; but these, well knowing the danger, keep them back
with their scythes, and it is said to have often happened that the
lightning came down and shivered the scythes, whereupon the
giants with rueful moans rushed back into the mountain (Afzelius
1, 10). It recalls to my mind the windball of the demons, 2 p.
640 (see Suppl.).

III. From the Devil's abode in hell, whence he has dislodged

1 The Moravian peaaant calls the whirlwind hammer (Meinert in the Vienna
Jahrb. vol. 48. Anz. bl. p. 55), which may refer to Donar as well as the Devil, and
thus agree with the fancies unfolded on p. 632 ; the Devil is described as rentu*
wrens and aquilo, Greg. M. 1, 547. 570, and the Mod. Qreeks call him Ivtfios, Gramm.
3, 736. It is odd that the Priscillianists ascribed storms to the Devil, thunder to his
roaring, rain to his sweat, which sounds very heathenish. The Manicheans too
explained thunderstorms by the fury of the chained Devil.

* Witches confessed they had been converted into balls, and gone bobbing
round stark naked on tables and benches. Weng's Nordl. hexenprocease p. 54.



Digitized by Google



NAMES TAKEN FROM HIS ABODE.



1001



the heathen goddess, are borrowed his frequent names of hclle-
warte (-ward), Suraerl. 7, 9. Cod. pal. 361, 71 c ; hellehirte, Parz.
316,24; helkgriibel, Mart. 4 b . 10 b . 72 b ; hellewirt, Ma. 2, 175%
and the like. Lohengr. 70, calling him liellescherge (-constable),
says 'er las die sine an sich,' he gathered his own unto him, just
as Wuotan receives the souls of his heroes.

His dwelling lies in the North, which at once agrees with the
view explained p. 34. ' Leit % nord'r (looked to N.) ' occurs in
the singing of a valgaldr (ferale carmen), Seem. 94*; 'diabolus
sedet in lateribus aqnilonis, Greg. M. 1, 1186; he claims to rule
' on nor&doele,' Cffidm. 3, 8; sets his throne nordernhalp, Diut. 3,
40. Fundgr. 2, 11 : ' nrSr ok nord'r liggr helvegr ' (p. 802). The
Esthonian also shuns the north side, Superst. N, 43 ; and the
daemon's waterfall runs north (p. 493).

I will here insert a few terms not touched upon at p. 804,
because I am not sure if they originally belonged more to Hell
or to the Devil. In the old play of Theophilus, after he has sold
himself to Satan, he is conducted to a castle, where it is cold,
but high feasting is kept up: 'up de Ouelgunne' (ill-favour). This
name, aptly expressing the envy and malice of the fiendish nature,
is borne by several places in Lower Germany : an Ovelgwme hi
the Magdeburg country, one in the Miinster, near Hortsmar, and
one in the Osnabriick between Witlage and Dumraersee; an Ooel-
gunne by Werben in the Altmark, an Ovelgonne in Oldenburg,
an Ovelgunne estate in Eidighausen parish, Minden country, an
Ubelgunne by Warburg, Paderborn country, and four or five
more in L. Germany. Probably other localities have the same
name, which makes one think of the equally well chosen TJbelloch
(Malpertuis) in our ' Reinhart.' Whether they were so named
in allusion to the Devil, or, as I rather think, to their bleak
northerly aspect, is a point to be determined; in the latter
case the name is fitly transferred to the Devil's dwell ingplace,
which is directly opposed to heaven's blessed and blissful hall
of joy (p. 820). — Again, they say in L. Saxony: ' na Hekelvelds
varen,' fare to H., Sam. Meiger ccciii* ; in Denmark : ' gaa du
dig til EMenfeldt I ' Lyngbye's Far. qv. p. 549. Thiele 3, 71
spells it ' til Hekkenfjalds ' ; what if the allusion be to Hakelberg,
Hakelbernd (p. 923) ? Veld is not our feld, but the ON*, fiall
(fell, mons), as the Dan. form fjald shews; and Hakelberg may



Digitized by Google



1002 DEVIL.

be the furious hunter's and therefore the Devil's abode, nay,
it is evidently Mount Hekla in Iceland, sometimes called Heklu-
fiaU, a rendezvous of witches j and Fischart Garg. 119 b calls it
Ileckelberg. Hekla itself is apparently named from the shape
of the cloak or cowl (cucullus), as W6dan is the cloaked one,
hacol-berand ; so that there are many points of contact. —
Abyssus/ whence our nobis, I have spoken of, p. 805, and only
wish now to give fuller examples of the latter form. Kilian has :
nobisse (daemon, nanus, cacodaemon), nobisgat (orcus), rwbis-
kroech (orcus). I dare say there are even more Nobiskrugs in
L. Germany than Ovelgunnes, the name is often given to border
taverns [krug=jug, alehouse], where you get as it were into
a new country ; thus you find a nobiskrug on the Frisian and
Saxon frontier in Ostringien bailiwick, Oldenburg, another
between Altona and Hamburg ; by Kiel, by Miinster, out of the
way publichouses receive the name, which does not convey quite
the bad sense of our hell, but rather the ancient one of death
and the underworld: 'he is na nobs-kroge* means no more than he
is dead. Nobiskrug is also used by HG. writers of the 16- 17th
cent., usually for hell, devil's tavern, he being a helle-mW
(-landlord): 'in nobiskrug faren,' Luther's Table-talk, ed. 1571,
418*. ' the rich man's soul in nobiskrug/ Fisch. Garg. 53\ ' that
he die not thus unshriven, and fare perchance to nobis-haus'
Eulensp. 277. ' darauff sie sagt, sie wird dalent me in Nobis-
krug sein ' ( = be dead),L. Thurneisser's Nothgedr. ausschr. 1584,
iii. 85. 'dein seel fahr hin in nobiskrug/ Cursus Cleselianus.
' fehrst in nobiskrug/ Ayrer 76 b . ' the Devil builds alway his
chapel and nobiskrug, where God his church hath set,' Aadr.
Musculus's Hosenteufel 1630, p. 16. 'to have been in nobiskrug/
Chr. Weise's Floretto p. 74. nobishaus, Burc. Waldis 191*. 303 b .
According to Staid. 2, 240 nobiskratten are the place where
unbaptized children go.

More beautiful is Walther's (123, 38) expression for hell, 'daz
verlorne tal/ recalling Dante's ' citta dolente ' and his ' per me si
va tra la perduta gente 1 (see Suppl.).

i Provencal abit, Rayn. 1, 14*. conf. 1, 184 b baratro, baratrum; but even the
Italian has by the side of abiuo formed a nabitso (from in-abisso). In Rol. 195, 1
a heathen standard-bearer is called Abitse, but the O. Fr. poem has Abismtt, as if
hell's abyss. The Brem. wtb. 3, 254 gives the older form obukroog, obskrovg.



Digitized by Google



OTHER NAMES.



1003



IV. Obscure names. On the Goth, skohsl for Saifioviov a con-
jecture was hazarded p. 487, which is strengthened or weakened
by the AS. scocca (also spelt sceocca, scucca, 1 therefore hardly
scacca) ; with skohsl as it is spelt, the root skaka (quatio) would
agree, while skiuha (timeo) would require skuhsl. Still nearer
perhaps is the ON. shoes (femina gigas), for which in Saam. 154 b
the MS. reads sleds. There is one expression for devil now largely
diffused in Germany, but nowhere used except as a diminutive :
L. Sax. stopke, stopke in der helle, on the Main stebchen, stdbchen,
in thieves' slang steppche, stepches, U. Sax, stebgen, stopgen,
Thur. stop/el, Baden steubel ; what is meant by it is particularly
the flying fiery dragon, who calls at the homes of his devotees,
bringing them money and corn; a fiery man, a will o* wisp
(Superst. I, 611), and the will o' wisp was called dolgr, foe, fiend
(p. 916) : all this throws no light on the origin of the word. A
L. Saxon and Westphalian name already touched upon p. 521 n.,
is dros, de dros in der helle, dross ; people swear f bi'm dros,' and
curse 'dat di de dros sift ! 9 Brem. wtb. 1, 257. The HG. drtis,
truos, drii8 appears to correspond, but is only used impersonally
of pestilence, ch. XXXVI. There is a host of provincialisms
besides, and I can neither quote nor explain them all : in Swit-
zerland they say kuhni, kueni, Staid. 2, 142, perhaps the bold,
reckless one; in Ravensberg district kramberend (conf. Brem.
wtb. under krambeer, krambeker), bramberend (from bram,
broom, genista?), hanax, etc. ; the M. Nethl. barlebaen, barlibaen
(Huyd. op St. 3, 38. Rein. 5184. Fergut 1754. 2372. 3763),
occurs pretty often, but is unintelligible, and the Romance
languages afford no light ; the only thing like it is the 0. Eng.
barlibak (acc. to Massinger 1, 80 the name of an evil spirit), and
barlibreak, barleybreak is a play in which hell is represented
(Nares sub v.); a MHG. 'bceser/nmurc/ Turl. Wh. 136*, said to
be spelt femurc in Cod. Pal., seems to contain mure (putridus),
Wh. 23, 5, and the ON. myrkr, AS. myrce (tenebrosus) p. 830 ;
lastly, ' ein tiuvel der hiez oggewedel, der ie die Grsten luge vant/
invented lies, Ms. 2, 250 b : wedel is flabellum, and occurs in other
names for the devil, Griinwedel, Strauss wedel, ch. X XX IV, and

1 Beow. 1871 lfiflum scuccum and $cinnwn (invisis daemonibns et praestigiis),
conf. $cinna )>eaw (praestigiornm mos), Cod. exon. 862, 4 ; tceuccum onsaccgan
(daemoniis ixnmolare), Ps. 105, 27 ; sceuccgyldum (soulptilibus), ib. 26.



Digitized by Google



1004



DEVIL



harmonizes with flederwisch, whisk ; and if ogge be the same as
ocke, ecke, uoke (p. 237), the OHG. form would be Uokiwedel,
flabellum horrendum.

Several appellations are proper names of men, bestowed on
the evil spirit either as euphemisms or in good-natured pity, just
as on homesprites (p. 504) and will o' wisps (p. 917). Such are
the Engl, old Davy, old Nick (Nares sub v. Nicholas), though
here there may also be an allusion to Hnikar (p. 488) ; the Dan.
gammel Erik (p. 989) ; the Swiss kueni above may mean Kueni
(Conrad, as the noisy ghost was called Kurt, p. 91 3 n.) ; and is
Benz (in Keisersb. teufel, Oberl. sub v.) Beuno ? [Burns's Nickie
Ben ?] ; a Bavar. Muchsel might come from Nepomuk, unless
we prefer Schmeller's interp. ' sly sneak ' 2, 546 [mugger,
s-muggle ?] ; but hardly Stepchen from Stephen ? Velten (Val-
entin) often stands for devil (' potz Velten ! '), I suppose with an
allusion to valant, p. 991; so does 'meister Peter, Peterchen,
Peterle* Ettn. unwiird. doctor 672, and this recalls nicknames
for a thief-taker or constable, who is likewise called meister Peter
or Eemmerlin, RA. 883, so that he lends a name to and borrows
one from the devil, for the devil is ' hell's constable/ he binds
and torments souls, and is called henker, diebhenker [Burns's
auld Hangie] . Now, as soldiers give their provost-marshal the
nickname ' stepchen ' too, it is worth considering whether step/el
may not come from the MHG. stempfel, Ms. 2, 2 b , which again
brings up the question of frau Stempe'tt spectral nature (p. 278).
A record of 1177 (no. 71 in Seibertz) has Stempel as a proper
name (see Suppl.).

Such grafting of the Devil on older native beliefs in spirits
and semi-divine beings was altogether natural, as christian
opinion held these to be diabolic, and the people tried to domes-
ticate the outlandish Devil. Hence Fischart could call him butze
(p. 506) : 1 may I become the very butze's if, etc.' Qarg. 224* ;
and the same in Altd. bl. 1, 55. The skratti (p. 478) of ON.
superstition hovers somewhere between woodsprite, devil and
giant, and so is troll (p. 526) a ' daemon ' in this more compre-
hensive sense. 1 In the cursing formulas 1 troll hafi Jnk I ' or ' troll
hafi bina vini ! ' Nial. cap. 38, 1 troll hafi J?ik allan ! ' Kormakss.

1 Troll ok fivattr, Fornald. Bog. 2, 248 ; troll ok eigi mafr, Finnbogas pp. 2te.
292. 340.



Digitized by Google



MIXED UP WITH OLD GODS.



1005



188, ' troll taki hann ! ' Orvarrodss. cap. 9, ' fara i trblla hendr ! '
Laxd. p. 230, it answers exactly to our Devil, yet also to the
older and more pagan one: ' eigi }>ik gramir' or ' iotnar ! '
(p. 990-1). In Saem. 39 we read : ' farbu nu bar smyl hafi J?ic ! 1
It seems that Scandinavian sorceresses call the Devil urdar mani
(luna saxeti, Biorn sub v.), which I know of nothing to compare
with. And as Loki is next of kin to Hel (p. 312), we find the
Devil in close contact with Death (p. 804) : 1 den tiuvel and den
tot viirhten/ Frid. 67, 9.

So far our survey of a great variety of names (from which how-
ever all merely Jewish ones, like Beelzebub, Asmodi, Belial etc.,
had to be excluded) has already shewn an admixture of heathen
ingredients, or betrayed a still older identity or similarity of
christian and pagan beliefs. Apparently words like gram, un-
hold, and perhaps scado, can only have been applied to the newly
adopted Devil because they already signified to the heathens
a hostile hateful spirit. Old was already said of giants, and
could the more readily bo used of the Devil. Wolf, raven, goat
called to mind the animals that escorted heathen gods or were
sacrificed to them. The designations hammer and bolt, and the
northerly residence were, to say the least, in accord with heathen
notions.

Let us try whether these results are likewise supported by the
substance of the tales and traditions.

To the new converts the heathen gods were one and all trans-
formed, not only into idols, i.e. false lying gods (galiuga-gub, as
Ulphilas advisedly renders idola), but into devils, i.e. fellows and
partners in a rival kingdom, whose dominion was broken down,
but yet even under retreat, put forth some power. Whoever
clung to the ancient gods and sacrificed to them in secret, was a
devil's servant, and his idolatry a downright diobol-geld (p. 38-9) ;
formulas of abjuration were imposed, which quote in one category
the devil and the once honoured gods. 1 In the AS. Laws deoflum
geldan means simply to serve the old gods. This mode of think-
ing, which gave the ancient deities more than their due, could not

1 ■ Fore&chistu diobole (dat . ) ? ' * Ec forsacho diaboU end aUum diobolgelde
end allem dioboles wercum end wordum, Thuner ende Wt>den ende Saxnote endo
allem them unholdum the hiro gen6tas sint.



Digitized by Google



1006



DEVIL.



always be avoided, so long as a belief in the reality of those gods
was undestroyed in the hearts of men : the new doctrine could
more easily take root and germinate by representing the old as
odious and sinful, not as absolutely null ; the christian miracles
looked more credible when something supernatural was allowed
to time-honoured heathenism too. This view found a precedent
in the New Test, itself : the god Beelzebub of the O.T. had dropt
into the class of devils. Long in the habit of regarding Jupiter,
Mercury, Mars and Venus as diabolic beings, how could the
converters, preaching Christianity to our forefathers, have set
Donar, Wuotan, Zio, Frouwa and the rest in any other point of
view ?

What is said and sung of the breaking of heathen images of
gods entirely confirms the fact that the false gods were credited
with some degree of diabolic activity. When thrown down, they
complain, as demons, of the violence of the intruders (p. 4-98-9) :
Perun's image, which the men of Novgorod dragged through
their streets and flung into the Volkhov, broke into wailings on
the faithlessness of his former adorers. Olaf talks to the statue
of Freyr (p. 657), and with Thorr he has to stand a regular con-
test (p. 177). St. George compels Apollo's image to walk and
speak, Geo. 33 — 35. Mars, a ' lugeliche got/ had prophesied at
Rome the Saviour's birth, and when it took place, his image
suddenly crumbled down: 'als der tievil do verdolte den slac
(tholed, suffered the blow) von himel so gr6zen, er fuor ze sinen
genozen (fared to his comrades) sa verstozen in die helle, da ist
er gebunden s6re, daz er niemer mere her uz mac gereichen/
Maria 191-3. Darius writes to Alexander: if thou get the
better of me, * so mugen von himele mine gote zo der helle wesen
bote/ Alex. 2542, i.e. they have belied my confidence, and are
devils. Medieval poetry is full of such statements. I have
shewn in ch. XXXI the way in which Wuotan, distorted into a
Wuotimc and wiitende (furious) hunter, appearing at the head of
the Wild Host, was made a devil of (p. 920). That is why the
Devil is called helle-jager, Mart. 62 d . 174 d : 'er ruschte als der
tiuvel in dem rore/ MsH. 3, 187* ; 'als in (him) der tiuvel jagete,'
Livl. chr. 96\ Our folktales make him either ride a black steed,
or drive in a magnificent car (Mone's Anz. 8, 184) like Wuotan
and like Donar.



Digitized by Google



devil's grandmother



1007


Wuotan was known as the god and inventor of gaming, and
of dice in particular (pp. 150. 160) : it was he that gave the all-
winning die to Player Jack in the fairytale. But very commonly
dice-playing is ascribed to the devil, in folktales he looks on at
the game, especially if played during divine service on Sunday,
and he plays with men, who have to stake their own souls j 1 in
witch-trials he is called Schenzerlein* dicer, from schanzen to
throw dice, Schm. 3, 374; and he lies in wait for gamblers,
Renn. 11316

Judaism has devils, but knows nothing of she-devils; all power
for good or evil it places in the hands of male beings (p. 396).
To put it still more generally : gods are altogether the older, and
a strict Monotheism or Dualism recognises gods alone ; it is in
the mellower fulness of Polytheism that goddesses first emerge. /
The Teutonic paganism, like ^othera^Jfl fond of female deities
and elvesj even'the Goth, vaihts (genius) is feminine (p. 439).™ m j^-*
Divine mothers, bright benignant dames, norns, valkyrs, wood- c-r '
wives, water-maidens, formed a main part of the religion : only ■ \ v> '££
kobolds and home -sprites are exclusively male; the very <^
giantesses are often lovely in mien and manners, and the world
of the dead is ruled by a goddess.

Following this general tendency, as a negative must run on the
lines of the positive, it was Teutonic to the core for Ulphilas to
translate Saifiovwv by unhulfro, and not to form a neuter, which
would have been just as easy. To the converted Goths this
feminine unholda fills the place of what their fathers had believed
in as Holda.

It is no slight confirmation of the diabolio nature of Grendel in
Beowulf, that he has a mother at his elbow, one with even more
of the giant in her than he ; that she tries to avenge his death,
and the hero's exploit is not complete until her discomfiture :
Grendel' 8 modor 2517-64. 3076. It is a very ancient feature in
our nursery-tales, that in the Devil's dwelling sits likewise his
grandmother (mother, or sister), and when the hero turns in for
shelter, she takes pity on him and befriends him against the
monster, Kinderm. 1, 152. 2, 188 devil's grandmother {eller-
mutter, great-grandm.). OSinn taunts the Vala with being

1 E.g. in Tettau and Temme's Preuas. eagen 197-9. 200-212.
a Nordlinger hexenprocesse, p. 46.



Digitized by Google



1008



DEVIL



1 frigfifj 0, )> ursa wodir/ Saem. 95 b . The human guests usually
arrive while the devil is out, they are then concealed by her, and
smelt out by the son on his return. So Th6rr and Tfr come into
giant H^mir's house, where they find his 900-beaded grandmother
(amma) and another female, his sweetheart, who hides them
under the cauldron, SaBm. 53*. The Indian giant too has a soft-
hearted sister living with him (p. 459). Now those stories of
the devil were known here in the 13th cent. ; a poem of the Cod.
Vindob. 428 no. 154 contains the words: ' der donr slahe tins
beide ! der tiuvel brahte mich zuo dir, und dich sin muoter her
ze mir/ his mother brought you to me j ' mit des tiuveU muoter
wette loufen/ run a race with; Wahtelmrare 108: 'ist diz der
tufel daz hie vert (rides), oder sin muoter, oder sin sun? 9 Herb.
7729; r der tufil adir sin eldirmuoter: Altd. bl. 1, 264; ' des
teufels muoter/ OL Hatzl. 219, 16 ; and in Margaretav. Limburg
she plays an important part (Mono's Anz. 4, 166). We see that
she is by turns represented as all that is bad, outdoing even her
son, and again as of a gentler disposition : ' a widower a widow ,
wedded, the devil to his dam was added 1 (things got worse) says
Burc. Waldis 138*; ' kam nicht der Mansfelder, der teufel mit
seiner mutter* (omnia mala simul), Berl. kal. 1844 p. 298: 'to
swear one of the hangman's grandam's legs off/ Simplic. 2, 254 ;
' I fear me not, were it the devil and his dam. n — And this sub-
ject again contributes popular explanations of natural phenomena :
a sure indication of old myths in the background. When rain
and sunshine rapidly succeed each other, it is said as a proverb,
'the devil bleaches his grandmother (de duvel blekt sin mom) 1 :
in Switzld. ' the devil beats his mother, Tobler 294* (also, the
heathen hold a hightide) ; of a brown complexioned man, ' he's
run out of the devil's bleaching ground (he is dem duvel ut der
bleko lopen)' ; if it thunders while the sun shines, the devil beats
his mother till the oil comes/ 8 In Nethl., ' de duivel slaat zyn
wyf,' and ' 'tis kermis in de hel (nundinae sunt in inferno).' In
Fr., ' le diabh bat sa femme/ when it rains amid sunshine (Tuet's
Proverbes no. 401). In connexion with this ought to be taken

1 Conf. Felner'a Flores philol. cap. 7 p. 103. Names of the devil or Mb grand-
mother were given to cannon (Rommel 4, 180) ; ' Hack vor die nolle '-D.'b mother
(Stender's Lett. wtb. 2, 337*).

> Praetorii Blocksbergverr. 2, 113. Brem. wtb. 1, 97.



Digitized by Google



devil's offerings. 1009

the explanation of crackling fire (p. 242) and of earthquake
(p. 816-7). The last quotation names the wife instead of the
mother, like the iotun's jrilla in H^mis-qviSa; and Hagene says
of Brunhild, who made him feel uncomfortable, 'ja sol si in der
helle sin des ubelen tiuvels brtlt (bride)', Nib. 426, 4. A Greek,
seeing giant Asprian grind fire out of stones, cries out, 'heir
veret des tuvelis brut/ Roth. 1054; just as another giant's (the
Wind's) bride fares along (p. 632). Percuna tete (p. 173) washes
her son the Thunder-god in a bath : this is the Bavarian ' anel
with her ley' (p. 641). In Austria they tell (Ziska pp. 14 — 16),
of the devil's franel (= ver anel), how she felt dull in hell, and
came for a change to the Highlands (Up. Austria), where she got
her son to build her a castle near the Danube, imagining the people
would worship her as much as the virgin Mary ; but as no ono
wanted her and the people laughed at her, she was enraged, and
threw a huge piece of rock with a part of her castle into the
Danube, at the spot now called wirbel and strudel, and the ruins
of her house are still named the devil's tower ; conf . p. 592 on
whirlpools. I suppose no one can doubt that all these notions
date from heathen times 1 (see Suppl.).

Private sacrifices, intended for gods or spirits, could not bo
eradicated among the people for a long time, because they were
bound up with customs and festivals, and might at last become an
unmeaning harmless practice. We have seen how a clump of
ears was left standing in the field for Wuotan or dame Gaue, and
a bushel of oats was presented to Death or the Wild Hunter.
This the clergy of an older time would at once have set down as
deoflum geldan (Legos Wihtrcedi 13). It is certain that tho
centuries immediately following the conversion still witnessed
lighted candles beside holy waters (p. 584). In Norway lambs
and kids, mostly black ones, were offered to the watersprite
(p. 493) ; and similar sacrifices were in use among the Lettons
and Lithuanians in modern times. Whirlpools and rivers de-
manded goats and horses (p. 592), Hecate black lambs. In a
Hessian folktale the Devil guards a treasure, and will allow
no one to lift it unless he offer to him a black he-goat exactly
a year and a day old. This is an almost invariable incident in

1 Mone in Anz. 8, 450 interprets the devil's mother as Demeter, who in the
EleuBinian mysteries is made the mother of Dionysus.



Digitized by Google



1010



DEVIL



treasure-lifting, and must have been deeply stamped on the
people's imagination. To the examples given at p. 977 I will add
one from the mouth of the peasantry in L. Saxony. Whoever
goes into the forest on Shrove Tuesday and sits down under a har-
row, may look on at everything, the beasts rushing through the
wood, the king on his car with foxes [sorrel horses ?] going be-
fore him, and whatever there is to be seen that night. A shepherd
who knew this and wished to try it, went and sat under the harrow-
in the wood, and looked through the holes; then, when the devilry
was over, he tried to creep out again from under the harrow, but
he sat fast, and the Devil stood beside him, shewing his teeth :
' have you got a black sheep/ said he, 1 one that is coalblack all
over ? Give it me, and you'll get loose.' The shepherd lay there
till daylight, then some people passing through the wood tried to
set him free, but could not, so he had his black sheep fetched, the
Devil took it and flew up in the air with it, and the shepherd got
loose. Black cocks were also sacrificed (Dieffenbach's Wetterau
279), but there must not be a white feather on them, Bechst. 4,
207. Little men of the mountain can also be conjured up, if you
place a new table for them, and set two dishes of milk, two of
honey, two plates and nine knives upon it, and kill a black hen,
DS. no. 38. Guibertus (vita 1, 24) speaks of a cock-sacrifice that
was still in use in France : ' diabolo gallo Utare, ita ut ovum de
quo concretus est, die Jovis, mense Martio, in gallina constet ex-
positum ; 1 the cock was roasted, and carried to the pond (i.e. to
a watersprite again). In H. Sachs iii. 3, 13° a man says he
will cover two old women with bear skins, stick them all over with
green lozenges, and give them to the Devil on new-year's day. In
Burcard Waldis 150* we read of 'sending the soul stuck over
with may (or birch) to the Devil.' 1 To light a candle to the Devil
(Schweinichen 2, 54) is preserved to this day as a proverbial
phrase. Drink-offerings to the highest gods of heathenism must
after the conversion have appeared devilish. At p. 56 was men-
tioned the hife (cask, bowl ? ) out of which our ancestors drank

1 These must be thoroughly popular phrases. In Christ. Weise's Drei erznar-
ren, Lp. 1704 p. 426 : 1 if Bhe were my wife, I'd have her gilded and stuck over with
rosemary, put an orange in her mouth, and sell her to the hangman for a sucking-
pig.' In his Kltigste leute, Augsb. 1710 p. 124 : ■ ay, you should stick him oxer with
rosemary, gild his snout, and squeeze a Borstorf apple between his teeth, you could
invite the Devil to dine off him then.' That is how old-fashioned cookery used to
garnish its roast.



Digitized by Google



devil's offerings.



1011



Wuotan's minne; perhaps even ' Saturni dolium' (pp. 126. 247)
was no bath, but a drinking vessel. It seems worth noting, that
in an AS. sermon the words in 1 Gor. 10, 20 'non potestis calicom
Domini bibere et calicem daemoniorum,' which Ulphilas renders
verbally (ni maguj? stikl Fraujins drigkan jah stikl skohsle), are
thus expressed : 1 ne mage ge sainod drincan ures Drihtnes calic
and )>aes deofles cuppan,' so that ' cuppe ' was the technical name
of the heathen vessel. People still say, if you' leave anything in
your glass, that you are sacrificing to the Devil (Garg. 43 b ). But
there is also ground for maintaining that a devil's or hell's bath
was believed in, as we saw before: 'ze helle badeu,' Welsch.
gast 105*; 'to get into the Devil's bathroom ' (Sastrow's Life 1,
11) means the height of distress. Popular legend often speaks
of devil' 8 baths (see Suppl.).

As in that passage of Wernher's Maria (p. 1006) which describes
the Devil as chained in hell, so through the Mid. Ages in general
he seems to have been imagined as lying bound till the dawn of
the Judgment-day ; then he will get loose, and appear in company
with Antichrist. His liberation from bonds therefore marks also
the time of general confusion and the world's destruction. One
popular tradition makes him lie tightly bound under the table at
which two virgins (evidently norns) are spinning, Deut. sag. no. 9.
In other tales a noose of bast is slipt over his head, which like the
chained wolf he is unable to break, and in that state is mauled
on the anvil with a hammer, which leaves him lamed (Mahrische
sagen, Briinn 1817, pp. 69. 72. 123); still better known is the
story of the blacksmith, who gets him to creep through the key-
hole into a sack, and then hammers him to pieces. I hold these
pictures to be heathenish and Eddie (see p. 244) ; as Prometheus
is chained, so Ahriman lies fettered for 1000 years, so Lohi is
bound ; not only in Germany, but in Scandinavia the expression
' the Devil is loose,' Nethl. ' de duivel is los,' has been handed
down through many hundreds of years in the people's mouth. 1
With this we must connect that of fire breaking loose (pp. 245.
602), and of rubbing fire out of wood to break the devil's
strength (pp. 606-7). What there is at the bottom of another
saying, ' The Devil's dead, and any one can get to heaven un-

1 Swed. • nu ar Fan los,' Mailman's Skrifter, Stockh. 1820, p. 224.
VOL. III. I



Digitized by Google



1012



DEVIL.



hindered 9 (Meinert's Kuhliindchen 215), I do not rightly know ;
it can hardly mean the devil's defeat in the christian sense. The
Maere von der wibe list 368 already has a protestation ' durch
des tiuvels tot.' I incline to identify it with the exclamation
quoted p. 453 n., 'the king is dead! ' namely of the dwarfs or
elves. 1 The Renner 17982 says: 'wceren die teu/el tot, miinche
und pfaffen ksemen in not/ be in a bad way (see Suppl.).

To Wuotan, as the war-loving god, were imputed the setting
up and souring of strife and enmity (p. 145 n.). So Ahriman sows
discord, Death sows his seed (p. 848), and Werre or Discordia
hers (p. 273-4 n.). Shall we set it all down to the sowing of
the devil's tares in Matth. 13, 39, or allow to the notion a more
universal character ? ' Sathanas seminavit semen suum/ Bohmer's
Fontes 1, 47. 'den sdmen kan der tiuvel geben/ Freid. 67, 25.
'des tiefels same,' Walth. 31, 34. 'der tievel hat gescet den
sinen samen in diu laut/ Ms. 2, 111*, 'warp de duvel sin sat
dar in/ Detm. 2, 217.

It is remarkable that in Beow. 348 seq. the devil is called
gastbona, soul-killer, and 3485 bona, shooting with fiery bow ; as
indeed we find in Mod. German ' the murderer from the first '
(Sieben ehen p. 394), 'the cruel hangman of souls' (in Erasm.
Francisci) ; conf. the Serv. stari krvnik (p. 21). To him, as well
as to Death, are ascribed bands, ropes, bridle and steed : ' diufeles
gi-benti* O. i. 10, 22. 'mit des tievels bande geseilet,' tied, Karl
33*. 'der tievel hat mich gestricket,' snared, 17*. ' in des tivels
zoumheften (bridle-fastenings) sitzen/ Tod. gehugde 782. 'an
des tiuvels siln,' cords, Renner 21232 ; ' bridles and saddles the
devil's horse ' 1 4429. ' tiuvels seil,' MsH. 3, 2 1 8.

To deepen the impression of something horrible, we still say,
the very Devil would shudder and shrink at it, used as he is to
horrors. As early as the 12th cent., it is said (Diut. 3, 59) of

1 In many other cases it is difficult or impossible to trace the origin of the
Devil's connexion with certain superstitious beliefs and modes of speech. People
say : when tho shaft is out of your hand, it belongs to the devil (he can steer it to
where it will do mischief). Who runs behind himself (not so fast as he could), runs
into the deviV$ armB, makes the devil' » bed, Superst. I, 604. 659. Idleness is the
devil's lounge, Nethl. luiheid is duivels oorkussen (pillow). Take the plough off the
drasi, or the devil sleeps under it, ib. 819. When you can't find a thing, the devil
holds his hand or tail over it 256. The devil's plough and cushion appear already
in Renner 15597. 15938. * rfchtuom ist des tivels wetzestein,' Welsch. gast 125 b .
' des tiuvels dom,' Renner 1748. What does 4 des tiuvels zite liden ' (Walth. 107,
28) mean 7 his festivals ? zite (pi.), OHG. zM, ON. tlSir, festa.



Digitized by Google



DEVIL.



1013



monsters with flashing teeth : ' swenne si si lazent plecchen, so
mahten sie ioch (eke) den tiufel screcchen' And MsH. 3, 293* :
' so luog ich herviir, ich inoht den tiuvel fa der helle erschreckcn,
swenne ich den minen kolben uf enbiir ' (seo Suppl.) .

Our common folk, when the disagreeable is suddenly brought
forward, or is bound to befall them, are apt, in outcry or curse, to
bring in the Devil or some baneful beiug that does duty for him :
' has the devil brought you here again ? 9 Platers leben p. 77.
' whence brings him the devil ? ' 1 hut dich der tiuvel har getragen ! '
Meyer and Mooyer 48*; 'hat dich der tiuvel als6 baldo (so soon)
getragen har? , 27 b . 'der tiuvel hat in dar getragen/ Reinh.
1544. 'der tiuvel braht in hiure her/ Gute frau 783. So in
M. Nethl. : * galghenere, die lede duvel bracht u here/ Ferg.
4735 j « die lede duvel droech u hier ' 520. ' deable li ont amene/
lien. 5051. 8171. ' dise hat der tiuvel gesendet in min hint/
Bit. 10 b . 'der tievel sande mich an die stat/ Reinh. 311. 551.
' sus (so) kam er her geriieret, als den der tiuvel fueret/ Trist.
6855. ' quis te malejicus hie adduxit ? 1 Vita Joh. Gorziensis,
before 984, in Mabillon's Ann. Bened. sec. 5, p. 401. 'does the
ritt (pestis) bring you here now ? ' H. Sachs iv. 3, 5 b ; equivalent
to the Westphalian ' wo ford di de siike her ? ' for diseases were
looked upon as demonic beings. But what means that in
Scbmid's Schwab, wtb. 544, ' has the zauch brought you back
already? ' I suppose, the hellish hound (tyke, OIIG. zoha, bitch).
Westph. ' fort juw do kiwitt (peewit) nu weer her ? ' instead of the
more usual cuckoo, vulture, which, like the peewit, are magical
birds, 'hat mich der guclguck hergebracht/ Grobianus 97*.
And curses go through the same variations : ' daz dich der tiuvel
hin fiiere!' Sifrit 74, 2. ' var du dein tiuvel in die hant ! '
Reinh. 952. 'lo diable t'emporte ! ' 'the ycier (vulture) take
you!' Gryphius 746. ' tho cuckoo and his clerk fetch him!'
Dan. 'var satan i void ! ' 'die leide ride (mala pestis) miieze in
vellen ! ' Karlmeinet, Meusebach 162. In the same way are to be
judged the formulas about becoming and being tho devil* 8 t i.e.
falling due to him, where again cuckoo, vulture and the rest can
be substituted. A devil's carl, devil's child, des tuvelis kint,
Rol. 2, 31 mean those taken possession of by him : curiously
Lamprecht makes Porus exclaim 4452 : dirre tubilis Alexander
stellet michel ' wunder/ this hero is bold as the devil.



Digitized by Google



1014



DEVIL.



These quotations will not appear superfluous, if we will observe
that they fit themselves to the Devil chiefly in those respects in
which he is a product of heathen god-notions. As we hear it
said just as much : ' what (ill) weather sends you here ? what
tempest (or thunderstorm) has brought you this way ? what, has
the hail beaten you here too? where does the hail beat you
from ? ■ in Simplic. 5, 2, " Til bo the weather's if . . ./ « I'll be
thunder's first ! ' 1 and even ' where does the Lord send you here
again from ? ' ; can anything be plainer, than that such phrases
properly refer to the heathen Donar, lord of the weather, conse-
quently that by the Devil afterwards put in his place we are to
understand him ? Or we may, if we please, summon up some
storm-breeding giant, a Blaster, Vader or Fasolt (pp. 549. 630).
We kuow that thunderbolts are also devil's fingers (p. 179). — And
here some other points can be made good. Donar had a red
beard, and our proverb runs : red of beard, devil's weird, ' rode
baert duivels aert (= kind)/ We good-naturedly pity in the
words poor devil ; in the 1 7th cent, they still said poor thunder,
Weise's Drei erzn. pp. 14. 335 ; and thunder's child is synony-
mous with devil's child, ibid. 285. 425. The author of Simplicis-
simus writes both teufeUgeld p. 480, and donnersgeld p. 481, in
the sense of accursed pelf. The curse ' zum donner ' still means
exactly the same as ' zum teufel ' ; and our 1 fahr zum teufel ! '
answers in effect to the ON. ' far til O&ins ! OSinn eigi J»ic ! ' as
well as to ']>ik hafi gramir, ibtnar,' p. 991, and to ' dat die de
Homer ! Hamer sla ! ' p. 181. To the benediction ' Qott wait's
(God guide it) ! ' corresponds in the mouth of the vulgar the curse
' des walte der teufel ! der donner ! ' Nor be it forgotten, that in
exclamations and curses, of no matter what language, names of
old gods get hardened and fixed ; conf. p. 783-4, and Gramm. 3,
297 (see Suppl.).

Again, the Devil stands connected, not only with the gods of
heathenism, but with its da3mons, its spirits ; and a good deal of
what was ascertained in ch. XVII. will apply to him. Thus he
is called the wicht, the bosewicht, the hellewicht (p. 441) in the
harshest sense ; the alp, whoso spell binds men, may stand for

1 4 Ik sen donners ! 1 Hansen's Geizhals p. 120. In Pruss. Natangen, Pikullis
(p. 672, surely not akin to Picken p. 176 ?) takes the place of it : ' bat mich heute
der PakulU gedragen f * Firmenich's Volkerst. 1, 108.



igitized by Google



DEVIL.



1015



bim. Like elves lie has the power of appearing, disappearing,
and transforming himself, only the more sportful mischief of
these sprites becomes grim earnest when applied to him. Like
the alp, the Devil or valant is said to ride men, p. 464: in a poem
of Heinr. von Miiglein (Mus. 2, 196) God destines him to ride
a wicked woman ' over hill and dale.' It is a remarkable thing,
that the notions of wind, wight, thing, and no less those of devil
and valant, are used to strengthen a negative, Gramm. 3, 734-G
(see Suppl.). 1 Now, as the word tropf (drop, ibid. 730) was used
in the same sense, it explains how the expressions 'armer tropf
(poor wretch, fool), armer wicht, armer teufel * all came to have
one meaning. We either attribute to spirits and the Devil the
swiftness of wind, of the Wild Host rushing in storm, or we ^
imagine the wind itself a spirit and devil (p. 999) ; hence the
following are synonymous turns of speech : • sam sie dor tievel
vuorte/ as though the d. carried her, Rab. 749. Dietr. 8854, and
' as if the wind drove her/ ' she rushed past me like the zauch
(tyke, p. 1013)/ Schmid's Schwab, wtb. 544.

That morbid imbecile condition of one whom the elves are said
to have touched (p. 461) is undoubtedly analogous to possession
by devils. The difference lies in this, that the Heathen view
makes the spirits operate purely from without, while in Jewish,
Oriental and Christian doctrine the devils take up their abode in
a man's body, and for the abnormal condition to cease, they must
be formally cast out. An actual incarnation took place (p. 338),
and we speak of devils incarnate. Saul is possessed by the evil
spirit. When Nalas had defiled himself, the demon Kalis entered
into him, but retired at length, and passed into a tree (Bopp's
Nalas pp. 234. 267. 196-8). Even our early Mid. Ages furnish
examples : Carl, son of king Ludwig, was a demoniac (Pertz 1,

1 Nib. 1682 : 1 ich bringe iu den tiuvel 1 means I bring yon none at all, as we
say ' the devil a bit,' etc. But also the simple indefinite pronoun is iutensitied by
the addition of devil : • welelter teufel t 1 who ? [quisnam, rit vart] Phil. v. Sittew.
1, 30. ' besohen, welchen tiuvel sie mit im wellen ane-vahen,' see what d. they
will do with him, Morolt 2650. ' zuo welchem tiuvel bin ich geschart ? ' Bit. 7766.
1 von welchem tiuvel si sint komen ? 1 Dietr. 81 b . 1 welchen tiuvel haste ein wip an
dir ersehen ? ' m who in the world, Hartm. erst, buchl. 818. Cries of surprise :
4 wa» teufri; what (the) devil, Dan. 4 hvad fanden 1 (intens. * hvad i fandens skind
or been,' skin and bone), ' drink then you and the devil I ' (Schlampampe p. 17) are
still common among the people. The meaning of the last is 1 you and whoever it
may be ' ; but the combination is also a counterpart of the 4 God and I ' explained
on p. 16. * daz weiz er und der tiuvel wol,' Helbl. 7, 125. Curiously in Benner
1745 : 4 dem tiuvel von first und darnach Gote,' the d. first, and then God.



Digitized by Google



101G DEVIL.

495) For elves to steal men's children, and put their own
changelings in their place, is heathenish (p. 468) ; for the Devil
to lie hid in the changeling, is not (Zeno 58 seq.). Again,
the devil-jtossessed are like those houses and tenements where
racketing sprites have made themselves fixtures (pp. 514. 892). 2
An early instance of this is that Grendel in Beowulf, who disturbs
the royal hall by his nightly visits. For ' possessed ' (arreptitius,
daemoniacus), having the devil in one's body, the OHG. has the
following terms : firnoman, taken up, O. iii. 14, 107 (MHG. ' vil
gar vernomen ich do lac/ I lay insensible, Fragm. 46 b ) ; ' ther
diufal ist iru inne,' 0. iii. 10, 12; ' gramon in-giwitun, 9 p. 991
(0. Fr. ' maus esperis li est el cors entres, 9 Garin p. 280) ; tiuvol-
winniCj tiuvolwinnanti, Gl. mons. 337. 391. Doc. 239, as well as
tiuvolsioh, AS. deofolseoc (-sick) ; in 0. iii. 14, 63 ' thie mit
diufelo wunnun, 9 who had to contend with the devil ; and that is
the meaning of H. Sachs's 1 wiitig und uinnig 9 1, 481 b . iv. 3, 16*.
In the 13th cent, our ' possessed ' was already a current phrase :
( lesaz sie der valant,' Uolrich 1510. f nu var hin, daz hiute der
tievel ftz dir kal ! 9 holla out of thee, Ben. 440. 'der tiuvel var
im in den rnunt!' pop into his mouth, Reinh. 1642. 'var du
dem tievel in die Kant ! ' 852. ' der tiuvel var dir in den bale ! 9
into thy skin, Morolt 1210. ' der tufil rauez im durch daz hem
vara ! ' Grundr. 314. ' tusent tiuvel uz dir bellen I 9 bark, MsH.
3, 259 b (we still say, 'an evil spirit spoke out of him'), 'ich
\va3n der tiuvel uz beiden luge,' Reinh. 309. 520 (see Suppl.).

The words last quoted bring us to his mendacity. The Scrip-
ture calls him a ' father of lies ' ; ' tievellichen gelogen 9 lied like

1 Vita S. Godehardi (d. 1038) : In civitate Ratisbona quodara tempore sanctus
Godehardua morabatur, pro negotio forsan sui monasterii; ubi quaedam obsesm a
dantionio ad eum ducobatur, ut sanaretur ab oo. Quam vir Dei inspiciens ait :
' responde niibi, immunde spiritus, ad ea quae a te quaero. quid bic agis in cre-
aturaDei?' At daemon ait : 'pleno jure est anima ipsius mea, quod inca n tutrix
est, et per eam raultas animas lucratus sum.' Et ait vir sanctus : • quare propter
incantationem tua est?' Et daemon ait: ' nonne legisti quia Dominus pithonfr,
di vinos et incantatores jussit exterminari? quid enim tales faciunt, nisi quod mini
meisque principibus deserviunt? idololatrae enim sunt, vix enim aliquos tan to jure
possidero possumuB quanto hujusmodi vitiis irretitos ; numquid ignoras quod inter
mille incantatricet aut divinon vix una invenitur quae vel qui velit hoc vitium
confittri ? sic enim ora ipsorum claudimus, ut de talibus loqui nihil valeant quovis
modo.' The bishop casts out the demon. Et sic spiritus ille malignus abscessit, et
luulier ut mortua cecidit. Sed vir sanctus subito eam erexit, erecta vero publico
vitium incantationi*, quod dudum multoties perfecerat, cum lacrymis est confessa,
quam et vir sanctus solvit.

2 A deserted castle possessed by the devil, Greg. Mag. dial. 3, 4. Like tormenting
sprites, the devil tlncncs stone*, conf. Greg. Tur. vitae patr. 1, vita Heimcradi cap. 21.



Digitized by Google



DEVIL.



1017



a devil, says Nib. 2167, 3. What if the corrupt Dan. 'Locke
lojeniand, lovmand 9 p. 246 had an allusion to lyve (montiri) pret.
loi, or if a kinship could even be established between luge (men-
dacium) and logi (blaze, blast) ? Wind means to us a false
allegation, windbag a humbug, liar. A Dan. proverb says :
€ logn er et skadeligt uveir ' (mendacium est tempestas nociva),
Saxo Gram., ed. Mull. p. 200. A liar is also a mocker, hence
' des tievels spot/ Nib. 2182, 2. ' daz sinen spot der tuvel mit
den sinen habe,' Gr. Rud. 1, 9. In Mod. Nethl. 'de vyand heeft
my beet gehad/ hostis me ludibrio habuit (see SuppL).

Grendel's diabolic nature resembles that of bloodthirsty water-
sprites (p. 494) ; he lives too in moors and fens, and comes up at
night to haunt sleeping mortals : ' com of more gangan/ Beow.
1413 ; he flies ' under fen-hleo^u ' 1 632. He drinks men's blood
out of their veins 1478, like vampires whose lips are moist with
fresh blood. An ON. saga has a similar demon, called Grtmr
fegir because he can walk in water as on land, he spits fire and
poison, sucks the blood out of man and beast (Fornald. sog. 3,
241-2).

About when in the Mid. Ages did the idea spring up of formal
covenants and treaties which the Devil concludes with men? To
the unfortunate, the desperate, he promises temporal blessings
for a number of years, but bargains for their souls at the expira-
tion of the term, and insists on a written bond usually signed
with the men's blood. This sounds not heathen, but rather as if
invented after the Roman mode of writing had become general
in Europe. The Norse devil 1 tries to strike profitable bargains
too, but never in writing. The most famous and variously told 2
tale is that of the vicedominus Theophilus. It is known that
Gerbert, afterwards pope Silvester 2 (d. 1003), was said to have

1 The iotunn p. 547. The transaction is called a purchase.

5 The event itself is placed at tho beginn. of the 6th cent. ; the oldest work
I know of, that relates it, is Hroswitha's poem Lapsus et conversio Theophili vice-
domini (Opp. ed. Schurzfleisch pp. 132-145), of the latter half of the 10th cent.
Not long after comes the mention of it by Falbertus Carnotensis (d. 1029), Opp.
Pari* 1608, p. 136. A Historia Theophili metrica is attrib. to Marbod (d. 1123),
and stands in his Works (ed. Beaugendre pp. 1507-16). The story occurs in Hart-
mann's poem (12th cent.) Von dem gelouben, 11. 1927-98. Berceo (d. 1268) merely
alludes to it in Milagros de Maria str. 276, and in Duelo de Maria str. 194 ; so does
a MHG. poet, Altd. bl. 1, 79. Widest diffusion given it by Vincentius Bellovac. in
Spec. hist. 22, 69. Dramatized by Rutebeuf (Lograud 1, 333 ; now publ. in Jubinal's
ed. 2, 79-105, and Michel's Theatre Franv- 136-156 with notes on its liter, history) ;
and aft. by a Low Germ, poet (Bruns p. 389).



Digitized by Google



1018 DEVIL.

sold himself to the devil (Anon. Leobiens. in Pez I, 763). In
the Annolied str. 46-7 is the story of one Volprecht, who gives
himself to the devil ; another in Ottocar cap. 335. In most
legends of this kind the Devil misses his prey after all, and is
made to give up the damning document. The man may have
denied God, bat has never renounced the heavenly Virgin, so she
lends a helping hand. In a Swiss folktale the devil bargains
that the contracting party shall never say the gospel of John any
more (de Hanseler uf der lalle ummedrtillen), but he comes to
grief nevertheless, for the poor shepherd lad whistles it from
beginning to end. Another time the Evil one is promised
payment of the sum advanced, at the falling of the leaf; but
when at fall-time he presents himself, and presses the bargain, he
is shown trees in the church, that were cut with the leaves on
(Kinderm. no. 148), or else firs and pines (Woycicki's Klechdy 1,
149). On the whole there are ways more than one, to cheat the
poor devil of his legal due. Ono who has bound himself to him,
but who for seven years long neither washes nor combs, is rid of
him again ; or he need only have demanded that the devil shall
make a Bapling grow, a thing be} T ond his power (Superst. I, no.
626). The former is the story of Bearskin (Simplic. 3, 896.
Kinderm. no. 101% and of Brother Sooty (KM. no. 100) : Bear-
skin has to remain seven years in the devil's service, wrapt in a
bear's hide by way of cloak, i.e. leading a lazy inactive life (conf.
p. 1010, the bearskin offered to the devil). Almost every case
contains this stipulation of seven years to be spent in his service
and lore. 1

What has a more direct bearing on our investigation is, that
some of the ON. legends speak of a gefaz Oftni (giving oneself
to O.) exactly as the christian Mid. Ages do of writing or vowing
oneself into the Devil's hands. Indeed ' gefa ' seems the most
genuine expression, because the free man, who of his own accord
enters into service and bondage, gives, yields himself: giafj?rael,
servus dedititius (RA. 327) ; ' begeben ' is used in MHG. of
maidens giving themselves up to the church. The Olaf Trygg-
vas. saga tells how king Eirikr of Sweden gave himself to

1 Mone's Anz. 5, 176. In a MHO. poem (Fragm. 20 c ) an old man is addressed :
' din hundert jar Bint nu komen zuo tiben jdren Gz erwegen, daz din der tiufel
mueze pflegen.'



Digitized by Google



DEVIL



1019



OSinn (at hann gafsc O&ni) in return for his lending him victory
for ten years long, Fornm. sog. 5, 250 and 10, 283 ; and this last
account calls Oddiuer a devil (so in 10, 303 a ' diofull meS asionu
O&ins,' looking like O.). That the ancient god of victory hero
sinks into the Enemy of good, is, from the legend's point of
view, quite in order. The only question is, whether the loan for
ten years, and after that, the king's forfeiture to the god, were
taken over from christian stories of the devil, or had their ground
in heathen opinion itself. In the latter case it may have been
these heathen traditions that first suggested to christians the wild
fiction of a league with the devil. It is true the Norse authorities
say nothing about a bond signed in blood, nor about fetching
away upon forfeiture (see Suppl.).

How to call to the Devil, when one wishes to have dealings
with him, we learn from a Dan. superstition (no. 148) : Walk
three times round the church, and the third time stand still in
front of the church-dpor, and cry * come out ! 1 or whistle to him
through the keyhole. That is exactly how spirits of the dead are
summoned up (Superst. G, lino 206 seq.). The hiss, by which
homage was rendered to the devil, does not occur till we come to
heretics and the later witches ; it seems either copied from tho
secular homagium, or a parody of the christian kiss of peace
during Adoration.

The devil in some stories, who brings money or com to his
friends and favourites, approximates to good-natured homesprites
or elves ; and in such cases nothing is said about a bond or about
abjuring God. He is usually seen as a fiery dragon rushing
through the air and into chimneys (Superst. I, nos. 6. 253.
520-2-3. 858). The Esthonians say, red streaks of cloud shew
the dragon is flying out, the dark that he is returning with booty
(Superst. M, no. 102) ; so the Lithuanians about the red alb and
the blue (N, no. 1). In Lausitz they tell of a corn-dragon (zitny
smij) who fills his friend's thrashing floor, a milk-dragon (mlokowy
smij) who purveys for the goodwife's dairy, and a jpenny-dragon
(penezny smij) who brings wealth. The way to get hold of such
a one is the following : you find a threepenny piece lying some-
where to-day ; if you pick it up, there'll be a sixpenny piece in
the same place to-morrow, and so the value of what you find will
keep rising till you come to a dollar. If you are so greedy as to



Digitized by Google



1020 DEVIL.

take the dollar too, you get the dragon into your house. He
demands respectful treatment and good fare (like a homesprite) ;
if good man or goodwife neglect it, he sets the house on fire over
their heads. The only way to get rid of him is to sell the dollar,
but below its price, and so that the buyer is aware and silently
consents. 1 It is the same with the alraun and the gallows-
mannikin (p. 513 n.). If given away, these breeding 'dollars always
come back (Superst. I, no. 781).

But nowhere does the Devil savour so much of heathenism as
where he has stept into the place of the old giant (pp. 999. 1005.
1023-4) . Both of them the thunder-god pursues with his hammer;
as the sleeping giant is struck by Thorns miolnir, so is the devil by
the blacksmith's hammer (p. 1011); 3 the devil with three golden
hairs (KM. no. 29) has already been likened to the ON. Ugarthi-
locus (p. 24 1) . And more especially is he giant-like, where the
people credit him with stupendous feats of building and stone-
throwing : hero he puts on completely the burly, wrathful, spiteful
and loutish nature of the iotunn (pp. 534. 543-54) ; stupid devil
is used like stupid giant (p. 528). The building of christian
churches is hateful to him, and he tries to reduce them to ruins ;
but his schemes are sure to be foiled by some higher power or by
the superior craft of man. Like the giant, he often shews him-
self a skilful architect, and undertakes to build a castle, bridge
or church, only bargaining for the soul of him who shall first set
foot in the new building.

What was once told of the giant is now told of the devil, but
a harsher crueller motive usually takes the place of milder ones.
The giant in building has commonly some sociable neighbourly
purpose (pp. 535-54), the devil wishes merely to do mischief and
entrap souls. Norway has many legends of giant's bridges. The
jutul loves a huldra on the other side of the water ; to bo able to
visit her dryshod, he sets about building a bridge, but the rising
sun hinders its completion (Faye 15. 16). Another time two
jutuls undertake the work to facilitate their mutual visits. Over

1 Lausitz. raonatsschr. 1797, p. 755-6. Conf. the Flem. oorem, Haupt's
Zeitschr. 7, 532.

3 It is no contradiction, that in other stories the Devil has the opposite part of
Donar with his hammer and bolt handed over to him, or again that of the smith,
the limping Hephiestus. A preacher of the 14th cent. (Leyser 77, 10) speaks of
the evil devil's bloic-bcllowM.



Digitized by Google



DEVIL.



1021



the Main too the giants propose to huild a bridge (p. 547),
though the motive is no longer told. When the Devil builds the
bridge, he is either under compulsion from men (Thiele 1, 18), or
is hunting for a soul (Deut. sag. nos. 185. 336) ; but he has to
put up with the cock or chamois which is purposely made to run
first across the new bridge. 1 A Swiss shepherd in a narrow glen,
finding he could not drive his flock over the brook, wished the
devil would bridge it over for him j instantly the fiend appeared,
and offered to do the work on condition that the first thing that
crossed should be his : it was a goat that led the way (Tobler
214*). In one French story, having reserved for himself every
thirteenth creature that should cross the bridge, ho has already
clutched numbers of men and beasts, when a holy man, being
a thirteenth, confronts and conquers him (Mem. de l'acad. celt.
5, 384). 2 The church-building devil also having bargained for the
soul of the first that should enter, they make a wolf scamper
through the door (Deut. sag. no. 186); he in a rage flies up
through the roof, and leaves a gap that no mason can fill up (the
last incident is in nos. 181-2). On mountains he builds mills,
and destroys them again (nos. 183. 195). 3 His wager with the
architect of Cologne cathedral is remarkable : that he will lead
a rivulet from Treves to Cologne, 4 before the other can finish his
church (no. 204). In the same way a giantess wagers to throw
a stone bridge over a strait of the sea, before St. Olaf shall have
brought his church-building to an end ; but the bridge was not
half done, when the bells pealed out from the sacred pile. She in
vexation hurled the stones she was building with at the church-
tower, but never once could she hit it; then sho tore off one of
her legs, and flung it at the steeple. Some accounts say she
knocked it down, others that she missed ; the leg fell in a bog,

1 Before entering a new house, it is safest to let a cat or dog run in first,
Superat. I, 499.

3 The devil is shut up in a tower, where he may get out at the top, but only by
mounting one btair a day, and there being 365 of them, the journey takes him a
whole year.

3 A mountain called Teufehtmiilin at the source of the rivulet Alp is ment. in
Dambek's Geogr. pagor. p. 79; and a mill Duielmolen near Soest iii Seibertz 1,
(J22. Bechst. Franken p. 107. Baader's Bad. sag. no. 487.

4 By this was meant the old Koman aqueduct (Gelenius de admir. Col. p. 254),
of which an equally fabulous account Btands in the Annolied 510 : 4 Triere was ein
burg alt, si ziexte BomAre gewalt, dannin man undir der enlin den win santi verre,
mit steinin rinnin, den herein al ci miuniu, di ci Colue warin btdilbait.'



Digitized by Google



1022



DEVIL.



which is still named Giograputten (Faye p. 119). Bell-ringing is
hated by dwarfs (p. 459), giants (Faye p. 7. 17. Thiele 1, 42),
and devils, 1 who keep retiring before it : these legends all
signalize the triumph of Christianity. Out of some churches the
devil drags the bells away (Deut. sag. 202) : at first he does not
know what the new structure is for, and is pacified by evasive
answers (no. 181) ; but when it stands complete, he tries to
batter it down with stones. Devil's stones are either those he has
dropt as he bore them through the air for building, or those he
carried up the hills when undoing some work he had begun, or
those he has thrown at a church (nos. 196-8-9. 200. 477). Scan-
dinavian stories of stones hurled by the giant race at the first
christian church are in Thiele 2, 20. 126-7. Faye pp. 16. 18; a
Shetland one in Hilbert p. 433. Frequently such fragments of
rock have the fingers of the devil's hands imprinted on them ; a
stone on which he has slept shews the mark of his ear, Deut.
sag. 191. At Limburg near Tiirkheim in the Palatinate is a
stone, which the Evil one was bringing to fling at the church ;
but being only a young devil, he tired of the heavy load, and lay
down to sleep on it ; his figure printed itself on the rock, and he
overslept the time during which the throw ought to have been
made. In the vale of Durbach, on a hill of the Stollenwald,
stand eleven large stones ; the twelfth and largest one the devil
was carrying off, to batter down the Wendels-kirk with ; he had
got across the Rappenloch with it, and halfway up the Schiehald,
when he laid his burden down, and had a rest. But after that he
could no longer lift the heavy stone, its pointed end stuck fast in
the mountain, and you may still see the round hole made in it by
the devil's shoulder-bone. So the church was spared, but the
devil still drives about the place now and then with six he-goats,
and at midnight you hear the crack of his whip (Mone's Anz. 3,
91). — Devil's Dikes 2 are explained by the people as built by the
Devil to mark the boundary of his kingdom (Deut. sag. 188) ; he
is imagined then as the ruler, of a neighbouring and hostile
kingdom (a Iotunheimr), nay, as disputing with God the possession

Sf U Iri t I 1 In the Mid. Ages bells were rung to keep off lightning (the heathen Donar)
' * /and the devil.

r tt .<i a Dike has the double sense of ditch and earth-wall, both being made by
digging ; hence also any wall. The Germ, graben, ditch, has in some old words the
«. f '« • - " meaning of wall.- Tbans.


Digitized by Google



DEVIL



1023



of the earth, till at last they agree to divide it, and the Devil
builds the boundary- wall (no. 189). But these devil's tualls and
devil's ditches alike gather additional significance for us. The
people call the Roman fortifications in Bavaria, Swabia, Fran-
conia and the Wetterau, not only devil's walls, but pfalgraben,
pohlgraben, pfahlt'dbel (-mounds), and even simply pfal, pi. pfale,
which is explained as our pfahl, pale or stake, a word early
borrowed from Lat. palus (Graff 3, 331). But these walls have
no stakes in them, only stones and bricks ; it seems more correct
to trace the name to our old friend Phol ; the form WuUgraben,
which occurs in the Wetterau (Dieffenb. Wett. p. 142) and is
merely a softened pronunciation of Phulsgraben, is clearly in
favour of it ; and we have seen several instances in which Phol,
Pfal, Pful interchange. What is more, in various places the
devil's wall is also called the schweingraben (swinedike), and a
remarkable Swabian folktale says it was scratched up and rooted
up out of the ground in the night by a chanticleer and a hog. 1
Does not that unmistakably point to p/ol the boar (p. 996) ? I
have scarcely a doubt that popular tradition and local names will
yield some further confirmations. On this devil's wall the devil
is said to come driving on Christmas night (A.bh. der Miinchn.
acad. 1, 23, conf. 38), as nearly all the heathen gods are astir
from then to Twelfthday. Nor ought we to overlook, that in
such districts we also come across teufehgraben, diikersgraben,
e.g. in Lower Hesse, where Roman walls never came : any rocks
and walls that strike the eye are traced back by popular imagina-
tion either to giants and devils, or to Romans (p. 85) and Hel-
lenes (p. 534) . One piece of rock the Devil puts on as a hat, to
shew his enormous strength ; then comes the Saviour, and slips
the same on his little finger (Deut. sag. no. 205), just as Thorr
keeps outdoing the giant (p. 545) : doubtless a fiction of primitive
times. But when footprints of the Saviour and the Devil are
pointed out on high cliffs, from which the tempter shewed and
offered to his Lord the landscape invitingly spread out below
(DS. 184. 192), that seems to be founded on the Bible. 9 Pro-

1 Preacher's Hist, bl., Stattg. 1818, p. 67. Where the wall runs over the
K chersberg to the K. Marr, the country people all call it schweingraben.

* Ulrichs in his Journey through Greece 1, 44 gives the story of a devil's stone
(logari) from which the De?il preached {\6yot).



Digitized by Google



1024



DEVIL.



jeering crags are called devil's pulpits (Staid. 2, 85, kanzeli,
fluhkanzel), whence he is said to have preached to the assembled
people (DS. 190. Bechst. 3, 222); perhaps in olden times a
heathen priest stood there, or a divine image ? or are they simply
ancient Woden's hills ? The devil's beds may be placed by the
side of the Brunhilde beds and the like (see Suppl.).

Here I will make room for a few detailed narratives. The
Devil is represented as a masterful giant who will have his tithe
and toll : sometimes he appropriates the first who crosses the
bridge, at other times the last. So from the wheel of fortune
(p. 868) he every year made the last pupil drop off, 1 and took
him to himself. A Spanish legend has it, that there was a cave
at Salamanca, where he constantly maintained seven scholars, on
condition that when they had finished their studies, the seventh
should pay the lawing. Once, when a set of students were
taking their leave, and the last was ordered to stay, he pointed
to his shadow, saying ' he is the last ! ' So the devil had to take
the shadoWi and the pupil escaping remained without a shadow
all his life. Jamieson gives the details of a Scotch superstition :
' Losing one's shadow arrives to such as are studying the art of
necromancy. When a class of students have made a certain
progress in their mystic studies, they are obliged to run through
a subterraneous hall, where the devil literally catches the hind-
most in the race, unless he crosses the hall so speedily that the
Arch-enemy can only apprehend his shadow. In the latter case
the person of the sage never after throws any shade, and those
who have thus lost their shadow always prove the best magicians.'
The devil is cheated of his prey, and has to put up with the bare
shadow, like the dishonest man in the sham penance (RA. 678) 2
(see Suppl.).

That significant Norrland story of the giant Wind and
Weather (p. 518), whose connexion with the Devil is placed
beyond a doubt by the observations on pp. 1000-14, is related by
Thiele 1, 45 in the following shape. Esborn Snare wished to
build Kallundborg church, but his means not sufficing, a trold

1 4 Da nu ciner ins teufels reder eesse, oder gar in sumpf gefallen were, oder
des tods schwaden hette ihn ergriffen,' Mathesius 140*>.

s Chamisso's Peter Schlemihl rests, no doubt, on a legend substantially the
same. Of the homcsprito Vollmar, on the contrary, notbing was seen but tha
shadow, p. 509.



Digitized by Google



DEVIL.



1025



offered his assistance on condition that, when the church was
finished, Esbern should be able to tell the trold's name, or else
forfeit to him his heart and eyes. The work went rapidly for-
ward, and only half a pillar was wanting, when Esbern began to
be alarmed, because he knew not yet the trold's name. Anxious
and sad he wandered in the fields, when at the top of a rock he
heard the voice of a trold-wife : 'hush, hush, my child, to-morrow
comes thy father Fin bringing thee Esbern Snare's heart and
eyes to play with/ Esbern came home comforted ; he stept iuto
the church, the trold was just bringing up the stone shaft that
was still wanting, when Esbern hailed him by the name of Fin !
In a rage the trold shot up into the air with the half-pillar : that
is why the church stands on three pillars and a half only. Finnr
is the name of a dwarf in the Edda. — The German legend on
p. 549 is' told thus in Lower Hesse: A peasant on tho Ellenbach
(by the Sandershauser mt. near Cassel) had so much corn to
gather in, that he knew not how to house it all : his barn was too
small, and he had not the money to build a larger. As, thought-
ful and anxious, he paced his fields, a gray old mannikin stept up
to him, and asked the reason of his sadness. When the peasant
had told him the plight he was in, Qraymannikin smiled and said :
' a barn I would doubtless build for thee, so roomy that thou
canst garner all thy crop therein, and ere to-morrow's dawn shall
it stand ready in thy yard, if thou wilt make over to me whatso-
ever hidden property thou ownest.' 1 Tho peasant thought of
treasures underground, which could do him no good till they
were lifted, and he closed with the stranger's offer : not till ho
turned to leave did he notice a cow's foot and horse's foot peep out
from under the gray coat. He went home, and told his wife what
had happened to him in tho field : ' my God ! what hast thou
done ? I havo a child unborn, and thou hast signed it away to
the Evil one.' The moment it was dark, a tremendous din arose
in the farmyard, carters, carpenters, masons working away to-
gether, the Devil as architect directing the whole business, whicli
advanced with incredible speed : a few hours more, and the barn

1 Hottr (bat, gray hat), i.e. Of inn (p. 146), after giving Geirbildr his spittle to
be tbe barm of the ale she was brewing (conf. p. 902), demands what is between her
and the vat, viz. her unborn child, Fornald. sog. 2, 26. The icilde walrabe (p. 907)
requires of the qaeen ' det du haver under belle dit,' DV. 1, 187. If only for this
one incident, I hold the Hessian tale to be of heathen origin.



Digitized by Google



1026



DEVIL.



stood ready built, the roof was thatched, the walls filled up, only
a square or two stood open in the gable. Then the cunning wife,
dressed in her husband's clothes, crept across the yard to the
henhouse, clapt her hands, 1 and mimicked the crow of a cock, and
all the cocks set up a crowing one after the other. The evil
spirits scuttled away with a great uproar, leaving but one gable-
square of the new barn empty : one carter had just come up
with a large stone drawn by four chestnuts, when the Devil
caught him up and smashed him, cart and steeds and all, against
the barn ; his figure was printed on that same stone for a remem-
brance, and may bo seen there now. The barn-gable no human
hand has ever been able to close up; what was built in by day
would always fall out again at night. 2 The hill where the gray
man first appeared to the peasant is called Teufelsberg. — Not far
from Eomhild stand the Gleichberge, high basaltic hills, one of
which has its top encircled by a double ring of stones irregularly
piled. Here the Devil once carried a wall round the castle of a
• knight, having bargained for the hand of his lordship's daughter.
But before daybreak the young lady's nurse slapped her knees
loudly with her hands, the cocks began to crow, and the devil lost
his bet. Exasperated he destroyed his own work, therefore you
see only ruins of the wall. Another version of the story (Bechst.
Franken p. 261) is, that the nurse, having overheard the compact,
stole out at early morn with a dark lantern to the hen-roost ;
the cock, suddenly seeing the light, thought it was day, and
crowed with all his might* — A mill at Coslitz being badly off for
water, the Devil undertook to provide it with plenty by daybreak,
before the cock should crow ; the miller in return bound himself
to give up his handsome daughter. In one night therefore the
devil had nearly finished cutting the conduit from the Elbe to
Coslitz, when the miller repented, and, some say by imitating
the cock's cry, others by knocking his leather apron, made the
cock crow before his time, whereupon the devil departed in anger,
and the trench remained unfinished, Mitth. des Sachs, vereins,

1 Clapping of hands avails in enchantments. Wolfdietr. 1372 says of the
heatheness Marpalie : ' sie sluog ir hend ze lonwn,' and immediately turned into a
crow.

3 In any church the bole at which the devil has flown out can never be closed.
1 Same incident in a Tburingian story, Bechst. 3, 224.



Digitized by Google



I

I



DEVIL. 1027

Dresd. 1835. 1, 11. — At Geertsbergen in W. Flanders there goes
a similar story of a devil* 8 barn (duivel schuer), and here too the
farmer is saved by the cunning of his wife : lang voor dat de
haen gewoon is te kraeyen, sprong zy het bed uit, en liep naer
buiten, waer zy een onnoemlyk getal werklieden bezig zag met
de schuer op te maken, aon dewelke nog slechts een gedeelte
van den zymuer ontbrak. Zy plaetsle haren mond tusschen hare
handen, en schreeuwde zoo schel als zy maer kon : 1 koekeloren
.; haen I ' en alle de hanen in de rondte lieten hun eerste morgen-
' geschrei hooren. Het werkvolk was verdwenen, en de schuer
stond er, doch met dien onvoltrokken gevel ; men heft herhaelde
malen beproefd het gat te stoppen : telkens komt Satan het's
nachts openbreken, uit weerwraek dat de ziel van den boer hem
zoo loos ontsnapt is. 1

The Esthonians call a farm-servant who has charge of the
barns and grains ' riegenkerl.' Once a riegenkerl sat casting
metal buttons, when the Devil walked up to him, said good day,
and asked, ' what are you doing there ? ' 'I am casting eyes.'
' Eyes ? could you cast me a new pair f ' 'Oh yes, but Fve no
more left just now.' ' But will you another time ? 9 ' Yes, I can,'
said the riegenkerl. 9 When shall I come again ? ' ' When you
please.' So the devil came next day to have eyes cast for him.
The riegenkerl said, ' Do you want them large or small ? ' ' Very
large indeed.' Then the man put plenty of lead over the fire to
melt, and said, ' I can't put them in as you are, you must let me
tie you down.' He told him to lie down on his back on the
bench, took some stout cords, and bound him very tight. Then
the devil asked, ' what name do you go by ? ' 1 Issi (self) is my
name.' 1 A good name that, I never heard a better.' By this
time the lead was melted, and the devil opened his eyes wide,
waiting for the new ones. ' Now for it ! ' said the riegenkerl,
and poured the hot lead into the deviVs eyes ; the devil sprang up
with the bench on his back, and ran away. He was running past
some ploughmen in the fields, who asked him, ' who's done that
to you?' He answered, 'issi teggi' (self did it). The men
laughed and said, ' self done, self have.' But be died of his new



1 Kanst en letterblad, Ghent 1840. p. 7 ; and from it Wolf no. 187, who gives
similar stories in no. 186 and note p. 686.

VOL. III. K



Digitized by Google



I



1028 DEVIL.

eyes, and nobody has ever seen the devil since. 1 In this tale the
Devil is more a blundering giant than the malignant Foe of
mankind ; his blinding and the name Issi reminds us of Homer's
Polyphemus and Out*?, as well as of the oriental Depeghoz
(p. 554). In our nursery-tale (KM. 2, 481, conf. Altd. bl. 1, 122)
the giant's eyes are scalded out with oil, and in Lith. the devil is
callod ahlatis, the blind, blinded. When other Esthonian tales
explain thunder by saying the devil is pursued by God, and
fleeing for refuge to the rocks, is smitten down (Superst. M, 61.
64) ; here also God resembles the Scand. Thdrr, and the Devil a
iotunn whom he slays (see Suppl.).

It is a vital part of the machinery of medieval poetry, for
heroes to be transported by the Devil through the air from distant
countries to their home, when there is urgent need of their
presence there : some marriage is contemplated, that would rob
them of wife or lover. Thus king Charles (in the Spagna, canto
xxi) rides a devil, converted into a horse, from the East to France
in one night ; later legends make an angel appear to him instead,
and shew him a strong horse, DS. no. 439. The angel visits the
gentle Moringer in like distress (no. 523) . But Henry the Lion
and Gerhart (Caes. Heisterb. 8, 59) travel with the devil's aid.
The mere fact that angel and devil can change places here, shews
that no evil spirit was originally meant; it is no other than
Wuotan carrying through the clouds his foster-son (p. 146) ; and
so we get at the real meaning of the question, what devil brings
you here ? A devil carries a belated canon from Bayeux to Rome
in time for pontifical mass ; and by the same magic Klinsor and
Ofberdingen get from Hungary to the Wartburg.

There is no surer test of the mythic element having a deep
foundation, than its passing into the Beast-fable. The Esthonian
tale of the man and the bear going halves in the cultivation and
produce of a field (Reinh. cclxxxviii), which turns on the same
distinction of upper and under growth that we saw at p. 715, is
told in our KM. no. 189 of a peasant and the devil, and in this
form we find it as early as Rabelais bk 4, cap. 45 — i7. Riickert's
Poems p. 75 (Godeke 2, 416) give it from an Arabian tradition,
the source of which I should like to learn; while the Dan. story

1 Rosenplanter's Beitrage, part 6, p. 61. The devil's being buried by beasts is
not in point here.



Digitized by Google



DEVIL. 1029

in Thiele4, 122 relates it of a peasant and a trold. The common
folk in Normandy have to this day a legend of their Mont St.
Michel, how Michael and the Devil disputed which could build
the finer church. The devil builds one of stone, Michael con-
structs a handsomer one of ice; when that melts, they both
agree to till the soil, the devil choosing the upper herbs, and
Michael keeping what hides in the ground. In all these tales,
the bear, giant, troll or devil is the party outwitted, like the
giant who built the castle for the gods (see Suppl.).

Lastly, the old-heathen nature of the Devil is proved by animals
and plants being named after him, as they are after gods and
giants (p. 532). The libellula grandis, dragonfly, a delicate
slender-limbed insect, is called both enchanted maid and devil's
horse, devil' 8 bride, devil's nag, Dan. fandens ridehest; in the L of
Mors a beetle, meloe proscarabaeus, fannens riihejst (Schade p.
215) ; in Switz. the libellula, devil's needle, devil's hairpin, and
the caterpillar devil's cat. 1 In the vale of Rimella the black
snail, tiufulsnaklte, and a tiny black beetle s' bozios ajo, the evil
one's mother, Albr. Schott pp. 275. 334, a counterpart to the
Marienkiifer, p. 694, but also suggestive both of ' devil's needle 1
and of Loki's mother Ndl, p. 246 ; so that Dona-nadcZ (p. 490 n.)
may be correct, as the name of an evil river-sprite. In Holland
some herb, I know not which, is called duivels naai-garen (sewing
yarn). The alcyonium digitatum or palmatum is devil's hand,
manus diaboli, thief's hand, Engl, devil's hand or deadman's
hand, Nethl. doode mans hand, oude mans hand, Fr. main de
diable, main de ladre, de larron, conf. Forneotes folme, p. 240.
Lycopodium clavatum, devil's claw; euphorbia, devil's milk;
clematis vitalba, devil's thread; scabiosa succisa, devil's bite, Boh.
cerUkus; adonis, devil's eye; convolvulus arvensis, devil's gut,
etc., etc. 2 Probably the folktales of an earlier time knew the
exact reasons of such names, conf. Superst. I, nos. 189. 190. 476.
The thunderbolt, the elf-shot, was also called devil's finger, pp.
179. 187 (see Suppl.).

1 Caterpillar?, through shedding their skins, becoming pupaa, and gradually
changing from creeping and dead-like creatures into flying ones, have something
uncanny, ghostly in them.

5 Hypericum perforatum, deviVi flight, because it drives him away : ' dosten,
harthun, weisse heid, thun dem teufel vieles leidV



Digitized by Google



1



DEVIL



In such various ways has a Being who, taken altogether, was
unknown to the heathen, pushed himself into the place of their
gods, spirits and giants, and united in himself a number of
similar or conflicting attributes. He resembles Wuotan as the
grayman and the cloaked wild hunter, who rides and carries
through the air; as sowing discord, playing dice, and taking
into his service men that vow themselves to him. His red beard,
his hammer and bolt recall Donar. Phol and Zio are connected
with the storm-wind, and the former with devil's buildings. As
for giants, their whole being has most things in common with
that of the Devil.



Digitized by Gc



CHAPTER XXXIV.



MAGIC.

Miracle (wundern) 1 is the salutary, magic (zaubern) the hurtful
or unlawful, use of supernatural powers : miracle is divine, magic
devilish ; not till the gods were degraded and despised was magic
imputed to them. 2 Beings midway betwixt them and man, sage
giants, artful elves and dwarfs practise magic; only their skill
seems more innate, stationary, not an acquired art. Man can
heal or poison, by directing natural forces to good or to evil ;
sometimes he even shares the gift of miracle, but when he pushes
the beneficent exercise of his powers to the supernatural point,
he learns to conjure. Miracle is wrought by honest means,
magic by unlawful ; the one is geheuer (blessed, wholesome,
p. 914), the other ungeheuer. At the same time the origin of
all conjuring must be traced directly to the most sacred callings,
which contained in themselves all the wisdom of heathendom,
viz. religious worship and the art of song. Sacrificing and
singing came to mean conjuring; the priest and the poet, confi-
dants of the gods and participants of divine inspiration, stand
next-door to the fortune-teller and magician (see Suppl.).

It is so with all nations, and was so with our ancestors : by
the side of divine worship, practices of dark sorcery, by way of
exception, not of contrast. The ancient Germans knew magic
and magicians ; on this foundation first do all the later fancies
rest. And the belief was necessarily strengthened and compli-
cated when, upon the introduction of Christianity, all heathen

1 I here use the verb wundern transitively (■» to do wonders), in which sense
its derivative wunderer meant a wonder-worker. Beinmar says, Ms. 2, 154 b : 4 wol
dem wonder, daz der minders? re gewundert hat an der vil stiezen.' God is the true
wunder&re. Ms. 2, 171 b . Trist. 10013, who of all wonders hath control, Parz. 43, 9 ;
mirabilis Dens, Helbl. 7, 12. Bat also a hero doing godlike deeds, e.g. Erek, earns
the name of umndertere ; in Etzels hofhaltung it is even applied, less fitly, to a
savage devilish man, p. 943.

* And a human origin for the same reason, p. 38 In. Snorri calls OSinn
• forspar, fi6lkunnigr,' and makes him ' galdr qveSa,' Yngl. saga cap. 4. 5. 7. Saxo
Gram. p. 13 ascribes to him ' praestigia,' and curiously divides all magicians
(mathematici ; see Forcellini sub v.) into three kinds, viz. giants, magi and deities
(p. 9) ; conf. his statements (p. 103) on Thor and Othin * magicae artis imbuti.' 8o
the Cbronicon Erici (circ. 1288) represents Odin as ' incantator et magus.'

1U31



Digitized by Google



1032



MAGIC.



notions and practices were declared to be deceit and sinful
delusion : the old gods fell back and changed into devils, and all
that pertained to their worship into devilish jugglery. Presently
there sprang up tales of the Evil one's immediate connexion with
sorcery ; and out of this proceeded the most incredible, most
cruel jumbling up of imagination and reality. Magic tricks per-
formed, and those merely imagined, so ran into one another, that
they could no longer be distinguished either in punishing or
even in perpetrating them.

Before proceeding with our inquiry, we have to examine the
several terms that designated witchcraft in olden times. It
seems worth noting, that several of the more general names have
simply the sense of doing or preparing, and therefore mark an
imperceptible lapse of right doing into wrong. The OHG.
harawan, AS. gearwian, had only the meaning of facere, parare,
praeparare, ornare, but the same word in ON. gora approxi-
mates to that of conjuring, Dan. forgibre ; gorning is maleficium,
gbrningar artes magicae, much in the same way as facinus is both
deed and misdeed. Our thun, to do, passes into anthun, to inflict
(by sorcery); and the ON. fordeeffa (malefica), Seem. 64\ 197 b
comes from da$ (facinus). 1 Now the Greek and Latin words
epBeiv, pi&tv, facere (p. 41n.), mean not only to do, but to
sacrifice, without requiring the addition of Upd or sacra, and
epSeiv rati rt is to bewitch ; the ON. biota, beside its usual sense
of sacrificare, consecrare, has that of maledicere; whether
forn&8kja, sorcery, can be connected with forn, sacrifice, has been
discussed, p. 41. — A difficult word to explain is the OHG. zoupar
divinatio, maleficium, zouparari hariolus, zouparon hariolari ;
Notker spells zoufer in Ps. 57, 6, zouver in Boeth. 29, zouferlih,
zouverlih in Cap. 45. 99; the MHG. zouber, zoubern answers
exactly to the strict OHG. forms with p, to LG. tover, toveren,
and the same in Nethl. both Mid. and Mod. (conf. toverie,
Maerl. 1, 260-3, toverare 1, 266. 2, 176-7, toeverie is a faulty
spelling) ; 0. Fris. taw&He, Richth. 401. 21. The Icelandic has
tofur instrumenta magica, tofrar incantamenta, tbfra fascinare,

1 M. Lat. factura (sortilegium), facturare (fascinare), affacturatrix (incantat-
rix) ; Itfil. fattura (incantatio), fattxtcchiero, -ra, sorcerer, -reas; Pror. fachurar,
faiturar, to conjure, fachilieira, faitileira, sorceress ; O. Fr. faiture, faicturerie,
sorcery ; Span, hecho (facinus), hechizo (incantatio), hechizar conjure, hechicero, -ra,
sorcerer, -ress.



Digitized by Google



ZAUBER. WITCHCRAFT. 1033



tofrari magus, tbfranom saga, Fornald. sog. 3, 205 ; with which
the Norw. tougre fascinare (Hallager 131 b ) and Swed. tofver in-
cantatio, tofverkaza saga, agree ; we may safely suppose a modern
importation of all these Scand. words from Germany, as they
do not occur in ON. writings. 1 I am in doubt whether an AS.
ted/or is to be connected with zoupar ; it signifies minium, color
coccineus, and Lye gives (without ref.) tifran depingere, which
ought perhaps to be t^frian. The addition of the adj. red in
redd iedfor (rubrica) favours the conjecture that ted/or was a
general term for the colours employed in illuminating manuscripts,
and thus may stand for rune, mystic writing, hence our zauber
(magic). 2 To identify zoupar with zepar (p. 40), AS. tedfor with
tiber, is forbidden by the difference of vowel, though it would
bring the notion of magic very near that of sacrifice again. One
would much rather trace zoupar to zouwan, Goth, taujan, AS.
tawian (facere, parare), and assume the operation of somo anoma-
lous change of the w into v, b, p? Even the Lith. daryti, Lett,
darriht (facere), and the Slav, tvoriti (facere, creare, fingere) are
worth considering. — Another term no less perplexing is one
peculiar to the Saxon branch of our race. In L. Saxony they
still say for conjuring or soothsaying, wikhen, wicken (Ssp. 2, 13.
Homeyer p. 117 var. x) and wigelen (wichelen), for fortune-teller
wikker, wichler, for witch wikkerske, for sorcery urichelie. So in
Nethl. both wikken and wichelen, wikkerij and wichelarij ; M.
Nethl. wikelare ariolus, Maerl. 2, 323. 348, wigelare, Kastner's
Bruchst. 42 b , wigelinge vaticinium 12 b . The AS. also has the
two forms : both wiccian fascinare, wicce saga, wiccungdom
(Csedm. 223, 17) or uriccancraift ars magica; and wiglian ariolari,
wigelere augur, wigelung augurium, incantatio ; while the Fris.
transposes the letters, wiliga incantatio, Richth. 401, 21. The
Engl, has witch = wicce ; from the AS. verb has survived its
partic. wicked (perversus, maledictus), and 0. Engl, had an adj.
wikke meaning the same ; add wizard, but all the L-forms have

1 So the Liineburg Wendic tdblattch sorcerer (Eccard p. 291), tobalar sorcerer,
tatclatza, toblar$ka sorceress (Jugler's Wtb.), seem borrowed from Oerman, as other
Slavic dialects have nothing similar ; for the Sloven, zdperm&gio, zdprati to conjure,
zopernik, -nitza sorcerer, -ress, are certainly the Germ, zanber, eto.

a Is the derivation of our ziffer, Engl, cipher, Fr. chiffre, It. cifra, cifera (secret
writing) from an Arabic word a certainty ? Ducange sub v. cifrae has examples
from the 12th cent. The AS. word has a striking resemblance.

1 Our gelb, farbe, gerben, murbe, all have to in MHG.



Digitized by Google



1034



MAGIC



disappeared. The word is unknown to any HG. dialect, old or
new ; 1 yet I believe it springs from a root common to all
Teutonic tongues, viz. veihan (no. 201), which again had originally
the sense of facere, conficere, sacrare, and from which came the
adj. veihs (sacer), OHG. wih, and the noun vafhts (res), conf.
Slav, tvar, tvor (creatura, /rnVte). We- know that vafhts, wight,
acquired the sense of daemon (p .440-1), and the ON. vcettr (orm
vaettr, poor wight) means a witch in Sajm. 214 b . I treat the kk
in wikken as I did that in Ecke from the root agan (p. 237), and
this is supported by the g in wigelen and ch in wichelen (evidently
a ch = h). — Near in meaning, though unrelated in origin, seems
the OHG. wxzago, AS. witega, witga, Caedm. 218, 18. 224, 13, our
weissage, prophet, soothsayer, but in a good, not in a bad sense ;
the ON. form vitki, Seem. 63*. 118*, stands for vitugi (conf. vitug
94*), as ecki, eitki does for eitgi (Gramm. 3, 738), and vaetki for
vaetgi. This vitki has been wrongly identified with AS. wicce :
never does an AS. cc result from tg, though it becomes tch in
English. 8 The corresponding verb is OHG. wizagon, AS. wite-
gian, M. Nethl. witegen, Diut. 2, 202 b . — Equivalent at first to
witega and vitki were the ON. spamaffr, spdkona, spadis (pp.
94. 402) : but from signifying the gift of wisdom and prediction
as it resides in priest and poet, 3 they gradually declined into the
sense of noxious wizard and witch. Even Snorri's for-spar and
fioUkunnigr (p. 1031 n.) had already acquired the bad secondary
sense. Fiolkimnigr (multiscius) came to mean magician, and
fioUkunndtta fidlkyngi, and even the simple kyngi ( = kunnugi)
sorcery. This k^ngi was learnt as a profession : ' Rognvaldr
nam fidlkyngi/ Har. Harf. saga cap. 36. Walther 116, 29 says
of a lady wondrous fair : ' daz si iht anders kiinne (that she was
up to other tricks, knew too much), daz soil man iibergeben
(you are not to imagine).' Hans Sachs calls an old sorceress by
turns 'die alt unhuld' and 'die weise frau* iv. 3, 32-3 (see
Suppl.).

1 Vegius in the Lex Burg. 16, 3 and OHG. 1, 8 has been taken to mean
magician ; but, aa the rubric 1 viator ' in the last passage shews, it is one who
fetches and carries, index, delator.

9 Of like meaning are: teeiser mann, tceue frau, klugefrau ; ON. vUindamafr,
sage, natural philosopher, Fornald. sog. 1, 5 ; Serv. vietcht peritus, victchtats,
•tiua veneficus, -ca ; Pol. wieizcika sorceress, fortune-teller, wieszczyka night-hag,
lamia ; Sloven, vezha witch.

■ Analogous is the O. Fr. devin, divin, magician, diviner.



Digitized by GoogI



WITEGA. SPA. GALDOR.



1035



Inasmuch as spying is foreseeing and seeing, there is another
word for conjuring that I can connect with it. Without any
bodily contact, things may be acted upon by mere looking, by
the evil eye : this in our older speech was called entsehen (p. 461).

But as the vates, beside seeing and knowing, has also to sing
tne mystic strain and speak the spell, there must from the earliest
times have been words to express conjuring, like our present
beschreien, beschwatzen, berufen, ubermfen, beschwdren [from cry,
call, talk, swear]. The OHG. kalan, AS. galan, ON. gala, was
not only canere, but incantare, a recital with binding power, a
singing of magic words. Such spoken charm was called in ON.
galdr, AS. galdor, OHG. IcaUiar (not to be confounded with
kelstar, sacrifice, p. 38-9), MHG. gahterie, Schwanr. 813; we
find gahterweiber for witches even in Mod. German ; galdr in
itself seems not to have meant anything criminal, for meingaldr
(wicked spell) is particularized, Fornm. sog. 2, 137. ON. galdra
fascinare, galdramaffr incantator, galdrakona saga ; AS. galdor-
croefi magia, galdere magus ; OHG. kahtarari incantator, ' Medea
diu handega galsterara* N. Cap. 100. In like manner the Fr.
charme, charmer come from carmen, and enchanter incantare from
cantus, canere. The M. Lat. carminare, to enchant, gave birth
to an OHG. garminari, germinari incantator, genninod incantatio,
Diut. 2, 326\ Gl. Doc. 213\ germenod, N. Cap. 100 ; which after-
wards died out of the language. The MHG. already used segen
[blessing, from signum] for a magic formula, segencerinne for
enchantress. Chap. XXXVIII. will go more deeply into this
necessary connexion of magic with the spoken word, with poetic
art ; but, as the mystery of language easily passes into that of
symbol, as word and writing get indissolubly wedded, and in our
idiom the time-honoured term rune embraces both tendencies ;
it throws some light on the affinity of zoupar with teafor (p. 1033),
and also on the method of divination (p. 1037) by rune-staves.

The Goth, afhugjan, to deprive of one's senses, bewilder, stands
in Gal. 3, 1 for fiaafcaiveiv = fascinare ; 1 AS. dyderian, bedyder-
ian illudere, incantare, perhaps conn, with our HG. tattern, dot-
tern (angi, delirare) ; we now say verblenden, daze, dazzle. That
ON. troll (p. 526), which stood for giants and spirits, is also

1 Is this, or is the Ital. f&sciarc . the source of Fr. f&cher, formerly fascher,
irritare, Span, enfadar ?



«



Digitized by Google



1036



MAGIC.



applied to magicians, trdll-skapr is sorcery, the Sw. trolla, Dan .
trylle incantare, trolldom, trolddom witchcraft; the Gulajmigslag'
p. 137 has 'at vekja troll* for conjuring, which reminds us of
' veckja hildi ' and * waking the Stelde/ p. 864. The Frisians
say tsyoene fascinare, tsyoen-er, -ster sorcerer, -ress, which (as
initial U before i or y often stands for k) is no doubt to be ex-
plained by the ON. kyu in its collateral sense of monstrum, conf.
MHGr. kunder. I cannot satisfactorily account for an O.Sw.
vifiskipli, used in the Vestgotalag for magic, not of the worst
kind, but what can be expiated by penance : ' far kona mep
vipshiplum' p. 153 ; 'varber taken meb vijjslcipplum* p. 228;
' convictus de widskiplum/ p. 321 ; it is plainly the present vid-
akepehe superstitio ; skipa is ordinare, facere, and the wrongness
must lie in the vid ; conf. beginn. of ch. XXXV".

We find seiffr meaning magic already in the Edda : ' 8eio* hon
kunni,' said of a vala or volva, Sa3m. 4 ; seiffberendr 118* are
magicians, who stand on a par with volur and vitkar ; and the word
becomes commoner in the sagas. If we might spell it seyffr (as
one poem has it in Fornald. sog. 2, 130), we should get both
an easy derivation from si65a to seethe, and another point of
contact with Goth. s&ubs, p. 40. Seiftma&r is magician, sei&kona,
sey&kona a wise woman, one that skills to seethe and cook magic
remedies. 1 Meanwhile serSr occurs clearly as a vowel-change
from si&a, Yngl. saga cap. 16-7, Loki reproaches OSinn with
having practised sorcery : ' bik st5a ko$o,' Saem. 63*, and I have
never seen si65a put for it ; so the two words, even if cognate,
must remain apart, or find their justification in an exceptional
shifting from the 4th to the 5th series of vowel-change.

The OHG-. puozan, AS. betan, is emendare, but also mederi, to
remedy, heal ; in Westphalia boten 2 still expresses the action of
old-fashioned charms as opposed to scientific medicine, Superst.
I, 873 ; the Teutonista gives boiten as synon. with conjuring,
and the M. Nethl. ut boeten is sanare (Reinh. 5394). 8

1 SeySr or tau9r is a poetic word for a fire to cook by: ' % seytfi bera,' S«m.
64% to aet on the fire, take to cook, make to boil.

* Roth de nomin. vet. Germ. med. p. 139.

* Foreign terms are less interesting, e.g. AS. drt} magus, pi. dryas, drycreeft
magia, whose Celtic origin is betrayed by the familiar name of Druid ; Ir. draoi
wizard, draoidheachd sorcery. Nigromanzic already in medieval poets, Ms. 2, 10 b ;
1 der list von nigrdmami,' Parz. 453, 17. 617, 12, list m. answering to ON. Ufrfitt,
which Snorri nses of magic ; nigromaneie, Maerl. 2, 261. ' der swarzen buoche wis,'



Digitized by Google



SEID-MAN. JUGGLER.



1037



Now, as the concocting of remedies and that of poisons easily
fall into one, the OHG. luppi, AS. lyf, MHG. luppe, is used of
poisoning and bewitching: • luppe und zouber triben/ Berth. 12,
and luppcerinne 58 is sorceress, exactly as veneficium and venefica
stand related in Latin; and the Goth, lubjaleisei, Gal. 5, 20
is (f>apfiaicela, sorcery, and leisei is like list in zouberlist, Iw. 1284.
Even the Goth, lekeis, OHG. lahhi (leech, medicus in the good
honest sense), and lahhin6n (mederi), lahhan (romedium) lie at
the root of the words lachenoerinne enchantress, Oberl. bihteb. 46,
lachsnen quackery, conjuring, lachsnerin witch, Staid. 2, 150.

In Hessian witch- trials of the 16th cent., the usual, nay the
only term for bewitching is derren, prop, nocere ; as even OHG.
taron acquired, beside nocere, the meanings fraudare, officere,
illudere (see Suppl.). •

A part of the diviner's craft consisted in casting and inter-
preting lots. Like the Lat. sortilegium and sortilegus (M. Lat.
soriiarius, whence Yr. sorrier), our old German words hliozan
(Graff 4, 1122), MHG. liezen (augurari, Dint. 3, 107-8. Er.
8123), and hliozari, Uezcere (augur, divinator) are applicable to
sorcery. Then from the customary phrase ' mittere, jactare
sortem' seems to have been borrowed the expression zouber
werfen, to throw a spell, Wolfd. 515. 520. 533, jeter un sort,
' maleficium super jactare/ Lex Sal. 22, 4 ; zouber legen, to lay a
spell, Walth. 115, 32. 116, 23-5. The Swed .tjusa to conjure is,
I think, for kjusa, ON. kiosa, choose, spy (Gramm. 4, 848), pick,
eligere sortem ; but also the ' vala/ the wise woman and enchant-
ress, is one that ' wales ' or chooses, a valkyrja.

One species of divination was performed with the drinking-cup
(Genesis 44, 5). From the Lat. caucus (for scyphus) are sup-
posed to have sprung cauculator, Capitul. an. 789, § 63 capit. 1,
62. 6, 373, and cocharius, ib. § 18 capit. 5, 69, and from these
the OHG. coucalari scenicus, magicus, Gl. Mons. 377, gougulari,

Troj. 7411. 1 euochen an den twarzen buochen,' Martina 20*. 1 nu ler etz in sin
$voarzez buoch, daz ime der hellem6r hat gegeben,' Walth. 33, 7. Black art, black
artist, not till a later time. All this came of misunderstanding the Gr. veKpoiuurrtta.
In the Ulm Vocab. of 1476 we read : ' nigramantia dicitur divinatio facta per nigros,
i.e. mortuos, vel super mortuos, vel cum mortuiB.' A curious statement in Bit. 79
about ToUdo : 1 ein berc lit nahen da bt, da der litt nigromanzi yon firste wart er-
funden (first invented) ; ' another opinion propounded in Herbort 9372. Our Mid.
Ages saddled the Saracens in Spain and Apulia with its invention ; 4 ein piilluch
zouber/ Ms. 2, 133 b .



Digitized by Google



1038



MAGIC.



0. iv. 16, 33, koukelari, Georgsl. 25, goucaltuom magia, Gl. Mons.
375, goukel praestigium, N. pa. 65, 3 ; MHG. gougel gougelare,
Walth. 37, 34, our gaukel, juggle ; ON. JcuM praestigium, kuklari
magus j M. Nethl. cokelere hariolus, Diut. 2, 217*. Others derive
gaukler from joculator, and one thing that seems to be in its
favour is the mild meaning, of mere Bleight-of-hand, which still
clings to gauklerei (jugglery), i.e. harmless tricks performed by
way of game and recreation ; conf. gougel-biihse (-box), Walth.
38, 6. Renn. 2244. gougelstok (-stick), Martina 9*. gougel-
fuore (-cart), MsH. 3, 166*. 186*. gougelspil (-play) 438*. goukel-
hiietlin (-cap), Renn. 16719, conf. Walth. 37, 34. So the Nethl.
guir.helen, gocheltn, goghelen, guichelaar : ' gokelt onder den hoet/
Fcrg. 2772 ; the form guichelen is very like wiclielen (p. 1033),
and there actually occurs an AS. hweolere, hweohlere (suggesting
hweohl, kvkXo*;, rota) as another way of spelling wigelere, so
that one might really conjecture an O. Frankish chuigalari, and
from it get cauculator, were not everything else against it. I will
just mention also the Boh. kauzlo magic, kauzliti to conjure, Pol.
gusla magic, gmlarz conjurer ; this g form we might be tempted
to refer to the Serv. gusle, Russ. gusli, psaltery, as the bewitch-
ing instrument, but that the Pol. gesle, Boh. hausle, does not
agree (see Suppl.).

The various ways of naming magic have led us to the notions
of doing, sacrificing, 1 spying, soothsaying, singing, sign-making
(secret writing), bewildering, dazzling, cooking, healing, casting
lots.

They shew that it was practised by men as well as women.
Yet even our earliest antiquities impute it preeminently to women.
More influential, more expert than the zouparari, wigelere,
spamaSr, galdramaSr, appears the zouparara, witce, vrikkerske,
kalstarara, galdrakona, spdkona; and to these must be added
some appellations hardly applicable to any but female witchery.

For the reason of this I look to all the circumstances external
and internal. To woman, not to man, was assigned the culling
and concocting of powerful remedies, as well as the cooking of
food. Her lithe soft hand could best prepare the salve, weave the
lint and dress the wound ; the art of writing and reading is in

1 Even where the vowel resists, the coincidence is remarkable : f6rn and forn,
g'elstar and galstar, sau« and seiS, zSpar and zoupar.



Digitized by Google



HEXE.



1030



the Mid. Ages ascribed chiefly to women. The restless lives of
men were filled ap with war, hunting, agriculture and handi-
crafts ; to women experience and convenient leisure lent every
qualification for secret sorcery. Woman's imagination is warmer
and more susceptible, and at all times an inner sacred power
of divination was revered in her (pp. 95. 397). Women were
priestesses, prophetesses (56n. 94 — 8), their names and fame are
embalmed alike in Old-German and Norse tradition ; and the
faculty of somnambulism still shews itself most of all in women.
Then again, looked at from one side, the art of magic must have
been chiefly monopolized by old women, who, dead to love and
labour, fixed all their thoughts and endeavours on hidden
science. 1 Snorri in his curious account of the origin of magic
(Yngl. s. cap. 7) says, that to males (karlmonnum) it seemed un-
dignified to dabble in a doubtful art, so they taught it the god-
desses or priestesses, for gyojur can mean either. According to
differences of national sentiment, the norns and volvas (p. 403),
the valkyrs and swan-maids approximate to divine beings or
sorceresses. On all this put together, on a mixture of natural,
legendary and imagined facts, rest the medieval notions about
witchcraft. Fancy, tradition, knowledge of drugs, poverty and
idleness turned women into witches, and the last three causes
also shepherds into wizards (see Suppl.).

To the Latin words saga? strix, striga? venejica, lamia, furia
answers our hexe, by which is meant sometimes an old, sometimes
a young woman, and a beauty can be complimented by being
called a perfect witch. The OHG. form of the word is hazus
[pron. hatsus], haznsa, hazasa, Graff 4, 1091 ; hazzuso (eumeni-

» 4 Where one man is burnt, there be well ten xcomen burnt ' says Keisersp.
Om. 46 . ' ein mtnderaltes trip bescheidet den troum,' unravels the dream, Walth.
95, 8. A * her ling frftf ok framsyn ' foretells of a log that is to perish in the fire,
Nialssaga 194-9. Very early times impute to old icomen more craft and malice than
to the devil himself, as we see by the pretty story of the hag who set a loving couple
by the ears when the devil could not, for which he handed her a pair of shoes
cautiously on a peeled stick, being afraid of her touch, Morolt 917 — 1007. Haupt's
Altd. bl. 2, 81. H. Sachs ii. 4, 9. Melander's Jocoseria 2, 53. Conde Lucanor cap.
48. No witchcraft comes into the story, though the first account calls her a zouberin.

a ■ Sagire sentire acute est ; ex quo tagae anus, quia multa scire volunt,' Cic.
de Divin. 1, 31.

> Lex Sal. 22. 67. Lex Alam. add. 22 stria ; O.Fr. estrie (see p. 287 dame
Habonde) ; Ital. strega, stregona (whence perh. the Swiss ttraggele p. 934), a wizard
being stregone. Orig. strix, arptyt, was bird of night, owl: 'Mtriges ab avibus
ejusdem nominis, quia maleficae mulieres volaticae dicuntur,' Festus sub v.



Digitized by Google



1040



MAGIC



dum), Dint. 2, 350*, is gen. pi. of hazus, hazes 2, 346*; hezesusun
(furiis) 2, 33 7 b apparently a corruption of hegezusun ? The Gl.
Flor. 21 give hegezisse, and that the genuine form in full was hagazus
or hagazusa (p. 1045n.) we are assured by the AS. hcegtesse, M.
Nethl. hagetisse, Diut. 2, 229 b , haghedisse, Hor. Belg. 1, 119: the
contraction of the first two syll. (as in talanc for taga-lank) speaks
for its age and frequent use ; we must therefore prefer the spell-
ing hdzu8 with long a, and in N. Cap. 105 it does seem to be
hazessa, Wackern. lb. 153, 36 in spite of Graff's hazessa. Rarely
do we find a MHG. hegxse, hexse, Martina 90 c . 106 b , hecse, OberL
bihteb. 46 ; the Swiss say hagseh, haagsch, Staid. 2, 10; at Ulm,
says Schmid's Schwab, id. 156, they call a stingy old woman
hekkas, only another way of writing hexe. But as the AS., be-
side hazgtesse, has also hecgesse, Engl, hag, MHG. hdchel, Ls. 2,
638, Swiss hdggele (conf. straggele), the suffixed letters seem to
have added little to the simple root hag. The ON. adj. hagr
means dexter, artificiosus, and might have had the full sense of
sagus : our hexe is a deep sly woman. Still the ON. never does
use a masc. noun hagr or a fem. hog in such away; and the
Swed. Jiexa, Dan. hex, in their very spelling betray their Mod.
German extraction. For hexen, to bewitch, Up. German dialects
furnish hechsnen, which agrees with an O. Fris. verb hexna
(Richth. 159, 25, one MS. has hoxna); the Dalecarlian is hagsa,
hugsa [hoax, hocus?]. Down to the 16-1 7th cent., instead of
the rare MUG. forms given above, the preference was given to
unholde (which properly means she-devil, p. 266), as diu unholde
in Martina 170 c . 172 c , occasionally backed by a masc. unholdcere;
in Keisersberg and Sachs unholde is still the usual word, not till
the 17-18th cent, did hexe become general instead of it. Here
and there the people use a masc. hex for conjurer ; in Swabia der
hmgst (Schmid 273), in Switz. haagg, hagg, hak for cheat, jug-
gler ; even the OHG. hazus strio (masc. to stria ? hardly for
histrio ?) might mean a male. Many have been caught by the
obvious resemblance of the Gr. Hecate, 'EKanj, but the letters
agree too closely, contrary to the laws of change, and the Mid.
Ages would surely have had an unaspirated Ecate handed down
to them ; no Ecate or Hecate appears in M. Lat. or Romance
writings in the sense of witch, and how should the word have
spread through all German lands ? About the M. Nethl. haghe-



Digitized by Google



HEXE. 1041

disse, strix, there is this to be said, that the Mod. Nethl. eghdisse,
egdUse, haagdisse is lacerta, our eidechse, OHG. egidehsa, AS.
a$exe : the lizard does seem to have played a part in magic, and
witch-trials actually speak of witches giving birth to a lizard in-
stead of the traditional elf, Mark, forsch. 1, 260 (see Suppl.). In
the Span, hechicero, -ra I see again only an accidental likeness
(p. 1032 n.) ; the Span, bruza, South Fr. bruesche, means a bane-
ful nightbird, but, like strix, it has passed into the sense of
witch. Vrut, drude is often found as an equivalent for witch,
though strictly it denotes the tormenting oppressive nightmare ;
out of what heathen being this drut arose, was shown on p. 423,
it was so easy for elvish sprites of the olden time to be after-
wards mixt up with human sorceresses ; in the same way bilwiz,
belewitte (p. 473) will now and then occur in witch-affairs.

Another set of names, presented to us in the ON. remains,
merits particular attention : here we see the notion of magic
women stand next door to that of giantesses. Troll is the gene-
ral term including at once beings of the elf or giant brood and
those of magic kind (p. 526), yet so that at first the giant
character predominates, and afterwards the diabolic. Trbllalidh,
trollaskogr, trollatunga occur in the Landnamabok ; trolhkapr
may be taken to mean, first the iotunmoSr p. 530, secondly our
witchcraft and magic. But while scarcely any mention is made
of a trollmaSr, there is plenty about the trollkona, and names for
a giantess like flag&, skass, skessa (p. 526) are applied without
scruple to witches. Snorri 210 gives a long string of names,
some hard to interpret, which will be a task to the student fox
some time to come. Others, archaic and poetically conceived,
are told by one who is a trollkona to Bragi, who meets her at
eventide, Sn. 175. The copiousness of this nomenclature implies
the great antiquity of magic in the North, and its deep-rooted
oneness with the systems of magic all over Europe : the most
significant of these names I shall take up and explain in the
course of discussion.

On such etymological groundwork, of the more general terms
that come under question, may now follow an examination of the
subject itself.

And this time I will commence with Scandinavian sorcery,



Digitized by Google



1042



MAGIC.



whoso more antiquated and to my thinking unadulterated cha-
racter proves above all things that the leading part in it was
taken by women, not by men.

It is true the Edda classifies magicians as volur, vitkar and
seidberendr, Seem. 118*, of whom only the first are female, the
other two male j nay, all three are traced up to Viffolfr, Vilmei&r
and Svarthofdi, alleged inventors of magic, about whom there is
nothing conclusive to be said. SvarUhofffi, Blackhead, may come
of the black art, and black as the fiendish colour in general
(p. 993). Vilmei&r, compounded of vil (favor, beneplacitum) and
meror (arbor), ought rather to claim kinship with the pleasing art
of poesy (p. 901). Vi&olfr would seem to be the 1 Vitolfus me-
dendi peritus* mentioned in Saxo Gram. 122. To me however
the first named, the volur, seem to throw the rest into the shade :
that poetic dialogue with Bragi gives the witch a vilsinn volu
(better perh. vilsinni, acc. vilsinna), i.e. a friend and comrade of
the vala. Vitkar, vitkar, are the OHG. wizagon, soothsayers,
vates, which supports my interpretation of VilmeroV. Sei&r has
no right to be monopolized by men : we saw above (p. 1036), and
shall soon make out more exactly, that it pertains to women too,
that serSkonor shew themselves no less than seiSberendr. Both
must have been forthcoming in great numbers in some districts :
in Harald harf. saga cap. 36, king Eirikr causes his brother
Rognvald and 80 serSmenn to be burnt. The vala or volva is a
prophetess, priestess, norn, a most holy being of the olden time
(pp. 97. 408), and at the same time a seiffkona. Even of the
Eddie vala it is said : ' sei^S hon kunni/ Saem. 4 b . Such magic
women are Hei&r, Hamglom, Skuld, etc., all originally air-riding
valkyrs (p. 421) ; in Saem. 154 b volva, skasa, valkyrja stand
side by side. Weighty evidence shall be brought by and by of
their wanderings in the wood at even and by night. They roam
through the country with tlieir retinue (meiS sitt lr5), are reverently
invited in by men, entertained, and called upon to say sooth.
This they do, sitting on a four-legged stool, the seiShiallr. The
performance is called efla seiff (fixing, instituting magic), Fornald.
s6g. 2, 72. 3, 318; setja sei& 1, 97; ' seiSrinn verSr erfiSr,' is
wrought 1, 12 ; fosra d hiallinn is to conduct to the stool 2, 72.
The later sagas evidently throw in contemptible features. In the
company of Skuld, says Fornald. sog. 1, 97, might be seen elves,



Digitized by Google



SEIDR.



104a



norns and other such fry (alfar ok nornir ok aunat ill-b£Si). Heiffr
may still come riding with 15 youths and 15 maids (2, 165. 506),
bat Oddr sets little store by her, addresses her as ' allra kellinga
ormust,' poorest (wretchedest) of old women 168.508. Sowhentho
Fornm.3, 212 mentions these vagrants, who tell people's fortunes,
the same word is used 214 : 'vol van anna/ miserable witch, like
'usle havfrue' in the Dan. folksong (DV\ 1, 110). 1 King Fr65i
"wished to get a prophecy out of the volva Heidi*, Fornald. sog. 1,
10: 9 giorSi hann fa gilda veizlu i m6ti henni, ok setti hana ft
seiShiall einn haan ... ok svara mer sem skiotast, sei&kona ! 1
When she falters, and will not say all, he threatens to use force :
c )?ik skal pina til sagna' (11. 12). 2 It is worth noting, that the
sei$r is performed at night, when men are asleep, by the volvas,
who sally out with their company : ' menn foru at sofa, en volva
for til ndttfars sei&s meb* sitt lib*' 2, 166 ; and the parallel passage
2, 507 says : 1 gekk hun b a At meo* lib*i sinu, or aSrir gengu til
svefns, ok efldi seid*.' Ketill was roused at night by a great
uproar in the wood, he ran out and saw a sorceress with streaming
hair (sa trollkonu, ok fell fax a herSar henni) ; being questioned,
she begged him not to balk her, she was bound for a magic mote,
to which were coming Skelking king of sprites from Dambshaf,
Ofoti (unfoot) from OfotansfirS, ThorgerSr Horgatroll and other
mighty ghosts from the northland (ek skal till trollabings, far
kemr Skelkingr, norSan or Dumbshafi, konungr trolla, ok Ofoti
or OfotansfirSi, ThdrgerSr Horgatroll ok aSrar st6r-vaettir norSan
ur landi), Fornm. sog. 1, 131, conf. 3, 222. The riding out by
night to do magic was called sitja uti (Biorn 2, 251* explains it :
sub dio nocturnis incantationibus operam dare) ; the Norw. Laws
name these jaunts uti-setor to wake up the magic-working sprites :
' spafarar allar oc utisetor at vekja troll upp, oc fremja me8 b vi
heidni,' Gulath. p. 137. Of the objects of Scand. sorcery I
will give a specimen or two. Fees were given to sorceresses, to
raise up storms : ' sendu eptir seiSkonum, tveimr, HeiSi ok
Hamglom, ok gafu bairn fe 1 til, at peer sendi ve&r . . . baer

1 Arm poor, slight, miserable. I named poverty as a cause of sorcery, p. 1039 :

• armer warsage, wisaage,' Freidank 124, 1. Ms. 2, 176», and note to Freid. p. 372.

• armer bleicher (wan) wissage ! ' Herb. 2266.

a ■ J>a let hann taka Finn, einn er margfrdSr var, oc vildi neySa hann til sntfrar
sdgu (force him to a sooth saw), oc pindi hann, oc feck >0 ecki af hdnnm,' Saga
Halfdanar svarta cap. 8.

VOL. III. L



Digitized by Google



_ 1044 MAGIC.

«• i o efldu scicfinn, ok foerSust ft hiallinn me5 guldrum ok giorningum/
Fornald. sog. 2, 72. Magic made men proof against weapons,
invulnerable : • var seidt at Haraldi, at hann skyldi eigi Uta iarn,'
iron should not bite him 1, 374. *)>eir letu seroa at Ogmundi,
sva at hann skyldi engi iam btta atkvaeoalaus ' 2, 241.

Certain features, that agree with the descriptions to be given by
and by of witches' doings, might be thought plagiarisms. I doubt
it. True, the nocturnal gathering before Skelking, Ofdti and
Th6rger5 is not altogether in the spirit of ON. religion, but it
may have arisen in Scandinavia itself by the gradual deterioration
of older beliefs. Nowhere is the Devil mentioned, though the
' footless one 9 may remind us of the horse-footed. This Norse
trolla-Jring is more like the meetings of our night-women, whom
I take to have sprung out of wise-women and volvas ; and this is
fully borne out by the nightly excursion of HerSr with her party
of 30 persons, and that of Skuld with elves and norns. ThorgerS,
Skuld and HerS are, like Hulda and Berhta, purely pagan half-
goddesses, round whom gathers the magic ring-dance ; they stir
up storm and tempest, they make invulnerable, they prophesy.
l* Ui*U+L Their seiff-hiallr with four props or prongs (stolpar, stiklar),
Fornald. sog. 1,12. 3, 319 (see Suppl.), finds nothing to match
it in the German witch-world ; it does remind us of the Delphian
pythia's tripod, and possibly further inquiry may allot a three-
legged stool to German night- excursionists as well, especially as
that article has a sacredness belonging to it from of old, RA. 80.
189. 208; conf. in Superst. F, 59. GO the sitting on the tripod,
and I, 1 1 1 the caution against setting an empty trivet on the fire.
Skuld queens it here, does her spiriting in a black tent, sits on
her magic stool : ' sat i sinu svarta tialdi a seifthialli sinum, skip-
tir nu svil um, sem dimm ndtt komi eptir biartan dag/ Fornald.
1, 105. With the Norse enchantresses the power and obligation
to prophesy is still predominant, which in German witches and
night-women falls into the background. Other features of the
Norse faith in magic I can better weave into the account, now to
follow, of our own antiquities.

Christianity found a heathen belief in magic- wielding women
existing among Celts and Germans as well as Greeks and Romans,
but has largely modified it ; views held by heretics or imputed to



Digitized by Google



WITCHES. 1045

them got mixt up with it, and out of everything put together
witchcraft has to be explained. Down to the latest period we
perceive in the whole witch-business a clear connexion with the
sacrifices and spirit-world of the ancient Germans. This of itself
proves the gross unfairness and grotesque absurdity of witch-
burning in later times.

A world-old fancy, that has penetrated all nations, finds in
sorcery the power to hide or change one's figure. Enchanters
would turn into wolves, enchantresses into cats ; the wolf was the
sacred beast of Wuotan, the cat of Frouwa, two deities that had
most to do with souls and spirits. The adept in magic assumed
a mask, grima (p. 238) } a trolls-ham, by which he made himself
unrecognisable, and went rushing through the air, as spirits also
put on grimhelms, helidhelms (p. 463) ; often we see the notion
of sorceress and that of mask * meet in one, thus the Leges Roth.
197. 379 have ' striga, quod est masca,' * striga, quae dicitur
masca.' On this last term I shall have more to say by and by
(see Suppl.).

But sorceresses have also at their command a bird's shape, a
feather-garment, especially that of the goose, which stands for the
more ancient swan, and they are like swan- wives, valkyrs, who
traverse the breezes and troop to the battle. Inseparable from
the notion of magic is that of flying and riding through air (p.
427), and the ancient ThruSr becomes a drut (p. 423), and Holda
an unholdin. Like the ' holde 9 sprites, ' unholde 9 now float in
the air with the Furious Host. They assemble in troops to fulfil
a common function.

From this subject, then, heathen sacrificial rites are by no
means to be excluded. Our very oldest Laws, esp. the Salic,
mention gatherings of witches for cooking, and I remind the
reader of those Gothland suffnautar (p. 56) at a sacrifice. The
Lex vSal. cap. 67 specifies it as the grossest insult to call a man
witches' kettle-bearer: 'si quis alterum chervioburgum, hoc est
strioportium clamaverit, aut ilium qui inium dicitur portasse ubi

» ON. Grima, name of a sorceress ; also Qrffla (horrific), Sn. 210*.

- Can hagebart, larva, Gl. H err ad. 189* bo conn, with hag in hageznsa ? A
mask is sometimes called $chembart, of which more hereafter : bearded masks were
worn in masquerades. I am even tempted to explain the latter half of hagazusa by
zusaa (lodix), or zusa (cingulum, strophium), Graff 5, 711 ; cont MUG. zuse
(cirrus), Diut. 1, 458-9. 460.



Digitized by LiOOQle



1046



MAGIC



strias (for striae) cocinant.' In my RA. 645 I have tried to
explain chervioburgus. 1 He that demeans himself to carry
witches' ntensils becomes contemptible to men ; he may also be
called simply strioportius, witches' carrier, being hired by them
to do it. Now this kettle-bearer is never named in the later
stories of witches, but these often take a piper to their meetings,
whose business is to play to their feasting and dancing, without
being exactly an accomplice in the conjuring; and he may be
likened to that menial. The words ubi striae cocinant (some MSS.
coquinant, cucinant ; Lex. emend, incorrectly concinunt) imply a
cooking and seething (seySr p. 1036) by several witches in com-
mon. In Macbeth three witches — but they are ' weird-sisters '
too (p. 407), and so suggest the old meaning of drut — meet on a
heath and in a cave, to boil their cauldron. They are not so
much enchantresses in league with the Devil, as fate-announcing
wise-women or priestesses, who prophesy by their cauldron, p. 56
(see Suppl.).

It may seem over-bold to name Shakspeare's witches in the
same breath with ancient Cimbrian prophetesses, with strigas of
the Salic Law ; but here we have other links between the oldest
times and the recent.

Speaking of heilawac (healing waters) in chap. XX, I on
purpose omitted all mention of salt springs, that I might here
bring their sacredness into immediate connexion with the witch-
craft of a later time. Tacitus, in a passage of importance in
many ways, Annals 13, 57, tells us: f Eadem aestate inter Her-
mnnduros Chattosque certatum magno praelio, dum flumen
gignendo sale foecundum et conterminum vi trahunt; super
libidinem cuncta armis agendi religione insita, eos maxime locos
propinquare coelo, precesque mortalium a deis nusquam propius
audiri. Inde indnlgentia numinum illo in amne illisque siivis
Salem provenire, non ut alias apud gentes eluvie maris arescente,
sed unda super ardentem arborum struem fusa, ex contrariis inter
se elementis, igne atque aquis, concretum.' 3 Burgundians and

1 Leo now explains from the Celtic, that burgius is the trusty, watchful, hence
attendant, and chervio wise-woman, from gear shrewd, and bhith, bhe, woman :
•eagae minister.' Also, that ttrioportius may be the Welsh ystryws wise, and
porthi helping, serving. All this is still very doubtful.

3 1 Sed bellum Hermunduris prosperum, Chattis cxitio fnit, quia victores diver-
gain aciem Marti ac Merenrio sacravere : quo voto eqoi, viri, cuncta victa occidioni
dantur. Et minae quidem hostiles in ipsos vertebant.' The sense of these remark-



igitized by Google



SALT.



1047



Alamanns also fought for salt-springs : ' Burgundii salinarum
finiumque causa Alamannis saope jurgabant/ Amm. Marc. 28, 5.
That not only in Germany, but in Gaul, salt was obtained by
pouring water on burning wood, wo know from Pliny 31. 7, 39 :
' Galliae Germaniaeque ardentibus lignis aquam salsam infundunt;'
hence the ritual that hallowed it may have been common to Celts
and Teutons. Now of streams charged with salt there was
doubtless a good number in Germany, then as now, and it is
hardly possible to say which in particular was meant by Tacitus. 1
They rose on mountains, in sacred woods, their produce was
deemed the direct gift of a near divinity, possession of tho spot
seemed worth a bloody war, the getting and distributing of salt
was a holy office; would not there be very likely sacrifices and
festivals connected with salt-boiling ? (see Suppl.) .

Suppose now that the preparation of salt was managed by
women, by priestesses, that the salt-kettle, saltpan, was under
their care and supervision ; there would bo a connexion established
between salt-boiling and the later vulgar opinion about witch-
craft : the witches gather, say on certain high days, in the holy
wood, on the mountain, whero the salt springs bubble, carrying

•

able words (pp. 44. 120-1) is : the Cbatti in case of victory bad devoted the hostile
army (div. ac.) to Mars and Mercury; such vow binds one to sacrifice horses, men,
every Live thing of the defeated. The Chatti had used the vow as a threat, the vic-
torious foe fulfilled it as his own. We need not suppose that both sides vowed, least
of all that the Hermunduri vowed to Mars, the Chatti to Mercury ; for then the
closing word * would have no point. Besides, I think the very peculiarity of this
cruel vow consists in its being made to both dispensers of victory (pp. 134. 197-8) at
once, the men falling, may be, to Wuotan's share, the women, children and animals
to Zio's ; none were to escape alive. Had the vow been to one god alone, he would
have been content with part of the spoils ; that is why Tacitus remarks that such a
vow was ruin to the Chatti. The passage proves that Zio and Wuotan were wor-
shipped by Chatti and Hermunduri ; the Boman conceptions of Mars and Mercury
are out of the question. Can it be, that the horses are named before the men, to
shew which fell to Zio, which to Wuotan ? Beasts, we know, were sacrificed to Mars,
Germ. 9. That it was the custom to devote those who fell in battle to the god, is
witnessed by Hervar. saga 454 : « Heiorekr fal (sot apart) Ofini allan pann val er par
haftii fallt til arbotar.'

1 Surprising how commonly, in names of rivers and towns that produce salt,
the roots hal and sal occur, both originally signifying the same wholesome
holy material (dXj, oX6i, sal, salis ; in the alternation of h and s, the former ofteu
seems more archaic, or more German, e.g. the particle ham, sain ; haso, sasa ;
hveits, svetas). ' In pago Satogewe, in illo fonte obi nascitur sal,' Trad. Find. 1, 88 ;
Halle on the Sale in Saxony, Halle in Bavensberg county, Hall on the Kocher
(boiler ?) in Swabia, Hallein on the Salza in Bavaria, Hall and /JaHstadt in Austria,
Hall in the vale of Inn (Tirol), ^Mendorf (for Hall.) in Hesse, and so forth, all have
salt-springs, salt works ; Halle as much as Sala, Salzaha refers to the salt, but why
do the rivers have s, and the towns h ? If halle meant merely the hut or shed
(taberna) in which the salt works are carried on (Frisch 1, 401), such a goneral
meaning would suit almost any village that has work-sheds.



Digitized by Google



1048



MAGIC.



with them cooking- vessels, ladles and forks ; and at night their
saltpan is a-glow. 1 These conjectures are countenanced by a
poem in the Vienna MS. 428, 154 b either by Strieker or one of
his countrymen and contemporaries, which I quote in full :

Ich bin gewesen ze Portig&l

und ze Dolet Bunder twal (Toledo, I assure you),

mir ist kunt (ken'd) Kalatra daz laut,

da man di besten meister vant (foond) ;

ze Choln (Cologne) und ze Paris,

da sint di pfaffen harte wis (exceeding wise),

di besten vor alien richen (realms).

Darfeor ich wierlichen (traTelled I truly)

niwan durch diu mscre (merely to ascertain)

wax ein unholde w»re (what a witch was) ?

Daz geh6rt ich nie gelesen (never heard it read),

waz ein unholde miige wesen (might be).

Daz ein wip ein chalp rite (should ride a calf),

daz wrere'n wunderliche Bite (fashion),

ode rit til einer dehsen (wand),

ode tii einem hflspesem (besom, broom)

ndch saUe ze Halle fiiere (fare to H. for salt) ;

ob des al diu welt swuere (if all the world swore it),

doch wolde ioh stn nimmer gejehen (say yea to it),

ich en-hete (unless I had) ez mit mlnen ougen gesehen

wand (for) to wiirde uns nimmer tiure (dear, scarce)

daz talz von dem ungehiure.

Ob ein wlp einen ovenstap iiber schrite (bestride)

und den gegen Halle rite

iiber berge und iiber tal,

daz si taete deheinen val (make no fall),

daz geloube ich niht, swer daz seit (whoever says it),

und ist ein verlorniu arbeit (lost labour) ;

und daz ein wip ein sib tribe (drive a sieve)

sunder vleisch und sunder ribe,

d& niht inne wiere (wherein was nought),

daz sint allez gelognin ma re (all a lying tale).

Daz ein wip ein man iiber schrite

und im sin herze tiz suite (cut out his heart),

wie zieme daz (how were that possible) einem wibe,

daz si finite uz einem libe (body)

ein herze, und stieze dar in str6 (stuff straw therein),

wie nioht' er (how could he) leben ode werden fr6 ?

ein mensche muoz ein herze haben,

ez habe saf od si beschaben.

Ich wil in sagen ma?re (give you information),
waz sin rehte unholdare (who real sorcerers are) :

1 OHO. salzsuti (salina), salzsSt, AS. Bealt8e4S (salt spring). A passage in Ihre
sub v. $ei(f would make this word (sec p. 1036) directly applicable to salt-boiling ;
but, for * $alU coctura,' read * talu coctura.'



Digitized by Google



SALT. HORSE-FLESH.



1049



daz sint der herren rAtgeben (counsellors of lords)

di ir ere fordem solden und leben,

di siflent in zuo den 6ren (whisper in their ears)

nnd machent sie ze toren (make fools of them),

si niezent (profit by) ir erbe und ir lant

und lazent och si ze hant (make them very soon)

scheiden von eren (part with their honour) und von guote,

von vrouden (joy) und h6hem muote.

Ditz ist ein warez maere (true tale) :

di selben (these same) unholdare

die sougent uz (suck out) herze und bluot.

daz vil mangem (full many a) herren schaden tuot.

This Halle is probably the one in Austria or Bavaria, so that in
those parts there still prevailed at that time the vulgar belief that
the 'unholden' rode on broomstick, oven-stick or twig (Schm.
sub. v. dachsen, conf. diesse p. 270 n.) over hill and dale to Halle.
Was it imagined that they fetched their supply of salt homo from
there ? which seems almost to be implied in the words, ' were it
so, they would not make salt scarce to their neighbours (abstract
it).' As Christians equally recognised salt as a good and needful
thing, it is conceivable how they might now, inverting the matter,
deny the use of wholesome salt at witches' meetings, and como
to look upon it as a safeguard against every kind of sorcery
(Superst. I, no. 182). For it is precisely salt that is lacking 1 in
the witches' kitchen and at devil's feasts, the Church having now
taken upon herself the hallowing and dedication of salt. Infants
unbaptized, and so exposed, had salt placed beside them for
safety, RA. 457. The emigrants from Salzburg dipped a wetted
finger in salt, and swore. Wizards and witches were charged
with the misuse of salt in baptizing beasts. I think it worth
mentioning here, that the magic-endowed giantesses in the Edda
knew how to grind, not only gold, but salt, Sn. 146-7 : the one
brought peace and prosperity, the other a tempest and foul
weather.

Equally significant seems to me the use of horseflesh and of
the horse altogether among wizards and witches. It was shewn,
p. 47, that the heathen sacrificed horses to their gods, and any
inclination to eat their flesh was denounced for a long time as
a hankering after heathen ways; it is only in these days

1 Also bread, another necessary of life ; yet of course the heathen baked for
their banquets and sacrifices exactly as the christians did.



Digitized by Google



1050



MAGIC.



that the prejudice against eating so clean an animal begins to
give way. Well, the witches were accused of indulging in
this food at their assemblies, i.e. of still keeping up heathen
sacrifices. Henry Boguet in his Discours execrable des Sorciers,
Kouen 1603, p. 82-3 asserts, not only ' qu'il y avoit une grande
chaudiere snr le feu, dans laquelle chacun alloit prendre de la
chair/ and ' mais il n'y a iamais du sel' but also expressly * que
la chair n'est autre chair que de cJieual.' If to this we add, that
the nailing up of horses' heads (p. 47) 1 must be identified with
those sacrifices, that horses' heads are thrown into Midsummer
fires (p. 618), that the piper at witches' meetings (p. 1046) or
other ghostly beings (p. 849) play on horses' heads, 3 that the
devil appears with horse's feet, and drinking is done out of
horse-hoofs; the whole thing assumes a still more antique ap-
pearance of heathen sacrificial rites (see Suppl.).

But if in heathen times the preparation and distribution of
hallowed salt, and the eating of horseflesh stood connected with
sacrifices and popular assemblies (and these were often com-
bined), such connexion is equally proved or confirmed by all
the remaining characteristics of witches' jaunts. Their Times
and Places can in no other way be accounted for.

Wo know that all over Germany a grand annual excursion
of witches is placed on the first night in Mag (Walpurgis),
i.e. on the date of a sacrificial feast and the old May-
gathering of the people. On the first of May, of all days,
the periodical assizes continued for many centuries to be held,
RA. 822-4 ; on that day came the merry May-ridings, p. 775,
and the kindling of the sacred fire, p. 603 : it was one of the
highest days in all heathenism. 8 Or if two or three witch-

1 On this fixing-up Festus has passages in striking accord : ' October eqwu
appellatur, qui in Campo Mart io mense Oct. immolatur. De cujuB capite non lev-is
contentio solebat esse inter Suburanenses et Bacravienses, nt hi in regiae pariete,
illi ad turrim Mamiliam id figerent ; ejusdemque coda tanta celeritate perfertur in
regiam, ut ex ea sanguis destillet in focum participandae rei divini gratia.' And :
♦ Panibut redimibant caput equi immolati idibus Oct. in Campo Martio, quia id
sacrificium fiebat ob fruguni evcntum, et equus potius quam bos immolabatur, quod
hie bello, bos frugibus pariendis est aptus.'

* Musicians piping or fiddling on a hirse's head, Trierer acten p. 203. Sieg-
burger pp. 228. 289. Death's head for cithern, Remigius 145.

3 A comparison of onr witches' dances on May-night with the Floralia, which
lasted from April 28 to May 1 (Hartung's Relig. d. Rom. 2, 142), and from which
all men were excluded (Creuzer's Symb. 4, 608), may be allowed, provided no
borrowing of the Teutonic and Celtic custom from the Roman be inferred. Rightly
understood, the Greek Diony$ia also present many points of comparison.



Digitized by Google



witches' jaunt.



1051



festivals be enumerated, as 'in Whitsuntide and Autumn/ or
'on St Walburg's, St John's and St Bartelemy's,' we have
still the usual holidays and assize-days of the Mid. Ages.
Danish witch-trials name ' Valdborg aften, S. Hans aften, Maria
besogelsesdags aften/ The people would never have given
up their venerated season of justice to the witches, had not
these been long in prescriptive possession (see Suppl.).

Still more plainly do the Localities coincide. The witches
invariably resort to places where formerly justice was ad-
ministered, or sacrifices were offered. Their meeting takes
place on the mead, on the oak-sward, under the lime, under
the oak, at the peartree; on the boughs of the tree sits that
piper whose help they need in the dance. Sometimes they dance
at the place of execution, under the gallows-tree, in the sand-pit.
But for the most part mountains are named as their try sting-
places, hills (at the three bulieln, knolls, three kopclien, peaks),
in fact, the highest points of a neighbourhood. We must not
forget how elves and bilweises are housed in hills (p. 474), nor
that the Servian vilas and Romance fays dwell on mountains : a
notable passage about magic wrought on a mount (puegau, pueg,
puy, Lat. podium) was quoted p. 411. The fame of particular
witch-mountains extends over wide kingdoms, in the same way as
high mountains are named after gods, sacrifices, courts of justice.
Almost all the witch-mountains were once hills of sacrifice
(p. 58), boundary-hills (malberge, RA. 801-2), or salt-hills. A
hexenbukel is pointed out on the Hirschau boundary-line hy
Rothenburg on Neckar, and an unholdenberg near Passau ; but
most of them have proper names of their own. North Germany
knows the Brocken, Brocks- or Blocks-berg, 1 the highest point of
the Harz Mts, as the head meeting-place of witches. A con-
fessioDal of the 15th cent, speaks of sorceresses 'die uf den
Brockisberg varen/ Hoffm. zeitschr. 753; that is the earliest
documentary evidence I know of a superstition that doubtless
reaches to a far older time. Seats of justice the Harz must have

1 4 Mons Bructena ' / Only the Bructeri never lived there, but on the West-

Jhalian Lippe ; some without any reason connect the name Melibocus with the
trocken. What is the oldest documentary form of the name ? Stieler 160 writes
Brockertb. ; others ProckeUb. (Proculus), Brocket ' .. Blockersb. ; Blocksb. (Brem.
wtb. sub v. bloksbarg) may have arisen bv mere softening of r into I, and can
hardly have anything to do with the Swed. Blakulla.



Digitized by Google



I



1052 MAGIC.

had more than one in the Mid. Ages ; a salt spring it has still
at Juliushall in Neustadt domain. Bat the name seems to cover
a much wider urea, as several hills in Mecklenbnrg (and no
doubt in other parts of N. Germany) are called blocksbergs, Mekl.
jahrsber. 2, 114. 3, 189; also in Prussia (Tettau and Temme
p. 264). Other trysts of witches I can only enumerate incom-
pletely. The Huiberg near Halberstadt is still spoken of; in
Thuringia they flock to Eorselberg by Eisenach, or Inselberg by
Schmalkalden ; in Hesse to Bechehberg or Bechtelsberg by Ottrau,
an old Ziegenhain seat of justice ; in Westphalia to Koterberg
by Corvei, to Weckingsstein (Wedigenstein, where Wittekind or
Wittich dwells) by Minden ; in Swabia to the Black Forest, to
Kandel in Breisgau, or to Heuberg 1 by Balingen, which is noticed
as a witches' mount as early as 1506, and resembles the Huiberg
above ; in Franconia to Kreidenberg by Wiirzburg, and Staffel-
stein by Bamberg ; and probably the Fichtelberg and the Silesian
Riesengebirge have witches' haunts of their own. In Alsace
are named Bischenberg, Buchelberg (conf. Bechelsb.), Schauenberg
and Kniebiss (knee-biting, from the steepness, elsewhere Knie-
brecher) ; in the Vosges, Hupella. The Swedish meeting-places
are Bl&hilla (Ihre says, an island rock between Smaland and
Oland, liter, black mount, a name it prob. shares with other
heights), 2 and Nasafjiill in Norrland. The Norwegian witches
also repair to Blaakolle, further to Dovrefjeld, Lyderhom by
Bergen, Kidrru in Tvedsogn, to Vardo and Domen in Finmarken;
all such try sting-places "are called balvolde (bale- wold, campus
malus). In Denmark they say 'fare til Hekkelfjelds ' (p. 1001),
i.e. to Mt Hekla in Iceland, Heklufiall; also 'ride til Trums,
fare til Trams,' meaning Trommenfjeld, a mountain on the Norw.
island Tromso, high up off the Finmark. The Neapolitan
streghe hold their tryst under a walnut-tree near Benevento,
which the people call the Beneventine wedding; on that very
spot stood the holy tree of the Langobards (pp. 101. 649), so
here again witchcraft stands clearly connected with old heathen
worship. Witches' hills in Italy are the Barco di Ferrara,
Paterno di Bologna, Spinato della Mirandola, Tossale di Ber-

1 Howberg, Paracelsi opera 2, 259. 260.

2 Acc. to Joh. Westhovii Fraefatio ad vitas sanctor., a wind and weather
making merwoman was called BlakuUa ; Arnkiel 1, 35 sets up a sea-goddess BlakylU;
Arvidsson 2, 302-5 has bcrgct bid, the black mount.



Digitized by Google



witches' jaunt. 1053

gamo, and one, f la croce del pasticcio/ whose situation I do not
know. In France the Puy de Borne near Clermont in Auvergne
is renowned, and other districts have their hills. The Spanish
hechizeras hold their dance on the heath of Baraona, in the sand
of Sevilla, on the plain of Cirniegola ; in Navarre on Aquelarre,
said to mean in Basque * goat's meadow.' The Servian witches
dance 'na pometno guvno/ on the swept thrashingfloor, pro-
bably on a high mountain; those of Hungary on Kopasz teto
(the bald crown), a peak of the Tokay wine-hills, 1 with which
the 'na Lysagore/ of the Polish witches (Woycicki 1, 17. 2,
77) agrees. A part of the Carpathians between Hungary and
Poland is called in Pol. babia gora, old wives' mountain ; I
cannot say if witch-festivals are placed there. The Kormakssaga
pp. 76. 204. 222 has a similar Spdkonufell, wise-woman's mount.
The Lithuanians say, on the eve of St. John all the magicians
come flying to Mt Szatria, where a mighty sorceress Jauterita
entertains them. 8 It is singular, how all over Europe the
heathen's pilgrimages to feasts and sacrifices are by christians
converted into this uniform sorcery, everywhere alike. Did
the notion take shape in each nation by itself? or, what is less
credible, was the fashion set in one place, and followed every-
where else? 3 (see Suppl.)

That the heathen in old Scandinavia already had the notion of
enchantresses riding or driving out at evening and night, is clear
from the Edda. As Heftinn roamed the forest alone in the
evening, he fell in with a trollkona, who offered him her fylgS
(attendance, like a guardian valkyrja), but he declined it, Seem.
146*. A legend fraught with meaning is but slightly touched
upon in Sn. 175 : As Bragi the old (p. 1041) drove through a
forest late in the evening, he met a trollkona, who addressed him
in a song and asked, who rideth there ? She names to him her
troll names, and he, answering in song, tells her his poetic names.
Hence an enchantress is called qveld-ri&a, evening-rider, Sfem.

1 Szirmai' a Notitia oomitatus Zcmpleniensis, Budae 1803. p. 3 ; and Hungaria
ill parabulia p. 158-9.

* Courl. Society's Commnnic., Mitau 1840. 1, 47 b .

9 Nocturnal meetings on mountains can also be conn, with other heathen
notions : giants and elves reside on mountain*. Pliny 1 says of Mt Atlas :
' incolarum neminem interdiu cerni, silere omnia . . . noctibus micare crebris
ignibus, Aegipanum Satyrorumque lascivia impleri, tibiarum ac fistularum cantu,
tympanorum et cymbalorum sonitu strepere.'



Digitized by Google



1054



MAGIC.



143 b , and myrk-ri<Ta 77*, by which monstrous mischievous giant-
women are meant, wild women, waldminnes, iarnvibjur (p. 483),
whom the heroes are bent on putting down : ' hefi ec qvaldar
qveldrioor/ I have quelled the witches, says Atli. Their riding
is called gandrei&, vectura magica, Nialss. p. 195 ; gandr is pro-
perly wolf, they are said to have ridden wolves and bridled them
with snakes : ' fann trollkono, sfi reib* vargi ok hafSi orma % tau-
mom,' Sffim. 146*. f Hyrrokin reift vargi ok hafSi hoggomi at
taumum,' Sn. 66. A Rune figure (bautil 1157) represents a troll
riding a wolf, using a bent twig for reins. A Swed. folksong
makes her ride on a bear, and use the wolf as a saddle, the snake
as a whip : ' bjdrnen den sa red hon uppa, ulfven den hade hon till
sadel derpa, och ormen den hade hon till piska/ Sv. vis. 1, 77.
Nor must we overlook, that the Servian vila, who has much more
of the elf about her, rides a stag, and bridles him with a snake.
Among names of enchantresses Sn. 210 b has Munnriffa, mouth-
rider, perhaps holding the snake-bridle in her mouth ? Another
is Munnharpa (Biorn says, rigor oris ex gelu) ; both demand a
more precise explanation, but anyhow -ri$a must refer to night-
riding. One poet, Sn. 102, uses the circumlocution qveldrunnin
qven, femina vespere excurrens. The Vestgota-lag, like the Salic
(p. 1045), speaking of insulting accusations, instances that of
sorcery, p. 88 : ' iak sa at ret a quiggrindu, losharafi ok i troh-
ham, }?a alt var iam rift nat ok dagher/ and p. 153 has almost
the same words, with losgiurp added to losharej? : I saw thee ride
on the hurdle, loose-haired, loose-girt, in troll's garb, where day
and night divide (in twilight) ; if we might read qvigindu, it
would be 'ride on the calf' as in the MHG. poem, p. 1048.
Neither this Law nor the Edda tells us of sorceresses assembling
in troops at appointed places, yet the valkyrs ride together by
twelves and twenties. But the idea of night-riding itself may
be derived even from goddesses : the HyndJu-lio$ has for its
groundwork, that Frcyja seated on her boar, whose bristles glow
in the gloom of night, and her sister Hyndla (canicula) on a wolf,
ride up to holy Valholl 1 (see Suppl.).

In Germany proper, successive stages can be pointed out.
Before Christianity, the old giantesses (etenins) may well have

1 A magician, who was kveld-svajfr (evening-sleeper), bears the name Kvtldulfr
Egilss. p. 8 ; it is like the OUG. Hahtolf by which N. renders Kocturnus.



Digitized by Google



witches' jaunt



1055



been sorceresses amongst us also, as we still find such a one in
our Heldenbuch (see p. 556), and a giant plays the host on a
witches' hill, Lisch 5, 83. After the conversion, sorcery links
itself with the discredited gods both foreign and domestic j not
at once with the Devil yet, whose idea had scarce begun to take
root among the people. The witches are of the retinue of former
goddesses, who, hurled from their thrones, transformed from
gTacious adored beings into malign and dreaded ones, roam rest-
less by night, and instead of their once stately progresses can
only maintain stolen forbidden conferences with their adherents.
Even when the bulk of the people was won over to the new
doctrine, individual men would for a time remain true to the old
faith, and perform their heathen rites in secret; but soon these
pagan practices would cease as real facts, and abide in the memory
and shaping fancy of mankind, and the more enduringly if they
were connected with popular feasts and the permitted or pro-
hibited usage about healings and poisonings. Performance, tradi-
tion, fancy were mixt up together, and no single century can
possibly have been without the notion of illicit idolatrous magic,
even if we are unable to specify the shape in which it entertained
it. Amongst all christians the report of it lasted ineradicable,
assuming a looser or firmer consistency, according as the Church
indulged popular beliefs, or sought more sternly to suppress
them. What she was determined to punish and exterminate,
must gradually have been withdrawn from the mild realm of
fancy, and assumed the harsh aspect of a horrible reality.

Enchanters and enchantresses (I will start with that) attach
themselves to the spectral train of deities, to that Furious Host
with which elvish and all manner of evil beings got associated :
in the Vilk. saga cap. 328-9 the wild host of Ostacia (Ostansia,
or whatever the genuine form may be) shews a significant con-
nexion. But enchantresses would be ranged specially with god-
desses, out of whom the christian teachers might make up a
Roman Diana, a Jewish Herodias, but the populace never entirely
dropt the traditional native names. How natural then, if dame
Hokla, if that Freyja or Abundia (whether she be Folia p. 308,
or a Celtic deity) had formerly led the round dance of elves and
holden, that she herself should now be made an unholde and
be escorted by unholden (p. 926) ! In the Norw. fairytale no. 15



Digitized by Google



1056



MAGIC.



the troldkidring takes quite the place of dame Holda. In the
Jeu d'Adans (supra p. 412 n.) the three fays assemble on a
meadow, where the old women of the town await them : 1 or tost
allons ent par illeuc, les vielles femes de le vile nous i atendent.'
There did exist a fellowship then between fays and witches.

It perfectly agrees with the view propounded, that the Thuring.
Horselberg is at once the residence of Holda and her host (pp. 456.
935. 959), and a trys ting- place of witches (p. 1052). Keisers-
berg in Omeiss 36. 40 makes the night-faring wives assemble no
otherwhere but in the Venusberg (p. 953), whereat is good living,
dancing and hopping. Still more decisive are the passages
quoted in the Appendix (Superst. C, int. 44; 10, 1; p. 194*.
D, 140 r.), by which it appears, that down into the tenth and
into the 14th cent., night-women in the service of dame Holda
rove through the air on appointed nights, mounted on beasts ;
her they obey, to her they sacrifice, and all the while not a word
about any league with the Devil. Nay, these night-women,
shining mothers, dominae nocturnae, bonnes dames (p. 287-8), in
Hincmar ' lamiae sive geniciales feminae* were originally daBmonic
elvish beings, who appeared in woman's shape and did men
kindnesses ; Holda, Abundia, to whom still a third part of the
whole world is subject (pp. 283-8), lead the ring of dancers, and
on the goddess's itinerant ship dances were trod (p. 260). It is
to such dancing at heathen worship, to the airy elf-dance (p. 470),
to the hopping of will-o' -wisps (p. 916), 1 that I trace primarily the
idea of witches* dances ; though festive dances at heathen May-
meetings can be reckoned in with the rest. To christian zealots
all dancing appeared sinful and heathenish, and sure enough it
often was derived from pagan rites, like other harmless pleasures
and customs of the common people, who would not easily part
with their diversion at great festivals. Hence the old dancings
at Shrovetide (p. 770n.), at the Easter fire and May fire, at the
solstices, at harvest and Christmas ; a minuter examination than
has yet been made of the proceedings at these holidays would
bring out many things more clearly. Afzelius 2, 5 informs us,
that to this day stories are afloat in Sweden of dances and reels
performed by the heathen round holy places of their gods : so

1 The ignis fatuus is called litxentanz (Schm. 2, 148), Sloven, vezha, prop,
witch ; even the dead were made to carry on dances.



Digitized by Googl



WITCHES' jaunt



1057



wanton were they, yet so enticing, that the spectators at last
were seized with the rage, and whirled along into the revelry.
When chronicles of our Mid. Ages occasionally record the dese-
cration of holy days by wild dancing, and that the penalty
imposed was, to keep it up without ceasing for a whole year, DS.
no. 231, this again expresses the disgust of the christians at the
relics of heathenism, and resembles the perversion of Wuo tan's
march into the 'everlasting hunter's' chase. 1 Why Herodias
was dragged into the circle of night-women, was just because
she played and danced, and since her death goes booming through
the air as the 'wind's bride.' In this ghostly band, then,
popular fancy placed human sorceresses too, i.e. women of ill
repute who clung to heathenism, fantastic old wives: ' Et si
aliqua femina est, quae se dicat cum daemonum turba, in simili-
tudinem mulierum transformata, certis nodibus equitaro super
quasdam bestias, et in eorum (daemonum) consortio annumeratam
esse ; 9 and : ' Quaedam sceleratae mulieres retro post Satanam
conversae, daemonum illusionibus seductae, credunt se nocturnis
horis cum Diana paganorum dea, vel cum Herodiado et innumera
multitudine mulierum, equitare super quasdam bestias, et multa
terrarum spatia intempestae noctis silentio pertransire, ejusque
jussionibus velut dominae obedire, et certis nodibus ad ejus servi-
tium evocari.' — Such was the earlier way of thinking about
witches' rides ; 2 and the names naht-fard, naht-frouwd, naht-ritd,
dating doubtless from the heathen time, agreed exactly with the
ON. qveldriSa, myrkriSa on p. 1053-4. I cannot indeed produce

1 The clergy represented dancing as a mimicry of the priestly procession, and
likened it to the Jewish idolatry with the golden calf.

3 The extract from Burchard, Superst. C (conf. Pref. to my Firet Ed. p. xxiv)
can neither have been derived from the Connoil of Ancyra a.d. 314, which has no
such passage in print or MS. ; nor from Augustine, though it occurs in the Tract, de
spiritu et anima cap. 28 (opp. ed. Bened. Antv. 1706. 6, 525) with 4 et Minerva '
added after Herodiade, for this is a spurious work, yet of so early a date (6th cent.,
thinks Biener, Zeitschr. f. gesch. rechtsw. 12, 123) that it is but little inferior in
value for our purpose. Begino too (ed. Waschcrsl. 2, 371), the oldest genuine
authority, has prob. drawn from it; then come Burchard in the 11th, and Ivo (11,
30) and Oratian in the 12th century. Albertus Mag. in Summa theol. 2, 31 (opp.
18, 180) has : 1 cum Diana pag. dea, vel Herodiade et Minerva.' The passage is
said to be also in an unpubl. Vita Damasi papae, and there to refer back to a
Synod of Borne of 367 (Soldan p. 75). To me it makes no difference if both Ancy-
ran council and Boman synod already mention the night-faring Diana and Herodias;
for Diana, who even to the ancient Romans ruled the woods, the chase and the
night, must no doubt have appeared to christiau converts of the first centuries as
a goddess of magio.



Digitized by LiOOQle



1058



MAGIC



them from earlier than the 13th century, as Wh. 1, 82 b : 'wil
der (Machmet) helfo sparn, sd helfen in die naht-varn ; daz sint
alter wibe troume/ if M. grudge help, the night-farers help them.
Ls. 3, 10 : ' ez konde niemen bewarn, ich miies eine (alone) uz
fam mit der naht-frouiven (i.e. with the goddess) ; d6 sprach ich
zuo mime gesellen : als schiere so (as soon as) ez naht wirt, diu
vart mich niht verbirt, ich sol liden groze n6t, bezzer waere mir
der t6t. 1st aber daz mir wol ergat, so kum ich umb die han-
krat, des enweiz ich aber niht. Min triu, du solt mir ein lieht
kleiben hin an etewaz, daz ich kunne dester baz komen her wider
hein : kleib* ez an einen stein, oder kleib' ez an die want.'
Notice that to the simple-minded man the woman represents her
alleged expedition as a painful necessity. 1 In Vintlor (Superst.
G, 1. 274) it is said : ' so farent etlich mit der (nacht) far auf
kelbern und auf pecken (bocken) durch stain und durch stecke/
So calves and he-goats are those f quaedam bestiae.' At p. 723
we saw the word nachtfare fittingly applied even to a star travel-
ling in the sky. John of Salisbury, who lived in England and
France (d. 1182), and believed in demonic influence, has a re-
markable statement in his Policr. ii. 17 : ' Quale est quod nocti-
culam (nocticolam ? noctilucam ?) quandam, vel Herodiadem, vel
praesidem noctis dominam, consilia et conventus de node asserunt
convocare, varia celebrari convivia, minister iorum species diversis
occupationibus exerceri, et nunc istos ad pocnam trahi pro
mericis, nunc illos ad gloriam sublimari; praeterea infantes
exponi lamiis, ofc nunc frustatim discerptos edaci ingluvie in
ventrem trajectos congeri, nunc praesidentis miseratione rejectos
in cunas reponi, Quis vel caecus hoc ludificantium daemonum
non videat esse nequitiam ? quod vel ex hoc patet, quod mulier-
culis et viris simplicioribus et infirmioribus in fide ista proveniunt.'
I will add some equally conclusive testimonies from various parts
of France, and all of the 13th cent., to the character of these
night excursions; their analogy to the preceding will not fail
to be perceived. The Acta sanct. 32 Jul. p. 287 b draw from
a parchment MS. of the 13th cent, the following, which has
also got into the Legenda Aurea cap. 102, though wanting in
the older biographies of Germanus : ' Hospitatus (S. Germanus

1 By nightmare (mar = horse) is meant, not the witch who rides out, but an
elfin who rides, i.e. presses, on the sleeper, Superst. I, 87a



Digitized by Google



witches' jaunt.



1059'



Autissiodor.) in quodam loco, cum post coenam ilerum mensa
pararetur, admiratus interrogat, cui denuo praepararent ? Cui
cum dicerent, quod bonis illis muUeribns, quae de nocte incedunt, 1
praepararetur, ilia nocte statuit S. Germanus vigilare. Et ecce,
videt multitudinem daemonum in mensa, in forma hominum et
mulierum venientem. Qui eis praecipiens ne abirent, cunctos de
farnilia excitavit, inquirens, si personas illas cognoscerent ? qui
cum omnes vicinos suos et vicinas esse dicerent, raisit ad domos
singulorum, daemonibus praecipiens ne abirent. Et ecce, omnes
in suis lectulis sunt inventi. Adjurati igitur se daemones esse

dixerunt, qui sic hominibus illudebant.' Guilielmus Alvernus

p. 1066 : ' Idem et eodem modo sentiendum est tibi de aliis
malign is spiritibus, quos vulgus stryges et lamias vocant, et
apparent de nocte in domibus in quibus parvuli nutriuntur, eosque
de cunabulis raptos laniare vel igne assare videntur : 2 apparent
autem in specie vetularum. Vetularum autom nostrarnm desipi-
entia opinionem istam mirabiliter disseminavit et provexit, atque
animis mulierum aliarum irradicabiliter infixit. Similiter et de
dominabus nocturnis, quod bonae mulieres sint, et magna dona
domibus quas frequentent per eas praestentur, mulieribus potis-
simum persuaserunt ; et, ut ad unum dicam, pene omnes reliqaias
idololatriae retinuit et reservavit et adhuc promovere non cessat

anilis ista fatuitas.' Vincentius Bellovac. in Spec. mor. iii. 3,

27: ' Cum in quadam parochia homines talibus crederont, quidam
ribaldi transfiguraverunt se in similitudinem mulierum, earum
assumto habitu, et domum cujusdam rustici cum tortiis (torches)
intrantes et choreas ducentes suppressa voce canebant Gallice s un
en prenes, cent en rendres,' Latine : unum accipite, centum
reddite ! et sic in oculis rustici domum ejus o vac uaverunt omnibus
bonis, dicentis uxori suae : tace, et claude oculos, divites erimus,
quia bonae res sunt, 3 et centuplicabunt bona nostra/ And
further on : ' Cum quaedam vetula volens blandire suo sacerdoti

1 Is the OHG. Cgengun, lamiae, Diut. 2, 174, to be explained by this nightly
going about t

2 When Demeter anointed the child Demophoon with ambrosia by day, fanned
him with her sweet breath, laid him in the fire at night to consume all that was
mortal in him, the boy throve, till his mother watched and saw and burst into a
loud wail, then the miracle was interrupted, Hym. to Ceres 236—63. So Thetis
anoints her infant Achilles, and hides him in the fire. Conf. however the vapa<p4p€t*
rd Pp^tfnj Sih Ti)t <f>\<ry6$ t and ponere juxta ignem, p. 625.

* Uuotiu wihtir, p. 442 ; conf. unrighteous things, p. 1031, sorcery.
VOL. 1J1. M



Digitized by Google



10G0



MAGIC.



diceret ei in ecclesia : domine, multum me debetis diligere, quia
liberavi vos a morte : quia cum ego vadebam cum bonis rebus,
media node intravimus domum vestram cum luminaribus, ego
videns voa dormientem et nudum, cooperui vos, ne dominac
nostrae viderent nuditatem vestram, quam si vidissent, ad mortem
vos flagellari fecissent. Quaesivit sacerdos, quomodo intraverant
domum ejus et cameram, cum essent fortiter seratae ? Tunc ait
ilia, quod bene intrabant domum januis clausis. Sacerdos autem
vocans earn intra cancellum, clauso ostio verberavit earn cum
baculo crucis, dicens : exite hinc, domina sortilega ! Et cum non
posset exire, emisit earn sacerdos dicens : modo videtis quam
fatuae estis, quae somniorum creditis vanitatem.' This priest goes
very sensibly to work with the sorceress, and never dreams of

baiting her as a criminal. Gervase of Tilbury 3, 85 : 1 Lamias

dicuntur esse mulieres quae noctu domos momentaneo discursu
penetrant, dolia vol cophinos, cantharos et ollas perscrutantur,
infantes ex cunis extrahunt, luminaria accendunt, et nonnunquam
dormicntes affligunt.' At 3, 93 he assures us he had known
women who declared 'se dormientibus viris suis cum coetu
lamiarum celeri penua mare transire, mundum percurrere, et si
quis aut si qua in tali discursu Christum nominavorit, statira, in
quocunque loco et quantovis periculo fecerit, corruere ; ' and one
woman had fallen into the Rhone that way. ' Scimus quasdam in
forma cattorum a furtive vigilantibus de nocte visas ac vulneratas

in crastino vulnera truncationesque ostendisse.' So then the

witches travel in the nightly train of gracious dames, 1 for whom
men spread tables, as they do for visitant fays and elves (pp. 409.
411. Superst. C, 198 d ), because they bring luck or multiply it,
scrutinize the house-gear, bless the babes in the cradle.
Heathenish the superstition was, for the name of Christ might
not be uttered ; but it did not pass for devilish yet. True, the
notion of kidnapping (of which elves also were accused, p. 468)
already mingles with it, and rises to the barbarous height of
roasting and devouring / but this also hangs on myths about elves
and goddesses, and had always been laid at the door of sorceresses.
One passage even celebrates the compassion of the president and

1 The Maid of Orleans, indicted for sorcery, was asked : • si elle scait rien de
coux qui vont avecq U* fees' I



Digitized by Googl



WITCHES.



1061



directress of the feast, she has the stolen sucklings carried back
to their cradles (see Suppl.).

Crescentia, who had devoted herself to the nurture of children,
is addressed as an unholde : ' Waz huotes du ddse, ubele horn-
bldse ? du soldes billecher da ce holze varn, dan die megede hie
bewarn ; du bist ein unholde, und sizist hie behangen mit golde.'
She answers : ' Got weiz wol die sculde, ob ich bin ein unholde,
oder ie dicheinis (any) zouberes gephlac/ Kaiserchr. 12199.
Diemer p. 373 (imitated, Kolocz. 261-2). They believed thon in
the 12th cent, that unholden 'fared to the woods/ to the Wild
Host, and ' blew horns/ like Tutosel, who as a tooting hooting
owl, i.e. strix, travels in the Furious Host (p. 922) ; can 1 hor-
tuta/ a word of insult in the Vestgotalag p. 38, have been
Iwrnfruta, hornpyta ? ON. fiota, ululare, Goth. )mt-haurn adXirty^. *■« ,.
The precise meaning of dose, unless it be for dwaso, twtlse, getwas
(spectre, p. 915), escapes me (see Suppl.). Such unholden are
much more night-dames, bonao dominae, than devil's partners.
The 'faring to woods and forests' expresses the sentence
pronounced on banished outlawed men, whoso dwelling is in
the wilderness, among wolves, RA. 733, to whom the forest be-
comes mother (shuma ti mati !), conf. saltibus assuetus (p. 482).
Vulgar opinion in Sweden to this day suspects old women, who
live alone in the woods, of harbouring and sheltering wolves
when they are hunted : they are called vargamodrar, wolf-
mothers, and such a one is meant in the song of Sdmung
(Ssemingr p. 305) : ' inde satt gamla djuramor, rorde med nasa i
brande/ within sat the old beasts'-mother, stirred with her nose
the coals (Afzel. sagohiifder 1, 38. 43). The long-nosed hag here
evidently melts into the notion of the alrune who mingles with
wood-schrats, p. 404, and of the wild wood-wife, p. 432 ; she is
like the ON. iarnvidja, p. 483.

But what to my mind completely establishes this milder
explanation of witches' doings, which leaves the Devil out of
the reckoning, is the collection of conjuring spells quoted in the
Appendix, vol. 3. Taken mostly from witch-trials of the last few
centuries, when the link between witch and devil was a long-
established thing to the popular mind, they refer not to devilish
doings at all, but everywhere to elvish or even christian. Some
of them seem to be of high antiquity, of heathen origin, and to



Digitized by Google



1062



MAGIC.



havo been handed down through a long course of oral tradition.
Their power to hurt or heal is founded on faith in elves and sprites,
whoso place is afterwards .filled by angels and holy names. As
elf and eljin, dwarf and she-dicarf, hilwiz and bilwizin are invoked
(p. 472), so in the old AS. formula (App. spell i.) ' esa gescot
(&ses' shot), y If a gescot, hcvgtessan gescot' all stand side by side.
Such formulas, whose words must long ago have become unin-
telligible to witches of the 16- 17th cent., at once prove the
injustice of the charge brought against them. It is to me a
significant fact, that the imagination of the tortured witches still
expressly owns to a journey 'auf Venesberg und in das paradis'
(Mone's Anz. 7, 426), meaning therefore the ancient elvisli or
even christian abode of bliss, and not a devilish one.

The gradual intrusion of the Devil by whom, according to the
Church's belief, men were possessed (p. 1015), is easily accounted
for. The conception was radically foreign to the Teuton mind,
which tried at first to naturalize it by transferring it to a fe-
male being (p. 990). But when in course of time the christian
notion of a male devil got the upper hand, then all that had been
told of Holda had in its turn to be applied to him. From their
service and attendance on that unhold dame of night, the witches
passed into the Devil's fellowship, whose sterner keener nature
aggravated the whole relationship into something more wicked,
more sinful. Those magic rides by night had merely rested
on the general allegiance due to the people's ancient goddess, in
whose train the women rode ; but now that the Devil came to
fetch the women, and carried them over hill and dale (pp. 1013.
1028), there grew up the idea of an amorous alliance between
him and every single witch.

Connecting links may be found in abundance. Ghostly beings
could form close and intimate ties with men ; a long line of
neighbourly elves links its destiny to the good or ill fortunes of
a human family, home-sprites devote themselves to a man's
service, and cling to him with obstinate and troublesome fidelity
(p. 513) ; only these attachments are neither founded on formal
compact, nor are they pernicious to man. An equally tender and
an innocent relation subsists between him and the attendant
guardian spirit given him at birth, p. 875.

The witches' devils have proper names so strikingly similar in



Digitized by Googl



witches' devils.



1063



formation to those of elves and kobolds, that one can scarcely
think otherwise than that nearly all devils' names of that class are
descended from older folk -names for those sprites. A collection
of snch names, which I have culled out of witch-trials, may afford
us a welcome glimpse into old elvish domestic economy itself.
Some are taken from healing herbs and flowers, and are certainly
the product of an innocent, not a diabolic fancy : Wolgemut (ori-
ganum), Schone (bellis minor, daisy), Luzei (aristolochia), Wege-
tritt (plantago), Bliimchenblau (conf. the marvelous flower, p.
971), Peterlein (parsley) ; exactly such are the names of two
fairies in Midsum. N. Dr., Peaseblossom and Mustardseed, Names
equally pretty are borrowed from the forest life of the sprites :
Griinlaub (-leaf), Crriinewald, Lindenlaub, Lindenzweig (-twig),
Eichenlaub (oak), Dimbaum (pear), Birnbiiumchen, Rautenstrauch
(rue), Btichsbaum (box), HolderUn (elder), Kranzlein (garland),
Spring-ins-feld, Hurlebusch, Zum-wald-flielien ; clad in green (as
the devil is in Kinderm. 101) appear the Scotch elves (Minstrelsy
2, 152-4. 160-4) and Norse huldre(Faye p. 42) ; foliage garlands
must have been largely used in ancient sacrifices as well as in
sorcery, oak-leaves in particular are enjoined on witches, and are
used in brewing storms (Mono's Anz. 8, 129). As the Devil
often presents himself in fair angelic guise (' in young man's
sheen* occurs already in Ls. 3, 72), he receives such names as
Jiingling, Junker, Schonhans, and feather-ornaments or wings
are a favourite ascription, hence the names Feder, Federhans,
Federling, Federbusch, Weissfeder (white-f.), Straussfeder (ostrich-
f.), Strausswedel (-plume), Qrunwedel. Of all the names confessed
by witches, none is commoner than Flederwisch (Voigt's Abb.
62-8-9. 105-9. 113. 129), but folktales give that name to ko-
bolds (Jul. Schmidt 158), and carousers in their cups used to
drink 'to all flederwischen ! ' (Franz. Simpl. 1, 47. 57): by
flederwisch we mean the end limb of a (goose) wing, used for the
purpose of dusting, hence Kehrwisch also occurs as a devil's name,
aptly denoting the rapid whisking to and fro of a spirit. Then
agam proper names of men are in great request, especially in the
familiar fondling form which is also used for kobolds (p. 504) :
Hans, Hanschen, junker Hans (squire Jack), Orauhans (conf.
Grayman, p. 993), Griinlians, Hans vom busch; Heinrich, Grau-
lieinrich, Hinze ; Kunz, Kiinzchen (conf. Kueni, p. 1003), Kon rad ;



Digitized by Google



1064



MAGIC.



Nickel, Grossnickcl; Martin (p. 931), Merten ; Kaspar, Kdsparle ;
Dewes, Rupel, Buppel (p. 504), Rausch (p. 51 7n.), Wendel (p. 375
lastl.), Eemmerlin (p. 182), Stbphel, junker Stof (Christoph, the
first syll. shortened with a purpose? conf. Stopchen, p. 1003),
some few of them equally savouring of the heathenish and
the devilish; Perlebitz (in some Hessian trials Berlewitzchen,
-witchen), probably the same as pilwitz (p. 472). 1 The following
begin to look suspicious : Leidenoth, Machlcid, Ungliick, Bekhelier,
Eintenhervor, Allerlei-wollust (perh. a flower's name), Schicarzbury,
Dreifuss, Kuhfuss, Kuhbhrnchen, Dickbauch ; yet they may also
turn upon the satyr-like shape of the sehrats, or upon the weird
and worrying nature of any intercourse with the demonic world.
The old Easter-play supplies the following names, belonging at
latest to the beginning of the 15th century: Kottelrey, Rosen-
kranz, Krczlin, Fcderwisch, Raffenzan, Binkebank, Spiegelglanz,
Schorbrant, Sclioppenstak, Eellekrug,* Schorzeniage ; they are
easy to explain from what has gone before. Italian streghe call
their devil Martinello, Martinetto, and again Fiorino ; French
trials furnish maistre Persil, Verdelet, Verdjoli, Jolibois, Saute-
buisson. Two more fairies in Mids. N. Dream, Moth and Cobweb,
are worth remembering. All these names have nothing in com-
mon with the names of the Jewish or Christian devil, except with
those quoted pp. 988-9. 1003, and they are kobolds* names. 8 Somo
of the names in my list appear to belong equally to the witches
themselves, just as elves have several common to both sexes.
Thus the feminine names of plants and flowers are more suitable
to sorceresses (see Suppl.).

Love-affairs between spirits and men arise out of their familiar
intercourse. She-kobolds are nowhere mentioned, and we are
never told of kobolds having designs upon women ; elves on the
contrary do carry off maidens, and men live in secret intimacy
with elfins; thus Helgi became the father of Skuld by an dlfkona,
Fornald. sog. 1, 32. 96. But except that Elberich having made
himself invisible overpowers Otnit's mother, and an dlfr does the

•

1 The Hessian dialect often inserts an r: at Cassel they call bellevne
berlevue.

8 Mone'B Schausp. p. 131 has hellekruke for witch.

■ A few times the hellish wooer is called Lucifer or Belzebok, Trier, act. 114 ;
where the name jamer is also given, which I do not quite understand : is it jammer
unpleasant [as in jammer schade, a sad pity] , or jammer ailment, epilepsy ?



Digitized by Google



devil's bride. 1065

like to king Aldrian's wife and begets Hogni, I cannot think of
any instance of such amours as lie at the bottom of all the witch-
stories. The notions of incubus and succubus seem to me not of
German origin, though afterwards they got mixed up with those
of elf and night- spirit. An AS. manuscript in Wanley, either of
the 12th, 11th, or some earlier cent., speaks of ' moanom, J>e
deofol mid hiem^.' In the later doctrine about witches their
prostitution is an essential feature, it seals the compact, and gives
the Devil free control over them : in a pure maid he can have no
part. 1 Without this abomination we never come across a witch
at all. 2

It is a question, at what period witches' covenants and amours
are first mentioned in Germany. No doubt the first impulse to
them was given by the persecution and consequent spread of
heresies, which after the middle of the 13th cent, came from Italy
and France into Germany . However guilty or innocent tho
heretics may have been, report, magnifying and distorting,
charged their assemblies with idolatrous excesses, whose affinity
to witches' doings is beyond dispute. Among the heretics them-
selves, with their seclusion, reserve, and constantly repeated
success in attaching new disciples and adherents, some ancient
departures from orthodox faith and ritual kept stubbornly
reproducing themselves ; as persistently did calumnies start up
against them. They were accused of adoring a beast or beast's
head, which presently turned into the Devil, who became visible,
now as a black spirit, now as a bright beguiling angel, his fa-
vourite animal shape being that of a he-catj or else a toad. At
their meetings, it was said, they slaughtered children and kneaded
their blood in flour or ashes, and after extinguishing the lights,
practised together the lusts of the flesh. Newly admitted mem-
bers were marked by the prick of a needle, the while they cursed
their Maker, and signified their faith and homage to the Evil one,
as to worldly rulers, by a kiss. 3 Even in the less offensive teach-

1 • Le demon ne peut faire pacte avec une vierge,' Mich. Hist, de Fr. 5, 68. 159.

160.

a Greek antiquity had its fables about the intercourse of gods with mortals (p.
343), and so had our heathenism about the union of heroes with swan-wives and
elfins ; at last the far grosser conception could find credence, of a literal commerce
of the Devil with mankind !

* Soldan's Geschichte der Hexenprocesse pp. 103—146.



Digitized by Google



10GG



MAGIC



ing and practice of some heretics there could not fail to be a
mixture of heathen things with christian ; the church's zeal had
to bestir itself at once against new errors of doctrine and against
remnants of heathenism that were combined with them. Along
with heretic-prosecutions went rumours of diabolic compacts and
conferences, which the populace connected with their ancient be-
lief in daemonic beings. Traditions of certain men being leagued
with the Devil had already circulated in the West, at all events
from the 10th cent. (p. 1017) ; the more readily would they now
be extended to women. The earliest certain mention of an in-
trigue between witch and devil is of the year 1275 under an
inquisitor at Toulouse (Soldan p. 147) ; the first half of the 14th
cent, seems to have established more firmly, especially in Italy,
the belief in a diabolic sisterhood (secta strigarum). Bartolus (d.
1357) delivered a judgment on a witch of Ortha and Riparia in
Novara bpric., 1 the charge was novel to him, and he appeals to
theologians as to the nature of the crime ; from the whole tenor
of his sentence we may assume that seldom or never had a witch
been tried in the Milanese before. Amongst other things he says :
' Mulier striga sive lamia debet igno cremari, confitetur se crucem
fecisse ex paltis et talem crucem pedibus conculcasse
se adorasse diabolum, Mi genua jlectendo , . . pueros tactu
stricasse et fascinasse, adeo quod mortui fuerunt. Audivi a sacris
quibusdam theologis, has mulieres quae lamiae nuncupantur tactu
vel visu posse nocere etiam usque ad mortem fascinando homines
seu pueros ac bestias, cum habeant animas infectas, quas daemoni

voverunh' Between 1316 and 1334 pope John XXII had issued

a bull without date, ordering the property of convicted sorcerers
to be confiscated like that of heretics. What was then done by
inquisitors and judges Soldan has subjected to a minute investi-
gation (pp. 160 — 210), and I need only single out one or two
facts. Alfonsus de Spina in his Fortalitium fidei (written about
1458) lib. 5 informs us: 'Quia nimium abundant tales perversac
mulieres in Delphinatu et (xaschonia, ubi se asserunt concurrere
de nocte in quadam planitie deserta, ubi est aper quidam in rupe t
qui vulgariter dicitur el boch de Biterne, et quod ibi conveniunt
cum candelis accensis, et adorant ilium aprum, osculantes earn in

1 Printed in Joh. Bapt. Ziletti consilior. select, in criminal, causis, Francof.
1578 lot, torn. 1, conail. 6.



Digitized by Google



devil's bride



1067



ano suo ; ideo captae plures earum ab inquisitoribus fidei, et con-
victae, ignibus comburuntur; signa autem combustarum sunt
depicta, qualiter scilicet adorant cum candelis praodictum aprum,
in domo inquisitoris Tholosani in magna multitndine camisearum,

sicut ego propriis oculis aspexi.' Read throughout caper for

aper, as bock, boc, bone evidently means the former. Adoring
and kissing of the he-goat or he-cat was just the charge brought
against heretics, whose very name (ketzer, cathari) some derived
from that circumstance. 1 This parody of divine worship may
either be connected with goat-sacrifices of the heathen (p. 52) and
the sacredness of that animal, or explained by the goat's feet
ascribed to the devil from of old (p. 995). Kissing the toad
(Soldan p. 133-6) is wonderfully like those conditions necessary
to the release of f white women ' (p. 969) ; here heretical
opinions coincide with superstition. In 1303 a bishop of
Coventry was accused at Rome of a number of heinous crimes,
amongst others 1 quod diabolo homagium fecerat, et eum fuerit
osculatus in tergo 9 ; Boniface 8 acquitted him (Rymer 2, 934 old
ed.). The same charge is commonly brought against the later
witches. Dr. Hartlieb in 1446 mentions 'abjuring God and
giving oneself up to three devils/ Superst. H, cap. 34. .

For four centuries, beginning with the 14th ; what with the
priestly Inquisition, with the formality of the Canon and Civil
law process simultaneously introduced in the courts, and to
crown all, with Innocent 8's bull of 1484 (MB. 16, 245-7), as well
as the Malleus Maleficarum 9 and the tortures of the criminal
court ; the prosecutions and condemnations of witches multiplied
at an unheard-of rate, and countless victims fell in almost every
part of Europe. The earlier Mid. Ages had known of magicians
and witches only in the milder senses, as legendary elvish beings,
peopling the domain of vulgar belief, or oven as demoniacs, not

1 4 Catari dicuntur a cato, quia osculantur posteriora caii, in cujus specie, at
dicunt, apparet eis Lucifer,' Alan, ab Insalis (d. 1202) contra Valdenses, lib. 1. A
better name lor heretics was boni homines, bom hommes (Soldan p. 131), not, I think,
because so many were of good condition, but in harmony with other meanings of
the term (conf. supra p. 89). At the same time it reminds us of the ghostly pood
women, bonae dominae, p. 287, as * francs hommes ' does of the tranches puceles, p.
410 n. Even the gute holden are not to be overlooked.

* Composed 1487 by the two inquisitors appointed by Innocent, Heinr. Insti-
toris in Alemannia and Jac. Sprenger at Cologne, with the help of Joh. Gremper,
prieBt at Constance. Soon followed by episcopal mandates, e.g. at Begensburg
1491-3 (MB. 16, 241-3).



Digitized by Google



1068



MAGIC.



as actual apostates from God and malefactors arraigned before
a court of justice. A good deal has been made of the Annales
Corbeienses, which do expressly state under the year 914, ' multae
sagae combustae sunt in territorio nostro ' ; but these Annals
were not written till 1464, and have of late been totally dis-
credited. Several ancient Codes lay penalties on sorcery ; 1 but
all the cases that occurred had for their basis real crimes,
murder, poisoning ; the stria is a ( herbaria,' i.e. venefica ; 2 for
alleged storm-raising few can have forfeited their lives. Especially
worthy of note are the punishments denounced against precisely
those persons who from a vain belief in sorcery have burnt or put
to death either man or woman ; 8 not sorcery, but the slaying of
supposed sorcerers is what the enlightened law pronounces
heathenish and diabolic. On the mere ground of a night-excur-
sion with 'unholden' nobody dreamt of bringing a criminal
charge against women; that father confessor of the 13th cent,
(p. 1060) refutes the confessions of his ' domina sortilega' by
rational argument. 4 But when once, by a fatal confusion of

1 Lex Sal. 22. Lex Rip. 83. Lex Visigoth, vi. 2, 2. 8, 4. Lex Alam. add.
22. Capital, a.d. 789 cap. 18. Capit. ii. a.d. 805.

3 Meichelbom no. 683 : a.d. 853, a girl at Freising, venefica ; a.d. 1028, • malefica
mulier artes maleficas cum tribus aliis mulieribus exercens,' Pertz 6, 146 ; a.d.
1074 at Cologne, 4 mulier homines plerumque magicis artibus dementare infamata,'
Lamb. schafn. p. 375.

* Capit. Caroli de part. Sax. 5 : * si quia adiabolo doceptus crediderit secundum
morem Paganorum, virum aliquem aut feminam strigam esse, et homines comedere,
et propter hoc iptam incetuterit, vel carnem ejus ad comedendum dederit, capitis sen-
tentia punietur.' Lex Roth. 379 : 1 nullus praesumat aldiam alienam aut ancillam
quasi strigam oc cuter e, quod christianis mentibut nullatenus est credendum nec
possibile est ut hominem mulier vivum intrinsecus possit comedere.' How the
wisdom of Charles and Rothar shines by the side of Innocent's blind barbarous bull !
Tbose ' sagae combustae ' in WestphaUa, if the statement be worth believing, were
hardly condemned by the courts, but more likely sacrificed by the mob to such
heathenish superstition as the laws quoted were trying to stem. In our own day
the common folk in England, France and Belgium take it upon thenutclves to throw
suspected witches into fire or the pond (Horst's Zauberbibl. 6, 368. 372-4). White's
Selborne p. 202 : ' the people of Tring in Hertfordshire would do well to remember
that no longer ago than 1751 they seized on two superannuated wretches, crazed
with age and overwhelmed with infirmities, on a suspicion of witchcraft ; and by
trying experiments drowned them in a horsepond.' The Qazette des tribunaux
no. 8055, June 4, 1835 relates a trial of supposed magicians, whose family had the
hereditary faculty of charming lice away.

4 It is true the Sachsensp. ii. 13, 7 has : 1 svelk kerttenman ungelovich (un-
believing) is, unde mit tovere umme gat oder mit vorgiftnisse (poisoning), unde dea
verwunnen wirt, den sal man upper hort bernen.' Schwabensp. 149. Wackern.
174. Lassb. Gosl. stat. 88, 20. The words * oder wif ' standing after 4 kerstenman 1
in Homeyer, are a later insertion : they are wanting in other laws, and are contra-
dicted by the pron. ' den,' him, which follows. That these docs, speak of wizards,
not yet of witches, seems to fit better their age and spirit ; yet it must be noted,
that they already link apostacy with witchcraft, conf. Soldan 172 — 4. Biener, in



Digitized by Google



WITCH-TRIALS.



10G9



sorcery with heresy, the notion gained a footing that every
witch renounces God and becomes the Devil's, everything assumed
a new aspect : as the Devil's ally, apart from any crimes she
might have committed, she was deserving of death, and her sin
was one of the greatest and horriblest. But from that time the
earlier notion of possession by the devil almost entirely ceased :
imagination had taken a new direction.

Witch-trials of the 16-1 7-1 8th centuries have been amply
made known, of the 15th few completely. 1 One need only have
read two or three o£ them : everywhere an unaccountable uni-
formity of procedure, always the same result. At first the accused
denies ; tortured,* she confesses what all those doomed before her
have confessed, and without delay she is condemned and burnt
(incinerata, as the Malleus expresses it). This agreement in
depositions of imaginary facts is to be explained by the traditional
illusions that filled the popular fancy. I will here attempt to
summarize all the essential points (see Suppl.). 8

Zeitschr. f. gesch. rechtsw. 12, 126, would limit the penal fire of the Sachsensp.
to cases where the spiritual court hands the sinner over, as impenitent, to the
secular.

1 Little can be gleaned from a Tractatus de phitonico contractu fratris Thomae
Murner, Friburgi Brisg. 1499. Murner tells how in childhood he was crippled by a
witch.

J The hangman's formula ran : ' thou shalt be tortured so thin that the sun will
shine through thee 1 • RA. 95. Dint. 1, 105.

> Witch-trials at Mainz of 1505-11, in Horst's Zauberbibl. 4, 210—8 ; at Frei-
burg of 1546 and 1627—35, ed. H. Schreiber, Freib. 1836 ; at Quedlinburg of 1569
—78, in G. C. Voigt's Gemeinniitz. abh. Leipz. 1792 pp. 59—160 ; at Trier of 1581,
in Trier, chronik 1825, 10. 196 seq., and of 1625 ib. 108 seq. ; at NSrdlingon of 1590
— I, ed. Weng, Nordl. 1838; in Elsass of 1615—35, in Lit. bl. der bbrsenh. Hamb.
1835 nos. 1092-3 ; at Eichstatt of 1590 and 1626—37, repr. Eichst. 1811; at Wem-
dingen of 1620, in Mone's Anz. 7, 425— 7 ; at Dieburg of 1627, in Steiner's Gesch.
von Dieb., Darmst. 1820, 67—100; at Buhl of 1628-9, in Mone's Anz. 8, 119—
132; at Siegburg of 1636, in P. E. Schwabe's Gesch. v. Siegb., Col. 1826, 225—
241 ; in Brandenburg of the 15-18thcent., in Mark, forsch. 1, 238—265 ; atCammin
of 1679, in Pommer. provinzialbl. Stettin 1827, 1, 332-365 ; at Freising of 1715—7,
in A ret in V Beitr. 4, 273 — 327. Useful extracts from Swabian trials of the 15th
cent, are in the notorious Malleus malefic, (first printed 1489) ; from Lorrainian of
1583—90, in Nic. Bemigii daemonolatria ; and from Burgundian (en la terre de
sainct Oyan de Joux) of 1588-9, in Henry Dogveft Disc, execrable des sorciers,
Rouen 1603, repr. Lyon 1610. Less important is S. Meiger de panurgia lamiarum,
Hamb. 1587. 4. On Soandinavia : Nyerup's Udsigt over hexeprooesserne i Norden
(Skand. Lit.-selskabs skrifter 19, 339—394. 20, 1-42), in which an extr. from Lem
on Norweg. sorcery (19, 385) is specially instructive ; Troll vasendet i Dalarna, &ren
1668— 73, in J. M. Bergman's Beskrifning om Dalarne, Fahlun 1822. 1, 208—19. I
have also read Girol. Tartarotti del congresso notturno delle lamie, Rover. 1749. 4 ;
and C. F. de Cauz de oultibus magicis, Vindob. 1767. 4 : two painstaking books, the
first revelling in Ital. prolixity ; D. Tiedemann's prize essay De artium magicarum
origine, Marb. 1787 was of less use to me. On the Netherl. : Scheltema's Gencbie-
denis der heksenprocessen, Haarl. 1829 I had not at hand; Cannaert's Bydragen



Digitized by Google



1070



MAGIC.



The Devil appears in the shape of a fine young man, gaily
plumed and amorous ; not till too late does the witch observe the
horsefoot or goosefoot (wilde pflotte fiisse, Nordl. hexenpr. 35).
Ho then compels her to abjure God (p. 818), baptizes her over
again, making her choose sponsors, gives her a new name, and
reveals his own. A mark is printed on her body (p. 1077), and
the place has no feeling ever after j in some cases hair is plucked
out from the front of the head. He comes sometimes as a mouse,
goat, crow or fly, but soon changes into human shape. Even
after repeated dalliances the witch receives but small presents of
money ; what he gave as glittering coin is by daylight muck and
dirt. 1 The main thing is, that on certain days the Devil fetches
her, or appoints her to go, to nightly feasts, which are held in
company with other witches and devils. After anointing her
feet and shoulders with a salve,* or tying a girdle round her, she
bestrides a stick, rake, broom, distaff, shovel, ladle or oven-fork,
and muttering a spell, flies up the chimney, and away through
the air over hill and dale. 8 A dehselrite, Helbl. 1, 1196 (p. 1049),
a fork-rider, besom-rider all mean a witch, so does quosten-
pinderin, sash-binder, Clara Hatzl. lxvii b (quaste = perizoma,
cingulum). A 14th cent, story told in Herm. von Sachsenheim
(Wackera. lb. 1005-6) makes an old woman at Urach anoint
with salve the calf on which she is to ride. If the hellish wooer
comes to fetch the witch, his seat on the stick is in front, and
hers behind ; or he is a goat, and she mounts him ; or she drives



tot hot oudo 3trafrogt in Vlaonderen, Bruss. 1829, repr. Gend 1835, has interesting
extra. 475 — 91 ; some fresh facts aro collected in Schaye's Essai historique, Lour.
1834, pp. 175 — 202. There is a crowd of other books : Horst's Dainonomagie,
Frankf . 1818, his Zanberbibliothek, Mainz 1821-3, and Walter Scott's Demonol. and
witchcraft, I have hardly used at all ; both, baaed on diligent compilation, lack true
criticism and scholarship ; besides, Horst's work is turgid and bad in taste, Scott's
inexact and careless. Most of the above are far surpassed by Soldan's Geschichte
der hexen-processe, Stuttg. 1843, a work of whose value 1 give a fuller estimate
in my Preface.

1 Everything divine the devil turns topsyturvy, p. 986:. his gold turns into
filth ; whereas, when gods or benignant beings bestow leaves, chips, or pods, these
turn into sheer gold, pp. 268. 275. Hence, when the devil sits, when witches stand
up or dance, etc., they look the wrong way (upside down?).

2 Unguentum Pharelis, made of herbs, Superst. H, c. 82; but the usual
witches' salve is prepared from the fat of infants killed while yet unbaptized :
' unguentum ex membris puerorum interemptorum ab eis ante baptismum,' Malleus
malef. ii. 1, 3 (ed. 1494, 51«>).

» Simpl. bk 2, cap. 17-8 describes such a flight ; a listener mounted on a bench
gives chase, and in a twinkling gets from the Fulda Buchenwald to Madgeburg
cathedral.



Digitized by Google



INITIATION.



1071



horses that come out of the ground. Older accounts have it,
that the devil takes her inside his cloak, and carries her through
the air, whence she is called mantelfahre, mantelfahrerin. At the
tryst ing- place are.many more witches, each with her demon lover ;
they are mostly neighbour women, often such as have long been
dead, some (the superior sort) inuffied and masked. But their
wooers are mere servants of the Chief Devil, who in goat-shape,
but with black human face, sits silent and solemn on a high chair
or a large stone table in the midst of the ring, and all do him
reverence by kneeling and kissing. When the Chief Devil takes
a particular fancy to one woman, she is named the witches' queen,
and ranks above all the rest, 1 answering to that Norse trolla
konungr, p. 1043. The undelightful meal is illumined by black
torches, all kindled at a light that burns between the horns of
the great goat. Their viands lack salt and bread* they drink out
of cows' hoofs and horses' heads. Then they relate what mischief
they have wrought, and resolve on new : if their misdeeds fail to
satisfy the Devil, he beats them. After the feast, 8 that neither
fills nor nourishes, the dance begins: up in a tree sits the
musician, his fiddle or bagpipe is a horse's head (p. 1050), his fife
a cudgel or a cat's tail. In dancing the partners face outwards,
turning their backs to each other : in the morning you may see
a circular track in the grass, shewing the print of cows' and goats'
feet. The dance, according to Hessian trials of 1631, is like that
of the sword-dancers (p. 304) ; we often hoar of one of the
women wearing the giildne schuh on her right foot, would she be
queen or commandress ? Martin von Amberg speaks of ' making
red shoes (schuechel) for the trut'; to dance in? When the
ring-dance is over, they beat each other with swingle-staves and
mangle-bats, and practise lewdness. At last the great goat burns
himself to ashes, and these are distributed among the witches to
work mischief with. A young untried witch is not at once
admitted to the feast and dance, but set on one side to tend toads
with a white wand ; 4 at home also they breed and maintain these

1 Laffert's IMationes criminates, Cello 1721. pp. 52-4. Horst's Danionom. 2,
376-7.

2 Yet they eat bread baked on a Sunday, meat salted on Sunday ; and drink
wine put in cask on Sunday.

3 Distinction of ranks is kept up too : the rich sit down to table first, and
drink out of silver goblets, then the poor out of wooden bowls or hoofs.

4 O. Fr. poets also put peeled wand- in the hands of witches : 1 une vielle



Digitized by Google



1072



MAGIC.



animals : the Hatzlerin lxviii* already chides a witch as ' inhitzig^e
krotensack ! * Such a novice witch the Devil inverts, and sticks
a candle in a part of her person, Thiir. mitth. vi. 3, 69. They
go home the same way as they came : the husband, who all the
while has mistaken a staff laid in the bed for his sleeping spouse,
knows nothing of what has passed. Whoever happens to get
sight of a witches' dance, need only utter the name of God or
Christ : it all stops in a moment, and disappears. 1 The harm
that witches do is chiefly to the cattle and crops of their neigh-
bours. They know how to drain other people's cows of every
drop of milk, without coming near them, Superst. G, line 132 :
they stick a knife in an oaken post, bang a string on it, and make
the milk flow out of the string (ReusclYs Samland p. 66) ; or
they drive an axe into the doorpost, and milk out of the helve ;
they draw milk out of a spindle, out of a suspended handkerchief.*
They turn good milk blue, or bloody-colour ; their compliments on
entering your house are bad for the milk : if you were just going
to churn, the butter will not come, Sup. I, 823. Hence any
witch is called milch-diebin (as the butterfly is a milk or butter
thief), milch-zauherin, molken-stehlerin, molken-toversclie, whey-
be witcher. 8 Here again comes to light the connexion between
witches, elves and butterflies, for vulgar opinion blamed dwarfs
also for drawing milk from the udders of kine : ON. dverg-speni
means papilla vaccarum vacua. If your milk is bewitched, whip
it in a pot, or stir it about with a sickle : every lash or cut makes
tho witch wince, Sup. I, 540. A Wetterau superstition takes
this shape : when a beast is bewitched, they set the frying-pan
on, and chop into it with the grass-chopper behind bolted doors ;
the first person who comes after that is the witch. The power
of witches to draw milk and honey from a neighbour's house to
their own is already noticed by old Burchard, Sup. C, p. 199 d .
Lashing the brooks with their brooms, squirting water up in
the air, shooting gravel, scattering sand toward sunset, witches

barbelee, qui porte a verge peUe plus do qatre vingts ans,' Benart 28286 ; conf.
Meon 4, 478, ' retnest ausi znonde com la verge qui est pelie.'

1 DS. no. 251. Wolfs Niederl. sagen 245. 381-2. Wodana xxivi.

8 So, by magic, wine is struck out of the post, Superst. G, line 262 ; conf. the
legend of Doctor Faust.

* On the eve of S. Philip and S. James, i.e. May 1, people in the I. of Riigen
ran aboat the fields with large fire-bladders : this they call molhentiivertchen brennen
Rugian. laudgebr. cap. 243. • milchdiebin und uuhold,' H. 8achs hi. 3, 5 d .



Digitized by Google



witches' doings



1073



bring on storm and hail (p. 909), to beat down their neighbour's
corn and fruit. For the same purpose they are said to boil
bristles or else oak-leaves in pots, or strew some of those devil's-
ashes on the fields. These are the lightning or weatJwr witches,
whose doings will come to be treated more fully hereafter. It
is said they stroke or strip the dew off the grass, and with it do
harm to cattle, Sup. I, 1118 ; also that early before sunrise they
skim the dew off other people's meadows, and carry it to their
own, to make the grass grow ranker ; hence they may be recog-
nised by their large clumsy feet, and are called thau-streicher (in
E. Friesland dau- striker) , though other suspicious characters,
even men, are called the same bad name. This clearly hangs
together with the dew-brushing after the nightly elf-dance, and
the dew the valkyriau steeds shako out of their manes; only
here it is perverted to evil. A witch, by binding up the legs of
a footstool, can heal the broken bones oE ono who is absent. If
she is present at a wedding, just as the blessing is pronouncing,
she snaps a padlock to, and drops it in the water : this is called
tying up the laces; until the padlock can be fished up and un-
locked, the marriage proves unfruitful. Witches can kill men by
dealing pricks to images or puppets ; in churchyards they dig up
the bodies of young children, and cut the fingers off ; 1 with the
fat of these children they are supposed to make their salve.
This seems to be their chief reason for entrapping children ; to
the sorceress of older times kidnapping was imputed far moro
freely (p. 1059). From the Devil's commerce with witches pro-
ceeds no human offspring, but elvish beings, which are named
dinger (things, conf. wihtir, p. 410), clbe, holden, but whose
figure is variously described : now as butterflies, then as humble-
bees or queppen (quab, burbot), and again as caterpillars or worms.
Even an OHG. gloss in Graff 1, 243 has : alba, brucus, locusta
quae nondum volavit. The enigmatic beetle and larva shape is
very appropriate to such beings. 2 They are called by turns good

1 Fingers of a babe anborn are available for magic : when lighted, thoy give
a flame that keeps aU tbe inmates of a house asleep ; equally useful is the thumb
cut off the hand of a hanged thief. Conf. Schamberg de jure digitor. p. 61-2, and
Praetorius on thieves' thumbs, Lips. 1677. The Coutume de Bordeaux § 46 treats
of magic wrought with dead children's hands. Thief's hand was the name of a
plant, p. 1029.

2 The caterpillar is also called devil's cat (p. 1029), and a witch, like the dragon-
fly, devils bride, deviVs doxy. The Finn. Vkon koira (Ukkonis canis) means papilio



Digitized by Google



1074



MAGIC.



and bad things, good and bad elves, good 1 and bad holden, holder-
chen, holdiken. Witches use them to produce illness and swel-
lings in man and beast, by conjuring them into the skin and
bones. But they also make them settle on forest- trees, they dig
them in under elder-bushes : the ' elves/ in gnawing away the
wood of the aspen, waste away the man at whom they are aimed.
The same witch as set the ' holden ' on a man must take them off
again ; when she wants them, she goes into the wood and shakes
them off the trees, or digs them out from under the elder (the
elves* grave). You may know a man into whom holden have been
charmed, by there being no manikin or baby (/copy, pupa) visible
in his eyes, or only very faintly (Voigt pp. 149. 152). This is
like the devil's drawing a toad on the pupil of a witch's left
eye. The nine species of holden I shall specify in the chap, on
Diseases. But not unfrequently the demon lover himself appears
in the form of an elf or butterfly. Their daughters born in human
wedlock the witches have to promise to the devil at their birth,
and to bring them up in his service ; at great assemblies they
present to him any children they have, lifting them up backwards.
Sometimes they sacrifice black cattle to him. They love to gather
where roads divide; 2 like the devil (p. 999), they can pop in and
out of houses through the keyhole (Sup. G, line 106-7. Tobler
146 a ) ; where three lights burn in a room, the witch has power ;
ringing of bells they cannot bear. Before the judge they must
not be allowed to touch the bare ground, or they will change
themselves in a moment; they are incapable of shedding a tear;
thrown into water, they float on the top? upon which fact the



or larva papilionis, Uvonen feoira (mortis canis) and sudtn horendo (lopi vectis)
butterfly, and Ukon lehmii (U. vacca) another insect. Swed. trollsttinda (daemonic
fusus) butterfly. In the prisons they call a caterpillar baluise, in Switz. (acc. to
Stalder) palause, which is our old acquaintance pelewise, pilweise, p. 472-5. A
mythic meaning also lurks in the OHG. huntes-satul (eruca), Graff 6, 167, as in
ON. geit-hamr (vespa).

' Called gute holden even when harmful magic is wrought with them, Brnun-
schw. anz. 1815, p. 726 seq. In the Malleolus I find : ' vermes nocivi qui vulgariter
dicuntur jugcr,' and 1 Alemannico nomine juger nuncupantur, sunt albi coloris et
nigri capitis, sex pedum, in longitudine medii digiti.' Is jug the same thing a3
gueg (pp. 183. 692) ? Many other designations of the phalaenae overlap those of
wilf o' wisps or of wichtels, as zUmler, from fluttering round a light, land-surveyors,
(p. 918), night-oxcU, etc

2 At cross-road* the devil can be called up, so can the Alraun.

3 Pliny 7, 2 of sorcerers : ' eosdem praeterea non ponse mergi ne veste quidem
degravatos.' We are told several times, that the devil, after promising to bring the
wiichcs in the water an iron bar to make them sink, brings them only a fine needle.



Digitized by Google



MISERY.



1075



ancient usage of the witches' bath (ducking) was founded, once
a divine ordeal, RA. 925. If at the beginning of the action
they contrive to catch the judge's eye, he turns soft-hearted, and
has not the power to doom them.

Now it is a characteristic fact, that witches, with all their
cunning and the devil's power to boot, remain sunk in misery and
deep poverty : there is no instance to be found of one growing
rich by sorcery, and making up for the loss of heavenly bliss by
at least securing worldly pleasure, a thing that does occur in
tales of men who sign themselves away to the fiend (p. 1017).
These hook-nosed, sharp- chinned, hang-lipped, wry-toothed, chap-
fingered beldams 1 practise villainy that never profits them, at
most they may gratify a love of mischief. Their dalliance with
the devil, their sharing in his feasts, never procures them more
than a half-enjoyment 3 (see Suppl.).

This one feature might have opened people's eyes to the basis
of all sorcery. The whole wretched business rested on the
imagination and compulsory confessions of the poor creatures.
Of fact there was none, save that they had a knowledge of medi-
cines and poisons, and quickened their dreams 8 by the use of
salves and potions. Called upon to name their confederates,
they often mentioned dead persons, to shield the living or to
evade inquiry ; any vile thing they stated was set down as gospel
truth. We read of witches confessing the murder of people
who turned out to be alive. 4 It never occurred to the judges to
consider, how on earth it happened that innumerable meetings
of witches, all at well-known accessible places, had never been
surprised by witnesses whom their road must have taken that
way. By what special licence from God in those times should
a pack of miscreants previously unheard of nestle down all of a
sudden in towns and villages all over the country !

Long before witches were tortured, great criminals had been

1 ' Crooked nose and pointed chin, look to find the fiend therein ! ' I find a
parallel in ON. names, Hengikepta, Urdttintanna, LoSinnfingra, Sn. 220-1.

3 Berthold p. 58 : ' s6 gent etellche mit bcesein zduberlehe umb, daz si waenent
eins geb&ren (boor's) sun oder einen kneht bezonbern. pfl du rehte toarin ! war
umbo bezouberst du einen graven oder einen kiinec niht {fool, why not bewitch a
count, a king) ? sd wrerestu ein kiineginne ! » They say a witch gets three farthings
richer every Beven years, Simplic. 625.

■ Alter voihc troume, Wh. 1, 82*. kerHnga villa, Stem. 169.

* Frommann de fascinatione p. 850. Montaigne notices the same fact, livre
3, chap. 11.



fOL. III.



1076



MAGIC.



put to bodily sufferings intended to wring from them a confession
of their guilt. The Lex Visig. iii. 4, 10-11 already speaks of
' torquere ' ; and the triangular beam on which the accused had
to ride was called equuleus, poledrus, whence comes our filter,
Fr. poultre, poutre. That ON. extortion of a full declaration,
'pina til sagna* p. 1043, need not have been borrowed from
witch-trials.

The signing away to the devil, abjuring of God and adoring
of the goat in witch-stories seems to bo of heretic origin ; at the
same time the abjurer parodies the Abrenuntiatio Diaboli enjoined
on catechumens; 1 in every other point the heathen element
preponderates. Even the goat, and tho offering of black beasta
(pp. 52. 493. 1009), cannot but remind us of the old worship of
gods; it is remarkable that a Dalecarlian tradition makes tho
devil not occupy the chair of state, but lie under the table, bound
with a chain (just as with those spinsters in German legend,
p. 1011). The witches there have much to tell about this chain :
when its links wear out, an angel comes and solders them to
again, Bergm. 217-9. Various witcheries were wrought by the
efficacy of salt, Sup. I, 713. 846 ; it seems almost as if we might
assume a connexion between the salt-boiling, salt-grinding, salt-
strewing, salt-burning, salt-fetching at p. 1017, and the burning
of the goat, the carrying away and strewing of his ashes?
Equally heathen we found the consumption of liorsefiesh p. 1049.
The witches' flights were usually performed on May-night, St.
John's night, and at Christmas, but also at Shrovetide, Easter
and other seasons ; these were the days of great heathen festivals,
of Easter-fires, May-fires, Solstitial and Yule fires, and there is
no occasion to see in them a parody of the christian feasts. The
riding by night, tho torchlight procession, the penetrating of
locked- up houses, are exactly as in the case of Holda's host ;

1 In the formulas : ' ik fate an (grasp) disen bitten stock, und verlate (forsake)
unsen herre Gott (Cathol. : Marien son nnd Got) ! * or • her trede ik in din nist
(nest), und verlate unsen herre Jesum Christ ! ' In Hessian records of 1633 : * hie
stehe ich uf dieser mist, und verleugne (deny) des liehen herrn J. Christ I * In
abjuring, she stands on the dunghill, which begins to burn round her, and with a
white stick she stabs a toad (iitsche). The standing on dung is also in conjuring,
spells. The white staff is a symbol of surrender, and after being grasped is thrown
into the water.

3 Shepherds reputed to be sorcerers were accused of baptizing their sheep
with salt. Factums et arrest du partem, de Paris contre des berges sorciera
executez depuis peu dans la prov. de Brie sur l'iniprime a Paris 1095. 8, p. 57.



Digitized by Google



HEATHEN ORIGIN OF DUCKING, ETC



1077



the seducers' names, the spells, the brood of ' holden,' the round
dance, all this is elvish. 1 A witch's being strengthened by
touching the bare ground (iarSar-megin p. 642) may remind us
of the heathen belief about giants. An application of the Old-
German ducking to witches sprang out of the early practice
of courts which had long used it against sorceresses who
committed actual crimes. I do not know that the blood-mark
imprinted on witches (p. 1070) on forming their hellish compact
is necessarily to be traced to the practice of heretics (p. 1005).
Mingling of blood in oaths and covenants was ancient and widely
spread, RA. 192-3 ; the stigma was known in Germany long
before witches were prosecuted, 2 the regular name for it being
anamdli (Graff 2, 715). The corresponding amaeli in ON. I find
only in the ethical sense of nota=vituperium ; but when heroes
of old Scandinavia found themselves dying the stra-dau5i in bed,
they used first to consecrate themselves to OSinn, who would
only take a bleeding hero, by scratch of spear, even as he before
dying gave himself a gash with Gungnir (p. 147) ; this they
called marka sik geirs oddi, marka sik OSui, Yngl. saga cap. 10.
11. And I incline moreover to connect the 'tires t&cen,' p. 200,
and even the ' Todos zeichen/ p. 847 ; about all this there was
not a thought of criminal sorcery (see Suppl.).

The details of witchcraft, the heart-eating, the storm-raising,
the riding through air, are all founded on very ancient and
widely scattered traditions, which I will now examine more
minutely.

Let a glance at Servian superstitions lead the way. Tho
veshtitsa is possessed by an evil spirit : when she falls asleep,
he comes out of her, and then takes the form of a butterfly or a
hen, but he is essentially one with the witch. As soon as he is
out, the witch's body lies as if dead, and then always turns
its head about to where the feet lay ; in that stato she cannot be
awaked. The witch tries to catch people, to eat up, especially

* The honeysuckle, or perh. another plant, is in Lr. Germany called alf-ranke
(elf-vine), hexen-*chlingc (Hitter's Mekl. gram. p. 107. Amdt's March, p. 404).
Any creepers, climbers, or intertwined branches, are named h*:xen-«chlupf, because
a witch or elf % when pursued, can always $lip through them.

1 Berthold p. 381, of tho devil : they that fall into capital sin make him glad,
he quickly paint* hu mark on them, and will fain have honour by their bearing his
escutcheon.



1078



MAGIC.



young children. If she finds a man asleep, she pushes a rod
through his left nipple, opens his side, takes out the heart and
eats it, and the breast closes up again. Some of the people thus
' eaten out 1 die directly, others live on for a time. A witch will
eat no garlic ; and at Shrovetide many people smear themselves
with garlic on the breast, soles and armpits as a safeguard,
believing that she eats more people in Lent than at other times.
Young and handsome women are never suspected of sorcery,
witches are always old women, 1 but there goes a proverb : ' mlada
kurva, stara veshtitsa,' young wanton makes old witch. If once
the witch has confessed and criminated herself, she can never
eat people or practiso witchcraft any more. When witches fly
out by night, they shine like fire, their meeting-place is a
thrashing floor (guvno), and each when starting from her kitchen
anoints herself with a salve, and repeats a spell which will be
quoted further on. If many children or other people die in a
village, and suspicion falls on some old woman, they bind and
throw her in the water : if she sinks, she is pulled out and let
go ; if not, she is put to death, for witches cannot sink in water.
Whoever kills a snake before Lady-day, and ties a piece of garlic
in its head, and on Lady-day goes to church with the snake's head
stuck on a cap, can tell what women are witches by their congre-
gating round him and trying to filch the snake or a piece of it
(Vuk sub v. vjeschtitza, pometno, blagovjest).

This remarkable account opens the way to explanations. We
too had similar means of recognising witches. He that has about
him a harrow's tooth he has picked up, or grains of corn found
baked into the loaf, or a Maundy Thursday's egg, will see the
witches at church with milking-pails on their heads, Sup. I, 636.
685. 783. Just the same in Denmark, Sup. 169. Bergman p. 219
says, in Dalarne the witches rarely come to church : it is really a
sheaf of straw or a swine-trough that occupies their place, only
no one is the wiser but they of the Blakulla sisterhood. I do

1 It is chiefly in Sweden that even innocent children, hoys as well as girls,
are drawn into the weh of sorcery. The devil requires every witch to hring some
children with her ; she wakes them ont of sleep with the words 1 Devil's brat, come
to the feast ! ' »tt# them on the roof till her number is full, then carries them through
the air to the Fiend, who asks them if they will serve him, and writes them down
in his book. He endows them with wisdom, and they are called vis-g<U$ar, wise
lads. Conf. the children piped out of Hameln. In our Freising records are some
poor be j gar boys seduced by the devil.



Digitized by



MEANS OF EECOGNITION. 1079

not know if this pail or trough has to do with their bewitching
the milk, or with the Norse belief that giantesses, ellekoner
and huldre- wives carry a trough on their backs (Faye 118.
MulL sagabibl. 1, 367. Molb. dial. lex. 98). Keisersberg in
Omeiss 36 c tells of a night-faring woman who sat down in a
dough-trough, anointed herself with oil, spoke magic words and
slipt away (?). So early as in Sn. 210 a we find among names of
sorceresses a Bakrauf, riven-backed, fissura dorsi. In Dan.
* ellekone bagtil huul som et deigtrug,' Thiele 4, 26. All these
resemblances are important. In the Appendix I quote a spell,
where the alb is thus addressed : ' with thy bach like a dough-
trough ! ' Both elf and witch are beautiful only in front, behind
they are disgustingly deformed, like Gurorysse p. 945, or dame
World in Conrad's poem. Out of the Maundy Thursday egg,
when hatched, comes a fowl of gay plumage, which changes
colour every year: take such an egg with you to church on
Easter Sunday morning, and in sunshine you can tell all the
women who belong to the devil ; but they smell it out, and try
to crush the egg in your pocket, so you must bo careful to carry
it in a little box, for if they succeed in crushing it, your heart
will be broken too. Tobler 102* informs us of the Swiss super-
stition : 1 weme ma n' am Sonntig vor sonna nufgang e nubbliitt-
lets chlee (clover) ino schue ina timed, ond mit dem schue i d'chi-
lacha god (goes to church), so sieht ma's, wenn e hax d'inen ist:
die wo bonder for sitzid (sit hind foremost) sond hiixa.' Also,
whoever at Christmas matins stands on a footstool of nine sorts
of wood, can tell all the witches in the congregation : they
all turn their backs to the altar. But the witches can see him
too, and woe to him if they get hold of him after service; he is a
dead man, unless he has provided himself with something to
tempt their cupidity, which he must keep throwing out bit by
bit (as in ancient legend the pursued scatter rings and gold
before the pursuing foe), and while they are picking it up, run
as fast as he can, till his home receives him. A parchm. MS. of
the 14th cent, at Vienna (Cod. bibl. graec. i9 / a bl. 183*) gives a
simpler recipe : ' wil du, daz di vnholden zu dir chomen, so nym
ein leffel an dem fassangtag, vnd stoz in in gesoten prein, vnd
behalt in also vntz in die drey metten in der Vasten (3 matins in
Lent), vnd trag den leffel in dy metten, so wird ez dir chunt, wor



Digitized by Google



1080



MAGIC



sew sint* Much the same in Mone's Ariz. 4, 310 : He that on
the first ' knopflein ' day shall pull the spoon out of the dough
unseen, and on the second and third day shall again put it in and
pull it out uuperceived, so that at length some dough from each
day sticks to it, and shall then take it to church with him on
Christmas day, will there sea all the witches facing the wrong
way (or, upside down ?) ; but he must get home before the bene-
diction is pronounced, or it may cost him his life. It is only upon
going to church that any of these recognitions can take place ;
but they seem also to depend on your being the first to see, as in
meeting a wolf or basilisk. Another means of recognising a
witch is, that when you look into her eyes, you see your image
reflected upside down. 1 Running at the eyes is a mark of old
witches, Sup. I, 787 (see Suppl.).

One thing that in our tales of witches has dropt into the rear,
their eating men's hearts out of tlieir bodies, stands in the fore-
front of the more primitive Servian way of thinking. Vuk has a
song no. 363, in which a shepherd boy, whom his sister cannot
wake, cries in his sleep : * veshtitse su me iz-yele, maika mi srtse
vadila, strina yoi luchem svetlila,' witches have eaten me out,
mother took my heart, cousin lighted her with a torch. Fortis
cap. 8 relates, how two witches took a young man's heart out in
his sleep, and began to fry it ; a priest had looked on without
being able to hinder, and the spell was not broken till the youth
awoke; then, when tho priest approached the witches, they
anointed themselves out of a mug, and fled. He took the heart
half-cooked off the fire, and bade the youth gulp it down quick,
by doing which he was completely restored. To me this Servian
witch, making her appearance at Shrovetide and cutting open
people's breasts, looks uncommonly like our periodical Berhta,
who cuts open the lazy workman's body and stuffs it with diopped
straw, p. 273 ; out of the goddess was made the hideous bugbear.
In many villages, we are told, there are wicked wives that have
a white liver, whose husbands waste away and die. Passages in
the Codes prove that the same delusion prevailed among the
ancient Germans: Lex. Sal. 67, 'si stria hominem comederU,'
and what was quoted p. 1068 from the Lex Roth. 379 and the

1 Pliny 7, 2 notices a similar test for magicians : ' in altero ocnlo geminam
pupillam, in altero equi effigiem.' Conf. the people possessed by holden, p. 1074.



Digitized by Google



HEART-EATING



1081



Capit. de parte Sax. 5. Also the Indie, paganiarum : ' quod
f erninae possint corda hominum tollere juxta paganos ; ' and Bur-
chard : ' ut eredas, te januis clausis exire posse, et homines inter-
ficere et de coctis carnibus eorum vos comedere, et in loco cordis
eorum stramen aut lignum aut aliquod hujusmodi ponere, et
comes tis iterum vivos facere et inducias vivendi dare.' Notker's
Cap. 105, speaking of ambrones and anthropophagi (man-ezon),
adds: 'also man chit, taz ouh hdzessa hier im lands tuen. n The
tenth, the eleventh century had not given up the heathen notion,
nay, it lingers later still. It lies at the root of Diomed's words in
Herbort 9318: 'si hut min heme mit ir . . . ich haunihtin dem
libe, da min herze soldo wesen, da trage ich eine lihte vesen, ein
stro, oder einen wisch ; ' only here it is not an old witch, but his
lady-love that has run away with his heart, in which sense lovers
in all ages talk of losing their hearts. 8 The poem given p. 1048
speaks of the nnholde striding over a man, cutting his heart
out, and stuffing straw in, and his still remaining alive. Says
Berthold (Cod. pal. 35 fol. 28*) : ' pfei ! gelawbestu, das du
ainem man sein herz auss seinem leib nemest, nnd im ain stro hin
wider stossest ? 1 So in the North they speak of a fern, mann-
(etta (not a masc. mann-a3tti), and the word is even used for male
magicians : ' troll ok mannoetta, 1 Fornm. sog. 3, 214. A Polish
story in Woycicki makes the witch pull the heart out and put a
hare's heart in its place. Child-devouring ' striges ' in Alt d. bl.
1, 125. Our present fairy-tales represent the witch as a wood-
wife, who feeds and fattens children for her own consumption
(KM. no. 15) ; if they escape, she goes after them in league-
boots (nos. 51. 56. 113). Grimly the witch in tho tale of Frau
Trude throws a girl into the fire as a log of wood, and snugly
warms herself thereby. That the Romans believed in witches
consuming particular parts of a man who still lived on, is proved
by the following passages. Petronius cap. 134: 'quae striges
comederunt nervos tuos ? ' cap. 63 : ' strigae puerum involaverunt,

1 To tins he appends his well-known statement as to the Weletabi or Wilxe,
who were accused of eating their aged parents, RA. 488. That the national name
Volot, Vtlet passed into that of giant, hence ogre (as in the analogous rases on p.
527), Schafarik has ably expounded in his Slav. stud. 1, 877 ; but he had no business
to mix up (1, 882) our Welisungs (supra p. 371) with those Wilzen.

• 'Rubacuori, che il cor m'avete tolto ; del petto mio cavasti il cuore,' Tom-
maseo's Canti pop. 1, 88—90.



Digitized by Google



1082



MAGIC



et supposuerunt stramentum.' Plautus in Pseud, iii. 2, 31 : 'sed
strigibus vivis convisis intestina quae exedint* The Atellanic
ghost, the manducus, from mandere, manducare, is a munching
voracious bogie (butz p. 507), a bugbear to children. Ma*ca p.
1045, Ital. mascliera, may be referred to macher, mascher, or
masticaro, and the witch is called mask because she consumes
children. The Indian sorceresses also try to get human flesh
to eat, Lomad. 2, 62 (see Suppl.).

Equally ancient is the opinion that the spirit passes out of a
sleeping witch in butterfly shape. Souls in general were likened
to butterflies, p. 829 ; to the Slovens vezha is will o' wisp, but-
terfly and witch. The alp appears as a butterfly or moth, pha-
laena (nacht-toggeli, Staid. 1, 287), as a devil's beast p. 1029; the
witches' holden and elves are butterflies. But our native legend
speaks of other animals too, that issue from the mouths of
sleepers. King Gunthram, spent with toil, had gone to sleep on
a faithful follower's lap : then the henchman sees a little beast
like a snake run out of his lord's mouth, and make its way to a
streamlet, which it cannot step over. He lays his sword across
the water, the beast runs over it, and goes into a hill on the other
side. After some time it returns the same way into the sleeper,
who presently wakes up, and relates how in a dream he had
crossed an iron bridge and gone into a mountain filled with gold
(Aimoin 3, 3. Paul. Diac. 3, 34, whence Sigebert in Pertz 8,
319). Later writers tell of a sleeping landsknecht, and how a
weasel came running out of him, Deut. sag. no. 455. But in
more recent accounts it is applied to devil's brides, out of whose
mouth runs a cat or a red amuse, while the rest of the body lies
fixed in slumber (ibid. nos. 247— 9). 1 A miller, cutting firewood
in the Black Forest, fell asleep over the work, and his man saw a
mouse creep out of him and run away; everybody searched, but
could not find it, and the miller never awoke. Is all this con-
nected with the witches' mouse-making p. 1090, and the narrow
thread-bridge to be crossed by the soul on its way to the under
world p. 834 ? It is stated, exactly as with the Servians, that
if you turn the sleeper's body round, the beast on returning

1 ' For the moxue that runneth out (« matrix) lay a sword across the stream,'
Ettner's Hebamme p. l'Ji. In Fischart's Plays no. 216 : 1 there runs a white mouse
up the wall.'



Digitized by Google



FORMS OF EXIT. BROOMSTICK.



1083



cannot find its way in, and death ensues, Sup. I, 650. That state
of internal ecstasy, in which the body lies in a rigid sleep, our
old speech designates by irprottan (raptus), i.e. tranced. 1 But
ON. myth has already acquainted us with the greatest of all
possible examples: 'OSinn skipti homum (changed his shape),
la ba bukrinn sem soBnn e$a dauSr, enn hann var (A fugl e$a dyr,
fiskr e$a ormr, ok fdr a einni svipstund a fiarlseg lond, at sin urn
erindum e$r annara manna/ Yngl. s. cap. 7; his body lay asleep
or dead, and he as bird, beast, fish or snake, fared in a twinkling
to far-lying lands (see Sup pi.).

Again, the Servian starting-spell, ' ni o trn ni o grm, vetch na
pometno guvno ! 9 (not against thorn nor against oak, but to
swept barnfloor), agrees with German ones. Usually the word
is : 1 auf und davon ! hui oben hinaus und nirgend an 1 9 out on
high, and (strike) against nothing ; or ' wol aus und an, stoss
nirgend an I 9 or ' fahr hin, nicht zu hoch, nicht zu nieder ! 9 and
in England : ' tout, tout, throughout and about ! ' But if the
witch is pursuing people : ' before me day, behind me night ! '
Dan. ' lyst foran, og morkt bag ! 9 A Norse magician took a
goatskin, wrapt it round his head, and spoke : ' verffi J>oka, ok
ver&i 8hripi, ok undr mikil ollum J>eim sem eptir )>er scekja ! ' be
there mist and magic and much wonder to all that seek after
thee, Nialss. cap. 12. A formula used by Fr. magicians on
mounting the stick is given, but not completely, by Boguet p.
Ill: ' bus ton blanc, boston noir, etc.* Of Indian sorceresses we
are likewise told, that they repeat a formula for flight : Kalaratri
said it and immediately, with her disciples and the cow-stall on
whose roof she stood, she flew aloft and along the path of cloud,
whither she would ; a man, having overheard her, made use of
the same spell to go after her (Somad. 2, 58-9), exactly as in our
tales of witches men get acquainted with their salves and spells,
and pursue them (see Suppl.).

Where is the first mention of stick and broom riding to bo
found ? Actually I can only produco a tolerably old authority
for riding on reeds and rushes, and even these turn into real
horses. Guilielm. Alvernus, p. 1064 : 1 Si vero quaeritur de
equo quern ad veetigationes suas facere se creduut malefici, credunt,

1 The hinbrUUn (ecstasis) of sorceresses, Ettu. Hebamme p. 226. Martin von
Amberg : ' die henpretigen, 1 the entranced.



Digitized by Google



1084



MAGIC.



inquam, facere de canna per characteres nefandos et scripturas
quas in ea inscribunt et impingunt; dico in hoc, quia non est
possibile malignis spiritibus de canna verum equum facere vel
formare, nequo cannam ipsam ad hanc ludificationem eligunt,
quia ipsa aptior sit ut transfiguretur in equum, vel ex ilia generetur
equus, quam multae aliae materiae. Forsitan autem propter
planitiem superficiei et facilitatem habendi eain alicui videatur ad
hoc praeelecta. ... Sic forsan hac de causa ludificationem istam
efficere in canna sola et non alio ligno permittuntur maligni
spiritus, ut facilitas et vanitas eorum per cannam hoininibus
insinuetur. ... Si quis autem dicat, quia canna et calamus babi-
tationes interdum malignorum spirituum sunt 1 . . . ego non im-
probo.' — More intelligible is the Irish tale of the rushes and corn-
stalks that turn into horses the moment you bestride them, Ir.
elfenmar. 101. 215. Of such a horse, after the first time, you
need only lift the bridle and shake it when you want him, and
he comes directly (Sup. H, cap. 31. Spell xvi.). In Hartlieb
(Sup. H, cap. 32) the unholden are represented riding on rakes
and oven-forks, in the older Poem given at p. 1048 on brooms,
delisen, oven-sticks and calves, in the Ackermann aus Bohmen
p. 8 on crutches and goats, but in the Tkadlezek p. 27 on distaffs
(kuzly). Dobrowsky in Slavin p. 407 mentions the Bohem.
summons ' stare baby, na pometlo ! 9 old wives, on to your stove-
broom. — Of more importance is what we find in the story of
Thorsteinn boearmagn, which Miiller 3, 251 assigns to the 15th
century : As the hero lay hid in the cane-brake, he heard a
boy call into the hill, 1 Mother, hand me out crook-staff and band-
gloves, I wish to go the magic ride (gand-rer5, p. 1054), there is
wedding in the world below'; and immediately the krokstafr was
handed out of the hill, the boy mounted it, drew the gloves on,
and rode as children do. Thorsteinn went up to the hill, and
shouted the same words : out came both staff and gloves, he
mounted, and rode after the boy. Coming to a river, they
plunged in, and rode to a castle on a rock, where many people
sat at table, all drinking wine out of silver goblets ; on a golden

i 1 Mennige narrinnen (many a she ■ fool) tied ock mennigen dor (fool) bindet de
duvel up $in ror (the d. ties on to his cane),' Narragonia 14 b (nothing like it in
Brant). Does it mean devil's horses ? And does that explain Walther's 4 ttz im
(the black book) leset siniu ror ' (33, 8) ? A Servian proverb says : ' lasno ye
dyabolu u ritu svirati,' 'tis easy piping on the devil's reed.



igitized by Google



BROOMSTICK. DISLIKE OF BELLS.



1085



throne were the king and queen. Thorsteinn, whom his staff had
made invisible, ventured to seize a costly ring and a cloth,
"but in doing so he lost the stick, was seen by all, and pursued.
Happily his invisible fellow-traveller came by on the other stick,
Thorsteinn mounted it as well, and they both escaped (Fornm.
Bog. 3, 176 — 8). If the poem has not the peculiar stamp of
Norse fable, it teaches none the less what notions were attached
to these enchanted rides in the 14th or loth century : no devil
shews his face in it. Sticks and staves however seem to be later
expedients of witchery : neither night-wives nor Furious Host
nor valkyrs need any apparatus for traversing the air; night-
wives had already calves and goats attributed to them, p. 1058.
There is a very curious phrase, 1 to wake a hedge-stick' which
has to become a he-goat and fetch the loved one to her lover ;
originally perhaps no other sticks wero meant but such as, on
bestriding, immediately turned into beasts (see Suppl.).

As witches slip through keyholes and cracks in the door, p. 1074,
they are able to squeeze themselves into the narrowest space,
even betwixt wood and bark (conf. Suppl. on p. 653). Thus in
H. Sachs ii. 4, 10 the devil first peels the hazel-rod on which
he hands the old woman the stipulated shoes, for fear she might
creep to him 'twixt wood and bark. In Iw. 1208 the utmost
secresy is expressed by : ' sam daz holz under der rinden, alsam
sit ir verborgen.' When a Lithuanian convert began to bark tho
trees in a holy wood, he said : ' Vos me meis anseribus gallisque
spoliastis, proinde et ego nudas vos (sc. arbores) faciam. Crede-
bat enim deos rei suae familiari perniciosos intra arbores et cortices
latere,* Tho Swed. song makes enchanting minstrels charm the
bark off the tree, the babe out of the mother, the hind from the
forest, the eye from out the socket (Arvidsson 2, 311-2-4-7).

Again, the witches' dislike of bells is heathenish : the elves
have it, and the giants, p. 459. Pious prayer and ringing of bells
put their plans out: they call the bells 'yelping dogs.' In a
Swed. folktale (Odm. Bahusl. beskrifn. p. 228) an old heathen
crone, on hearing the sound of the christian bell from Tegneby,
exclaims in contempt : 1 nu ma tro, Rulla pa Rallehed har fadt
bjalra,' R. the christian church has got a tinkler. As yet there
is no thought of witchery. But it is told of Swed. witches too,
that they scrape the bells loose up in the belfry : in their airy



Digitized by Google



1086



MAGIC.



flight when they como to a steeple, .they set the kidnapped
children (p. 1078) down on the church-roof, who are then mere
jackdaws to look at ; in the meantime they scrape the bell loose,
and lug it away, and afterwards let the metal drop through the
clouds, crying : f never let my soul draw near to God, any more
than this metal will be a bell again ! ' (see Suppl.).

The raising of hailstorms and spoiling of crops by magic reaches
back to the remotest antiquity of almost every nation. As
benignant gods make the fruits to thrive, as air-riding valkyrs
from the manes of their steeds let life-giving dew trickle down on
the plain (p. 421) ; so baneful beings of magic power strive to
annihilate all that is green. The Greek Eumenides (a word that
even our oldest glosses translate by hazasa) spoil the crops with
their slaver, and the fruit with hailstones, Aesch. Eum. 753-68-77-
95. The Roman Twelve Tables imposed a penalty on him ' qui
fruges excantassit . . . sive . . . alienam segetem pellexerit.' 1 In
the 8-9th cent. f weather-making 1 was alleged against sorcerers
rather than sorceresses ; the passages given at p. 688 name only
tempestarii, not tempestariae. So in Ratherius p. 626 : 1 contra
eos qui dicunt quod homo malus vel diabolus 8 tempestatem faciat,
lapides grandinum spergat, agros* devastet, fulgura mittat, etc.
Those magicians in Burchard are called immissores tempestatum,
Sup. C, 10, 8; p. 194\ Yet in the North, ThorgerSr and Irpa,
who stir up storm and tempest, are women (p. 637), and the salt-
grinders Fenja and Menja giantesses ; their ship is like the mist-
ship of the clouds. How magicians set about their weather-
making, is nowhere specified. In much later authorities we find
them using a tub or a pitcher, p. 593. In Ls. 2, 314 Master
Irreganc says (G. Abent. 3, 90) :

und kasm ein wann (tub) in min hant,

der hagel slueg (hail would beat) uber allez lant.

In the Apollon. von Tyrland (9183. 10970. 11010 seq.) are
mentioned pitchers, the emptying of which was followed by
showers and hail : one jug engendered lightnings and thunder-
bolts, another hail and shower, a third one rain and nipping

1 'Rudia adhuc antiquitaa credebat et attrahi imbrea cantibua, et repelli,'
Seneca Nut. qnaest. 4, 7.

J The devil brings on gales and thunderetorma, p. 1000 ; bo doea the giant, p. 636.



Digitized by Google



RAISING OF STORMS.



1037



winds. A woodcut in Keisersberg's Omeiss (ed. 1516, 36 b ) por-
trays three naked unholden sitting on footstools, distaffs and
horses' heads, holding up pots, out of which shower and storm
mount up. A passage in the Budlieb is worth quoting: the
repenting culprit begs (6, 48),

post triduum corpus tollatis ut ipsum
et comburatis, in aquam cineres jaciatis,
nejubar abscondat sol, aut aer neget imbrem,
ne per me grando dicatur laedere mundo.

Let her body be taken off the gallows and burnt, and the
ashes be strown on water, lest, being scattered in air, it should
breed clouds, drought and hail. Just so the devil's ashes are
strown to awaken storm and tempest, p. 1071-3; the Chronicon
S. Bertini states that Richilde, before her fight with Robert the
Frisian, threw dust in the air against the Frisians with formulas
of imprecation, but it fell back on her own head in token of
her speedy overthrow. She meant, like ThorgerSr and Irpa, to
destroy the enemy by tempest. Justinger's Chron. of Bern p.
205 relates how a woman, secretly sent for by a Count of Kyburg,
who promised not to betray her, stood on the battlements of his
castle, and uttering hidden words, raised clouds, rain and storm,
which scattered his foes (a.d. 1382). The witches of Norway still
proceed exactly as the Vinlanders were said to do (p. 640) : they
tie up wind and foul weather in a bag, and at the proper moment
undo the knots, exclaiming 1 wind, in the devil's name ! ' then
a storm rushes out, lays waste the land, and overturns ships at
sea. By Hartlieb's account (Sup. H, cap. 34), old women sacri-
fice to devils, that they may make hail and shower. According to
German records of the 16-17 cent., witches assemble in crowds
by waterbrooks or lakes, and flog the water with rods, till a fog
rises, which gradually thickens into black clouds ; on tiiese clouds
tftey are borne up, and then guide them toward the spots to
which they mean mischief. They also place magic pots in the
water, and stir them round. 1 The ivindsack is mentioned a few
times (Voigt 131). They make blue lights trickle into the water,
throw flinlstones into the air, or trundle barrels whose bursting
begets tempest. They gather oak-leaves in a man's shirt, and

1 Conf. p. 596-7 on storm-raiaing by throwing stones and pouring out water.



Digitized by Google



1088



MAGIC.



when it is full, hang it on a tree : a wind springs up directly,
that drives all rain away, and keeps the weather fine. Out of a
small piece of cloud a witch made a deal of bad weather (Arx
Buchsgau p. 103). A violent thunderstorm lasted so long, that
a huntsman on the highway loaded his gun with a consecrated
bullet, and shot it off into the middle of the blackest cloud ; out
of it (as out of the ship, p. 638) a naked female fell dead to the
ground, and the storm blew over in a moment (Mone's Anz. 4,
309). In Carinthia the people shoot at storm-clouds, to scare
away the evil spirits that hold counsel in them. The parson
being credited with power to charm the weather, the women
bring apronfuls of hailstones into his house: 'there, that's his
rightful tithe of the weather, as he did not see good to keep it
away'; Sartori's Journ. in Austria 2, 153-4. In some parts of
France whole families are suspected of having the hereditary
power to raise a storm : they meet on the lake-side, not less
than three at a time, and lash the water up with horrible cries ;
this is done at night before sunrise, and a violent storm is the
immediate consequence, Mem. de Tacad. celt. 2, 206-7. Such
people are called meneurs des nuees, Mem. des antiq. 1, 244. In
Germany witches were commonly called, by way of insult, wetter-
macherin, wetterhexe, wetterkatze, donnerkatze, nebelhexe, strahU
hexe, blitzhexe, zessenmacherin (from the old zessa, storm), and
earlier, wolkengiisse, cloud-gushes, Ms. 2, 140 b . The OHG.
Wolchandrut, a woman's name in Trad. Fuld. 2, 101, need have
had none but perfectly innocent associations : the valkyr either
rides in the clouds or sprinkles from them fertilizing dew ; so
even the strewing of ashes on the field may originally have in-
creased their fertility. Occasionally feldfrau and feldspinnerin
are used of a witch ; is it because she passes over field and
meadow, or spins magic threads? (conf. p. 1099). Who knows
but that the popular saying, when it snows, ' the old wives are
shaking their coats out 9 (de aule wiver schiiddet den pels ut,
Strodtm. p. 336), is, properly understood, identical with that
on p. 268 : * dame Eolle is making her bed' ? Goddess, valkyr,
witch : the regular gradation of such myths. To the Greeks
Zeus himself was still ve<f>e\rrfepkra, to the Serbs the vila gathers
clouds. In Scandinavia too, hail and hurricane proceed from
those half-goddesses Thorgerdr and Irpa, not as injurious to



Digitized by Googl



BEWITCHING OF CROPS. 1089



crops, but perilous to armies; 1 Sn. 175 makes a sorceress bear
the very name El, procella 2 (see Suppl.).

But sometimes the aim of sorcery is not so much to destroy
the produce, as to get possession of it, to carry it off the field,
either to one's own garner, or that of a favourite. 3 Even the
Romans speak of this : * satas alio traducere messes/ Virg. Eel.
8, 99 ; ' cantus vicinis fruges traducit ab agris/ Tibull. i. 8, 19.
People fancied, that when unholden walked through a vineyard
and shook the vines, the grapes camo out of the neighbour's plot
into theirs (Hartm. segenspr. 341). An old dalesman gave his
granddaughter a staff, and told her to stick it in the corn at a
certain spot in a field ; tho girl on her way was overtaken by a
shower, took refuge under an oak, and left the staff standing
there : when she got home, she found a great heap of oak-leaves
in her grandfather's loft (ibid. p. 342). We also hear of
vine-shoots being boiled in a pot, probably to spoil the vineyard.
The poison-herbs of witches boil and evaporate under the open
sky.

We are told of witches bathing naked in the sand* or in corn ;
I know not for what purpose; Superst. I, 519 speaks of rolling
naked in the flax. Three witches were seen going to a field of
rye, laying aside their garments, and bathing in the corn with
their hair hanging loose. When witnesses approached, two
vanished suddenly, leaving their clothes behind, tho third hud-
dled her smock on (Voigt 130 — 2). Has this to do with corn-
wives and rye-aunts p. 477 ?

Witches and sorcerers use various implements, of which for
the most part no exact description is given. Of the wand with
which the old magicians aro usually armed, I find no mention
in our tales, for when the wishing-rod is named, it is as a higher
and noble instrument ; yet tho staff or stick that witches are said

1 As the whirlwind ia ascribed to the devil (p. 1008) so it is to witches (Sap. I,
554. 648). Eilian 693 remarks, that it is also called varende wif, travelling woman,
i.e. air-riding sorceress ; conf. wind's bride p. 632, and 4 rushing like a wind's-bride
through the land,' Simplic. 2, 62.

5 Is she called solar bol y sun's bale, because she darkens the sun with her
storm-cloud ? Or may we go farther back to heathen times, and impute to the
witch, as to the wolf, a swallowing of sun and moon ? To me it looks the more
likely from the name hvel-svelg himin*, swallower of heaven's wheel.

* Conf. the convenient corn-dragon (p. 1019) and home-sprite.

* Fowls are said to 4 bathe in sand * : Lith. kutenas' wiaztos ziegzdrosa ; Lett,
perrinatees ; Pol. kury sie, w piasku k%pia, ; Serv. leprshatise.



Digitized by Google



1090



MAGIC.



to ride may originally have been carried in the hand. I also
find the stick spoken of as the wizard's third leg (Clone's Anz. 7,
426). In Bavarian records the so-called making of mice or pigs
(fackel for ferkel) is often mentioned : the witch has a four-
legged implement, dark-yellow, hard and stiff; this she holds
under a figure of a mouse or pig that she has made oat of a
napkin, and says ' Run away, and come back to me!' the figure
becomes a live animal, and runs away ; probably to fetch her
something of other people's. Hence' a witch is called maus-
schlclgerin, mouse-beater, and a wizard mausschlagel. In North
German trials the expression is muse-maker, and the process is
different: the witch boils magic herbs, then cries, 'Mouse,
mouse, come out in devil's name ! ' and the beasts come jump-
ing out of the pot (Laffert's Relat. crim. p. 57-9). It reminds
one of the destructive mice created by Apollo Smintheus in his
wrath, and the devastations of lemings in Lapland ; so that this
plague may with perfect right take its place with the desolating
storm and hail, although our witch-trials say hardly anything of
the damage done by the magic beasts (conf. Klausen's Aeneas
p. 73—5). One Nethl. story in Wolf no. 401 relates how a
young girl flung two pellets of earth one after the other, and in
a moment the whole field swarmed with mice. Swedish tradition
tells of a bjaraan or bare, which (says Ihre, dial. lex. 18') was a
milking-pail made by tying together nine sorts of stolen weaver's
knots. You let three drops of blood fall into it out of your
little finger, and said :

pa jorden (on earth) skal tu for mig springa,
i Blakulla skal jag for thig brinna !

The name comes from the vessel conveying (bara) milk and other
things to the houses of the devil-worshippers. Hulphers (Fierde
saml. om Angermanland. Vesteras 1780, p. 310) describes it as
a round ball made of rags, tow and juniper, etc., and used in
several magic tricks : it ran out and brought things in. It starts
off the moment the sender cuts his left little finger and lets the
blood fail on it :

smor och ost (butter and cheese) skal du mig bringa,
och derfor (skal jag) i helfvetet brinna (in hell-fire burn) !



Digitized by Googl



APPARATUS : MICE, WAX FIGURES. 1091

Who can help thinking of Goethe's Magician's Apprentice with
his water-fetching broom ?

Of the same kind seems to have been the Icelandic snackr,
which commonly means a weaver's spool. It is made, says
Biorn, of a dead man's rib in the shape of a snake, and wrapt in
gray wool ; it sucks at the witch's breast, after which it can suck
other people's cattle dry, and bring their milk home 1 (see
Suppl.).

Of wider diffusion is sorcery with the sieve, which I shall speak
of by and by ; and with wax figures, to which if you did anything
while uttering secret words, it took effect on absent persons. The
wax figure (atzmann) was either hung up in the air, plunged in
water, fomented at the fire, or stabbed with needles and buried
under the door-sill : the person aimed at feels all the hurts in-
flicted on the figure (Sup. G, line 28 ; H, cap. 79) .* In Aw. 2, 55
a travelling student says :

Mit wunderlichen sachen

ler ich sie (I teach her) denne machen

von wahs einen kobolt,

wil sie daz er ir werde holt (he grow kind to her),
und touf ez s in den brunnen,
und leg in an die sunnen ;

but counter-agencies make the danger recoil on the conjuror
himself. 4 Magic figures can also be baked of dough or lime, and

1 The Lapps have a magic vessel quobdat (Leem p. 421 spells govdes), cat oat
of fir, piue or birch with the grain running from right to left ; it is open under-
neath, but covered with a akin at the top. The Lapl. adepts drum on this skin
with a hammer.

2 Conf. Dsmonomanie, Fischart's transl., Strasb. 1591 fol. p.143-4.

* I.e. tauche es, dip it into the fountain ; if we took it as tau/e, baptize, we
should have to read 1 in dem brunnen.'

4 Schimpf und ernst cap. 272 tells the following story : A certain man went to
Rome, for to seek S. Peter and S. Paul ; and when he was gone, his wife loved
another, that was what men call a scholar-errant, and did covet her to wife. The
woman saith, 1 my good man is departed unto Borne, were he dead, or couldst thou
take away his life, then would I have thee of all men.' He said, ' yea truly I can
take his life ; ' and buyoth wax about six pound, and maketh an image thereof.
Now when the good man was come to Rome into the city, thero came one to him
and spake : ' O thou son of death, what goest thou up and down? If none help
thee, this day shall Bee thee alive and dead.* The man asked, 4 how should that
be ? ' And he said, 1 come to my house, and I will shew it thee.' And having
brought him home, he prepared for him a waterbath, and set him therein, and gave
him a mirror, saying, ' look thou therein,' and sat beside him, reading in a bock,
and spake unto him, « behold in the glass, what seest thou therein ? ' The man in
the bath said, * I see one in mine house, that tetteth up a waxen image on the wall,

VOL. UI. O



Digitized by Google



1092



MAGIC



wrought out of metal, but wax made by the sacred bee (p. 696)
appears the most appropriate ; their manufacture is a mimicry of
divine creation (p. 570), but it succeeds only up to a certain
point. In Pulci's Morgante 21, 73 a witch possesses an image
made of the pure wax of young bees (delle prime api), and
having every limb except one rib : 1 the witch's own vitality is
bound up with the figure, and when Malagigi melts it at a slow
fire, she dwindles away. That such figures were sometimes
baptized, is shewn by a sermon of Berthold's (Cod. pal. 35 fol.
27 b ) : 1 so nimpt diu her und tauft ein wacks, diu ein holz, din ein
t6tenpein (dead man's bone) , allez daz sie domit bezouber ; ' 9 and
this proves the connexion of magical appliances with superstitious
healing appliances. As the sick and the restored used to conse-
crate and hang up in churches an image or a limb of wax, so by
images the witch maimed and killed. No doubt this kind of
conjuring goes back to the oldest times; we find it in Ovid,
Amor. iii. 7, 29 :

Sagave punicea defixit nomina cera,
et medium tenues in jecur egit acus ?

and gocth and taketh bis crossbow, and having bent it, will $hoot at the image'
Then said the other, * as thou lovest thy life, duck thee under the water when he
shall shoot.' And the man did so. And again he read in the book, and spake
' behold, what seest thou ? ' The man said, * I see that he hath missed, and is ex-
ceeding sorry, and my wife with him ; the scholar-errant Betteth to, and will shoot
the second time, and goeth the half way toward.' 4 Duck thee when he shall shoot.'
And he ducked. Saith the other, ' look, what seest thou ? ' The man said, * I see
that he hath missed, and is sore troubled, and speak eth to the woman, If now I
miss the third time, I am [a man] of death ; and setteth to, and aimeth at the
figure very near, that he may not miss.' Then spake he that read in the book,
1 duck thee ! ' And the man ducked from the shot. And he said, ' look up, what
seest thou ? ' 1 1 see that he hath missed, and the arrow it gone into him, and if
dead, and my wife bestoweth him in the basement below.' Then said he, 4 arise now,
and go thy way.' And the man would have given him much, but he would take no-
thing, and said, ' pray Qod for me.' When the citizen was come home again, and
his wife would have kindly received him, he would take no pity on her, but sent to
bid her friends, and spake to them, what manner of wife thoy had given him, and
shewed them everything, how she had borne herself. The woman steadfastly
denied it ; then led he the friends to the place where she had dug him in, and
dug him out again. And the people took the woman, and burned her, the which
was her just reward. — The story comes from the Gesta Bom. (ed. Keller cap. 1W; ,
transl. ed. Keller p. 160) ; but ono ought to compare the fresh story from Finniah
Lapland in Afzelius 1, 48.

1 As the rib serves for further creation (p. 562), and for making miraculooJ
apparatus (pp. 907. 1091), imperfect creation is destitute of it.

3 Quidam (Judaeorum) ad similitudinem episcopi (Eberhardi Treverensis, in
11th oent.) ceream imaginem lycnis interpositam facientes, clericum ut earn tef*
tizaret pecunia corruperunt, quam ipso sabbato accenderunt ; qua jam ex parte
media consumpta, episcopus coepit graviter infirmari, et obiit (Hist. Trev.).



WAX FIGURE. WEREWOLF.



1093



Compare Horace, Epod. 17, 76: 'raovere cereas imagines/
Theocritus 2, 28 has the wax-melting very plainly : <w<? tovtov rbv
tcapov eye* avv Saifiovt, rd/co), a>? raKoid' vir t I/)wto9, but not that
it was an image. In Virgil, Eel. 8, 74 seq., a magic figure
(terque haec altaria circum effigiem duco) seems to be made of
lime and wax (see Suppl.).

An ancient custom, very similar to this of hanging up and
thawing the atzmann, was to cut out the earth or turf on which
had rested the foot of one whom you wish to destroy. This erd-
schnitt as Vintler calls it (Sup. G, 1. 92) is hung in the chimney,
and as it begins to wither or dry up, the man too shall waste
away (I, 524. 556). It was already known to Burchard (C, p.
200»). To fetch up a comrade from a foreign land, you boil his
stockings ; or you put his shoes in a new pot, and with it draw
water against the current, then boil the shoes in the pot four days
long ; when they are past, he will come, says Hessian superstition
(see Suppl.). You can lame a horse by driving a nail into his
recent footprint, and discover a thief by putting tinder in his (I,
978). Pliny 28, 20 says : 'vestigium equi excussum ungula (ut
solet plerumque) si quis collectum reponat, singultus remedium
esse recordantibus quonam loco id reposuerint ; 1 a cure for hic-
cough if you remember where you put it.

Our magicians have also, in common with those of Greece and
Rome, the power of assuming an animal shape (in itself a divine
'attribute, p. 326) : the men prefer changing into a wolf or hawk,
the women into a cat or swan ; to translate it into the language
of our heathen time, they addict themselves to the service of
Wuotan, of Frouwa. These metamorphoses are either voluntary
or compulsory : the higher being in his might puts on the animal
shape that suits him, or he dooms a man to wear it in punish-
ment or vengeance. In the stories it is often a mother-in-law or
stepmother that transforms children, ON. stiupmo&ur shop, Forn-
ald. sog. 1, 31. 58.

Herodotus 4, 105 says of the Neuri, that among Scythians and
Greeks settled in Scythia they pass for magicians (yoi/Te?), be-
cause once a year every Neurian becomes a wolf for a few days,
and then resumes the human form (<»<? ereo? etcdaTov dira^ tcov
Nevp&v €Kaaro<t Xvico? yCverat, rjfiepa^ 6\iyas, koX avri<i oiriaca is
t<ovto KariaTarai), Similar accounts are in Pliny 8, 34. Pomp.



Digitized by Google



1004



MAGIC.



Mela 2, 1. Augustine Civ. Dei 18, 17: 'his ego saepe lupum
fieri et se condere silvis Moerin . . . vidi/ Virg. Eel. 8, 97.
A man distinguished by this gift or malady was called
XvKavOpatnros} a word-formation to which the AS. werewulf
(Leges Canuti, Schmid 1, 148), Engl, werewolf, exactly corre-
sponds; Goth, vairavulfs? OHG. werawolf? MHG. poets have
no werewolf. The ON. uses vargr alone (RA. 733. Reinh.
xxxvii), verulfr in Sn. 214 b is a sword's name, the Swed. Dan.
varulf varulv, seem formed on a Romance or German model. I
find werwolf first in Burchard (Sup. C, p. 198 c ) ; though Boniface
before him couples ' strigas et fictos lupos credere ' (Serm., in
Mart, et Dur. 9, 217). The Fr. loup-garou (warou in O. Fr.
poems) might seem a distortion of warulf ; garulf (Gorvase of
Tilb. writes gerulphus), but then the Breton dialect has also its
bleiz-garou, -garo (fr. bleiz, wolf), and den-vleiz, man-wolf (fr. den,
man), grek-vleiz (femme-loup) ; bisclaveret in Marie de France 1,
1 78 is apparently a corruption of bleizgarv, as the Norman garwal
is of guarwolf The Pol. wilkolak, wilkotek, Boh. wlkodlak,
strictly means wolf-haired, and suggests the hairy wood-sprite,
p. 480. The Serv. vukodlac signifies a vampire. From wilks
(wolf) the Letton forms wilkats (werewolf), Wilkascha radda ds.
1G44.

Our oldest native notions make the assumption of wolf-shape
depend on arraying oneself in a wolf-belt or wolf-shirt (ulfa-hamr),
as translation into a swan does on putting on the swan-shift or
swan-ring (p. 427-8). 3 One who wears a wolf-belt, ulfhamr, is
called in OHG. ivolfhetan, ON. ulfheffinn (the $ repres. an orig.
d) ; especially do raging berserkir become ulfhe<Tnir : * heir hoHSu
vargstakkar fyrir brynjur,' VatnsdcDla saga 3G. ' berserkir J?eir
varu kallaSir ulfhiedar (r. ulfheSnir)/ Grettissaga 32*. We also
find a man's name Ulfheftinn, and OHG. Wolfhetan, MB. 28, nos.

1 Among the ^sopian Fables ia a merry gest (Cor. 425. Fur. 423) : A thief
pretends to his host, that when he has yawned three times, he becomes a werewolf
(dray ofo x<w>"?0w rpeix /SoXdt, ylvofxai X1V01 ivdiuv dpdpunrovs) ; the timid host runs
away, and the rogue gets possession of his garment. Petronius in Sat. 62 mentions
a peculiar method of metamorphosis: ' Hie circumminxit vestimenta sua, et subito
hiput factus est ; vestimenta lapidea facta sunt.' Conf. cap. 57 : ' sicircumminxero
ilium, nesciet qua fugiat.'

1 The girdle was an essential article of dress, and early ages ascribe to it other
magic influences : e.g. Th6r's divine strength lay in his girdle (megingidrK, fern.),
8n. 2G.



Digitized by Google



WEREWOLF.



1095



52. 246. Apart from wolves, we have biarnheSinn, geitheSinn,
i.e. dressed in a bearskin, goatskin; as a proper name, both
Biarnhed'inn, Landn. 45, and a simple He&inn, ancestor of the
Hiaffningar, AS. Heodeningas fr. Heden or Heoden. The vowel
is therefore e (not e), and we must suppose a lost verb OHG.
hetan, hat, pi. hatum, Goth, hidan, had, hedum. Lye quotes a
' heden, casla/ meaning prob. casula, robe ; and an ON. geithe-
ffinn is supposed to be 'pallium e pelle caprina'; but I prefer
to take Wolfhetan as a participle. We see then, that the trans-
formation need not be for a magical purpose at all : any one that
puts on, or is conjured into, a wolf-shirt, will undergo metamor-
phosis, remain a wolf nine days, and only on the tenth be allowed
to return to human shape 1 ; some stories make him keep the
wolf-body for three, seven or nine years. With the appearance,
he acquires also the fierceness and howling, of the wolf: roaming
the woods, he rends to pieces everything that comes in his way. 2
Fornald. sog. 1, 50 speaks of a 1 liosta me?> ulfftandska/ striking
with wolfs glove, by which a person is turned into a bear, and
wears the animal form by day, the human at night. In a similar
way the notion of werewolves also gets mixed up with that of
outlaws who have fled to the woods. A notable instance is that
of Sigmund and Sinfiotli (ibid. 2, 130-1) : when they sleep, their
wolf-shirts hang beside them.

Werewolves thirst for youthful blood, and carry off children
and maidens with reckless audacity. Out of many stories in
Woycicki 1, 101—113. 152—8 I select only this : A witch
twisted her girdle together, and laid it on the threshold of a house
where there was a wedding ; when the newly married pair stepped

1 It is also believed, that every ninth day the seal (selr) doffs his fishy skin, and
is for one day a man (Thielo 3, 51). In medieval Germany the nine years' wolf was
supposed to give birth to addert, Ms. 2, 234 b ; to which may be compared Loki's
begetting the wolf Fenrir and the snake Ionnungandr (p. 246), and that gandr
again means wolf.

3 A married couple lived in poverty ; yet, to the man's astonishment, his wife
contrived to serve up meat at every meal, concealing for a long time how she
obtained it ; at length she promised to reveal the secret, only, while she did so, he
must not pronounce her name. They went together to the fields, where a flock of
sheep was grazing, the woman bent her steps toward it, and when they were come
near, she threw a ring over herself, and instantly became a werewolf, which fell upon
the flock, seized one sheep, and made off with it. The man stood petrified ; but
when he saw shepherd and dogs run after the wolf, and his wife in danger, he forgot
his promise, and cried ' ach Margareit I ' The wolf disappeared, and the woman
stood naked in the field (Hess. Folktale).



Digitized by Google



1096



MAGIC.



over it, the bride, bridegroom and six bridesmen were turned
into werewolves. They fled from the cottage, and for three years
Tan howling round the witch's house. At length the day of their
deliverance came. The witch brought a pelisse with the fur
turned outwards, and as soon as she covered a werewolf with it,
his human shape returned ; the covering reached over the bride-
groom's body, all but the tail, so he became a man again, but kept
the wolfs tail. Schafarik (Slow. st. 1, 167) observes, that in a
very marked degree these wolf-stories are native to Volhynia
and White Russia, and thence draws an argument for his opinion
that the Neuri were a Slavic race.

According to the French Lai de Melion pp. 49. 50, the man,
when undressed* must be touched with a magic ring: forthwith
he turns into a wolf, and runs after game. Marie de Fr. I, 182
makes a knight become a bisclaveret three days every week, and
run about naked in the wood; if the clothes he has laid aside
be removed, he has to remain a wolf. 8 Pluquet (Cont. pop. 15)
remarks, that he can only be delivered by being beaten with a key
till he bleeds.

The common belief among us is, that the transformation is
effected by tying a strap round the body ; this girth is only three
fingers broad, and is cut out of human skin. Such a werwolf is
to be distinguished from natural wolves by his truncated tail.
From the witch-records of Lorrain we learn, that when stalks of
grass were pulled up, blessed and thrown against a tree, wolves
sprang forth, and immediately fell upon the flock ; Remigius
pp. 152. 162 leaves it doubtful whether the men that threw the
grass themselves turned into wolves, but from p. 261 we can think
no otherwise. Bodin's Dcemonomanie (Fischart's transl. p. 120
seq.) has several werewolf stories. Rhenish and Westphalian
superstition makes men alone become wolves ; maids and matrons
change into an utterbock (uddered buck, hermaphrodite ? ) : an
uncanny old hag is called ' the cursed utterbock ! ' According to
a peculiar Danish superstition (K, 167), if a bride uses a certain
specified charm to secure painless labour, her sons become rdr-

1 Bnt he begs people to keep his clothes safe for him : 1 ma despoille me
gardez,' as in the Aesopian fable : teonai aov, Iva <pv\&Zr}% rd Ifidnd fiov.

8 I have not read the O.E. tale of William and the Werewolf in Hartsborne's
Anc. metr. tales.



Digitized by Google



WOLF. BEAR. CAT



1097



iilve, her daughters marer (nightmares). Thiele 1, 133 remarks,
that the werewolf goes in human shape by day, yet so that his
eyebrows grow together over the nose, 1 but at a certain time of
night he turns into a three-legged dog, and can only be set free
by some one calling him 'werewolf/ Burchard's account also
seems to make lycanthropy something innate to man (see Suppl.)

That a change of the human form into that of the bear should
also be familiar to Norse antiquity, is no surprising thing, as that
animal was considered rational (Reinh., app. on p. lvi), and held
in high esteem, p. 667. Finnbogi talks to him, and calls him
bessi, Finnb. saga p. 246. A Danish song makes the trans-
formation take place by tying an iron collar round one's neck,
DV. 1, 184. In Norway it is believed that the Laplanders turn
into bears : of a bear that is uncommonly daring and destructive
they say, 'this can't be any christian bear/ An old bear in
Ofoden's prastegjeld, who had killed six men and over sixty
horses, had the same reputation, and when at last he was slain,
a girdle is said to have been found on him (Sommerfelt Saltd.
priisteg. p. 84) .

Conversion into the cat has most of all to do with the works
and ways of home-sprites (pp. 503-9) : there is nowhere the
slightest hint of donning auy belt or shirt. It is a common
saying, that a cat of twenty years turns witch, and a witch of
a hundred turns cat again. Vintler (Sup. G, 1. 232) notices the
assumption of cat-shape. As was the case with night-wives
(p. 1060), examples occur in almost every witch- trial, and particu-
larly common is the story of the wounded cat, whom you after-
wards recognise in a bandaged woman. Cats meeting you are
of double meaning, Sup. I, 643. One should never hurt a strange
cat ; the witch might serve you out. A farmer took on to ail
from the day of his wedding : on that day he had shied a stone
at a cat that walked into his yard with a saddle on her. The
saddled cat is a kind of Puss-in-boots, KM. 3, 259. Wolf's
Wodana pp. 123. 131 has stories of magic cats. But the cat is
also to be spared because she was Frouwa's favorite beast
(p. 305) : if it rains on your wedding-day, they say in the Wette-
rau ' you have starved the cat/ and so offended the messenger or

1 Otherwise a mark of the witch or wizard who can set the alb on other men :
he comes out of their eyebrows in butterfly shape, Deut. sag. 1, 132.



1098



MAGIC.



»



handmaid of the love-goddess. Now night-wives and witches
apparently travel in the train of that divinity.

The goose too is a magic beast, and easily referable to the
nobler swan of older legend. A sportsman shot at some wild
geese and hit one, which fell into the bnshes ; when he came up
to the place, there sat a naked woman unhurt, whom he knew
very well, and who begged hard that he would not betray her,
but get some clothes sent her from her house. He threw her hi a
handkerchief to cover herself with, and sent the clothes (Mone'a
Anz. 6, 395) . Niclas von Wyle, in the Dedication to his translation
of Apuleius, tells us of a different case, which he had heard from
the lips of Michel von Pfullendorf, clerk to the Imp. treasury :
An innkeeper had through a woman's witcheries (gemecht, conf.
make = conjure, p. 1032) been a wild goose for more than a year,
and flown about with other such geese, till one day a goose that
he was quarrelling and snapping with, happened to tear from off
his neck the little kerchief in which the enchantment was knit up :
again therefore a swan-ring, except that the witch does not wear
it herself, but has changed an innocent man into the beast, just
as werewolves are by turns enchanters and enchanted. In
Kinderm. 193 white strips of cloth take the place of the swan-
shift.

As the raven stands on a par with the wolf, we may fairly
assume transformations of magicians into ravens, though I can
think of no example : trolds in Dan. songs often appear as ravens,
p. 993. Perhaps witches may be found turning into crows rather,
as we already hear of an oskmey (wish-maid, Vols. cap. 2) : 1 hun
bra a sik krdku ham, ok ftygr ; ' and Marpalie in Wolfdietrich doffa
her garments, claps her hands (p. 1026 n.) and turns into a crow
(see Suppl.).

If the cast-off clothing, human or animal, be removed (p. 427-9),
a re-assum p t ion of the former shape becomes impossible ; hence
in legend and fairytale the practice of secretly burning the beast's
hide when stript off. 1 Yet the human shape may be restored on
this condition, that a spotless maid keep silence for seven years,
and spin and sew a shirt to be thrown over the enchanted person,
KM. 1, 53. 246. 8, 84. And such a shirt not only undoes the

1 Aw. 1, 165. KM. 2, 264. Straparola 2, 1. Pentam. 2, 5. Vuk 1, xxxix
seq. Fornald. Bog. 2, 150-1.



Digitized by Google



GOOSE. RAVEN. CROW. EVIL EYE. 1099

charm, bat makes one spell-proof and victorious (Sup. I, 656.
708) ; 1 in the last passage, victory in a lawsuit has taken the
place of the old victory in battle. In the Mid. Ages it was called
St. George's shirt, and was spun on a Saturday (Vintler ; conf.
Sup. I, 333 the thread spun on Christmas night) ; Wolfdietrich
receives it from Siegminne, i.e. from a wise spinning norn or
valkyr (p. 434) : obviously the old heathen idea was afterwards
transferred to the conquering saint of the christian church. Not
unlike are the golden shirt that defends from drowning, Beow.
3095, and the frid-heniede (App. Spells x) ; a woven flag of victory
will be mentioned p. 1112. To me these famous shirts of fate
seem connected with the threads and webs of the norns and dame
Holda. A magic weaving and spinning was probably ascribed
to witches, who in Sup. I, 824 are called field-spinsters ; and Bur-
chard's allusions to the superstition ' in lanificiis et ordiendis
telis ' are worth comparing, Sup. C, int. 52, and p. 193 d . Hincmar
of Rheims (Opp. 1, 656) speaks of sorceries 1 quas superventas
feminae in suis lanificiis vel textilibus operibus nominant ' ; again
p. 654 : 1 quidam etiam vestibus carminatis induebantur vel co-
operiebantur.' 2 A similar thing is the magic and spell in the
case of swords, conf. p. 687-8 (see Suppl.).

There may be magic in the mere look, without bodily contact,
what our old speech called entsehen (p. 1035), Ital. gettare gli
sguardi, Neapol. jettatura, fascino dei malvagi occhi. The
bleared, envious, evil eye* of a witch who walks in (Sup. I, 787),
let alone her breath and greeting, can injure in a moment, dry up
the mother's milk, make the babe consumptive, spoil a dress, rot
an apple, visu fascinare (p. 1066 and Sup. C, p. 199 d ) : ' the coat
is so handsome, the apple so red, no evil eye (onda oga, Sup.
Swed. 57) must look upon it ; 9 hurtful look, Sup. I, 874 ; obliquus
oculus, Hor. Epist. i. 14, 87. Of sick cattle especially they say :

1 This thirt of victory reminds us of the child's thirt of luck (p. 874), which in
Denmark is likewise called a victor'i $hirt (seyers-hue, -hielm, -serk). If we may
ascribe high antiquity to the phrase ' born with helmet on,' suoh teyert-hielm fore-
tells the future hero. Conf. Bulenger 3, 30 on amniomantia, i.e. divinatio per
omnium seu membranam tertiam embryonis.

3 Disenchanting or defensive shirts have their counterpart in bewitching baneful
ones. In a Servian song (Vuk 8, 80, 1. 786) a gold thirt is neither spun nor woven,
but knitted, and a snake is worked into the collar. The shirt sent to Herakles,
drenched in dragon's blood, is well known.

* Ubel ougen, Parz. 407, 8 are spiteful eyes ; whereas ' ein bcuez ouge ' 71, 16 is
a weak, sore eye.



Digitized by Google



1100 MAGIC.

f some evil eye has been at it ' ; to look at a beast with sharp
eyes. In Virgil's Eel. 3, 103 : 1 nescio qnis teneros oculus mi hi
fascinat agnos.' The Renner 18014 says, the glance of the eye
kills snakes, scares wolves, hatches ostrich-eggs, breeds leprosy.
Radulfi ardentis Homil. 42* : ' cavete ab illis qui dicunt, qnosdain
oculis urentibus alios fascinare.' Persius 2, 34 has urentes oculi ;
and fascinare, fiaatcatveiv with the ancients meant chiefly this kind
of sorcery. The ON. expression is sion-hverfing, look-throwing :
1 sundr stauk aula for sion iotuns,' asunder burst the pillar at the
look of the giant, Seem. 53 b . Stigandi can by his look destroy
anything ; when taken prisoner, they pull a bag over his head
(dreginn belgr a hofut honum) : he peeps through a hole in the
sack, and with one look spoils a field of grass, Laxd. p. 152-6.
Different and yet similar are the sharp eyes of certain heroes
(p. 391) and maids, e.g. Svanhildr being bound is to be kicked
to death by horses : ' er hun (when she) bra i sundr augum, ]>k
J?or$u eigi (dared not) hestarnir at spora hana ; ok er Bikki sa
J>at, maelti hann, at belg skyldi draga a hofuS henni/ Fornald.
sog. 1, 226. And of one SigurSr we are told in Fornm. sog.
2, 174: 'at hann hefiSi snart augnabragS, at allir hundar hurfu
fra honum, ok var enginn sva grimmr at hyrSi a hann at ra5a,
er hann hvesti augun Sm6t J?eim/ as dogs cannot endure the look
of spirits and gods (p. 667). Any one possessed of this perilous
power, who is evil-eyed, can prevent its baneful operation by
directing his looks to a lifeless object. The phrase ' no one shall
say black is your eye* means, no one can exactly report any
harm of you (Brockett p. 66). Has that peculiar conformation
of the witch's eye-pupil (p. 1080) anything to do with her evil
eye ? As a safeguard against its influence, the paw of the blind
mole is worn 1 (see Suppl.) .

But as great beauty enchants by the radiant glance of the
eye, it has also magic power in the smiling of the lips. In a
Mod. Greek song, when the charming maid laughs, roses fall into
her apron (ottov yeXa, koX irtyrovve ra poSa \ ttjv iroBtdv T179),
Fauriel 2, 382. In Heinr. von Neuenstadt's Apollonius of
Tyre, composed about 1400, it is asked L 182: 'wa sach man

1 It is another thing for conjurors to blind the eye» of men by jugglery : * sunt
et praestigiatoreB, qui alio nomine obttrigilli voeantur, quod praeatringant vel
obstringant humanorum aciem oculorum,' Hincm. lie in. ed. 1645. 1, 606.



Digitized by Google



LOOKS. LAUGHING. KISSING. DRINKS. 1101



rosen lachen ? ' and then follows a tale about a man who laughs
roses :

' der lachet, daz ez vol rosen was,
perg und tal, laub und gras.'

A Nethl. proverb (Tuinman 1, 306) says : * als hy lacht, dan
sneuwt het rozen* The myth must have been very popular, as I
frequently find in records (e.g. Bohmer's Cod. francof. 1, 185),
and even at the present day, the names Rosenlacher, Rosenlachler,
BlumlacJier. The same poem of Apollonius has at 1. 2370 :

er kuste sie wol dreissig stunt (30 times)
an iren rosenlaclienden munt (mouth) ;

other passages to the point are quoted Aw. 1, 71-5. Gifted
children of fortune have the power to laugh roses, as Freyja wept
gold ; probably in the first instance they were pagan beings of
light, who spread their brightness in the sky over the earth,
'rose-children, sun-children/ Georg 48-9, laughing daybreaks
(p. 747), rose-strewing Eos (p. 749). Mart. Cap. says, a silver urn
'quae prasferebat serena fulgentia et vernantis coeli temperie
renidebat' was called risus Jovis (see Suppl.).

The hissing mouth has even greater power than the smiling.
It is a recurring feature in our nursery-tales, that a kiss makes
one forget everything (KM. 2, 168. 508), yet also that it brings
back remembrance (2, 463). The unbinding of a spell hangs
upon a kiss (p. 969). In the Norse legends oblivion is produced
by a potion called Sminnis-ol (-ale), Sminnis-drycJcr, the opposite
of minnis-dl (p. 59) : such an ominnisol Grimhild hands to SigurS,
who thereupon forgets Brynhild ; and Go$run, before she could
forget SigurS and choose Atli, had to drink an ominnis-veig,
whose magical concoction the poem describes, Saom. 223 b . 234*.
So valkyrs, elfins and enchantresses offer to heroes their drinking-
horns (p. 420), that they may forget all else and stay with them ;
conf. the Swed. tale in Afzelius 2, 159. 160 and the song in
Arvidsson 2, 179. 282, where the miner makes the maiden drink
of the gldmskans horn and forgot father and mother, heaven and
earth, sun and moon. Now, seeing that minna in the Swed.
folksongs and minde in the Dan. signify to kiss (minna uppa
munnen, Sv. vis. 3, 123-4. D. vis. 1, 256. 298), as <f>i\elv is
amare and osculari, and with us in the 16th cent. 1 to set the seal



Digitized by Google



1102



MAGIC



of love ' is roundabout for kissing ; there must be a close connec-
tion between kissing and the minne-drinking at sacrifices and in
sorcery. 1 But magic potions are of various kinds and extreme
antiquity, their manufacture trenches on the healing art and
poison-mixing (see Suppl.). Love-drinks have love-cakes to keep
them company. Burchard describes how women, after rolling
naked in wheat, took it to the mill, had it ground against the sun
(ON. andscelis, invereo ordine), and then baked it into bread.
Popular superstition in Samland makes out, that when a wife
perceives her husband growing indifferent toward her, she lays
aside a piece of the raw dough from nine successive bakings of
bread or scones, then bakes him a scone out of the pieces, on
eating which his former love returns. The Esthonians have a
karwakak (hair-bread), a loaf into which hairs have been baked
as a charm. The love-apples, in which symbols were inscribed
(Hoffm. Schles. monatschr. p. 754), are to the same purpose (see
Suppl.).

There are certain safeguards in general use against magic. One
should not answer a witch's question (Sup. I, 59), not thank her
for her greeting (568) ; for certain kindnesses and gifts, if they
are to do you good, it is advisable not to thank any one (398.
Swed. 35. 52. Esth. 94). A witch may be known by her thank-
ing you for lending things (I, 566) ; she never answers three times
(563). — Whatever she praises will turn out ill, unless you
promptly reply with railing, reviling, wishing ' the same to you 1
(696), or spitting. To praise one to his face does harm, Pliny
28, 2. 'Si ultra placitum laudarit, baccare frontem cingite, ne
vati noceat mala lingua futuro/ Virg, Eel. 7, 27; hence in prais-
ing oneself a ' praefiscini ' (prae fascino ?) was added, Plaut. Asin.
ii. 4, 84. Insult and imprecation the ancients turned aside with
the words : et? tce<f>a\i]v <rot, on thy head may it fall ! — The Mod.
Greeks and Slavs are shy of praise, and try to save themselves
by spitting : a Russian nurse directly spits in the face of one who
cracks up her baby without putting in the precautionary ' God
save the mark ! ' Before a witch's house you spit three times
(Sup. I, 756), the same in crossing a haunted water by night

1 Minna — to kiss may indeed seem a corruption of mynna (to give month),
ON. mynna/, coni. mundes minne, MsH. 1, 45*; still the other explanation has its
weight too.



Digitized by Google



SAFEGUARDS.



3103



(Swed. 40); the Greeks at sight of a madman spat thrice into
their bosom, Theocr. 6, 39. 21, 11. ' ter dictis despue carminibus/
TibulL i. 2, 55. Home-sprites cannot bear spitting (p. 514) ; conf.
Sap. I, 317. 453. To the same effect, and worth reading, is what
Pliny 28, 4 says on despuere, adspuere, inspuere, exspuere. — In
case of need you may without scruple strike a suspected witch,
and draw blood (p. 1096), or throw & firebrand at her (Sup. Swed.
96). — Bread, salt and coals are a protective against magic (I, 564.
713), as witches abstain from bread and salt (p. 1071). I fancy
that pipping of the loaf, so distasteful to the wood-wives (p. 484),
was a sacred magic-averting symbol) conf. 'placenta digito
nntata 9 in Lasicz 49. — Throw a steel over enchanted beasts, and
they are bound to resume their natural shape (Sup. I, 886) j 1
throw a knife marked with the cross over a witch, and you re-
cognise her (554) ; when a man threw steel between the elfin and
the hill, it prevented her going into it (p. 467) ; steel insures the
child in the cradle from being changed. Instances of magic thus
averted by steel we find in Faye 20. 24-5-6. 51. 141 ; conf. Sup.
Swed. 71. — Witches and devils shun the sign of the cross : that
is why we see so many crosses on the doors the first night in
May. The peasant ploughs a cross into each corner of his field.
On the cradles of infants before they were christened, the cross
was lavishly employed to guard against elf or devil ; just so the
heathens used their hammer, and there is a remarkablo vestige of
it forthcoming still : ' malleum, ubi puerpera decumbit, obvolvunt
candido linteo* (Gisb. Voetii sel. disput. theol. Ultraj. 1659, pars
3 p. 121.) — No less do evil spirits hate and shun the sound of
bells (pp. 1022-74); it disturbs their dance at the cross-road, Sup.
I, 542. — To this must be added the methods mentioned p. 1078
of recognising witches and guarding against them (see Suppl.).

These are the most distinctive phenomena in the world of
Magic. Many, indeed most magic appliances run over into
Superstition, between which and magic proper it is impossible
to draw a fixed boundary. I have indeed put forward, as a dis-
tiDguishing mark of sorcery, the malicious design to do mischief,

1 A peasant was driving his waggon one night, when a werewolf approached. To
disenchant him, the man had the presence of mind instantly to tie his fire-$teel to
the lash of his whip, and fling it over the wolfs head, keeping the whip in his
hand. Bnt the wolf caught the steel, and the peasant had to save himself by
$peedy flight.



Digitized by Google



1104



MAGIC.



and it does seem to have resulted from inverting the wholesome
use of occult forces in nature (pretty much as the devil from an
inversion of God, p. 986); but particular applications of the true
and the false art cannot always be kept apart. As a herb, a
stone, a spell proves a source of healing, so may it also act
perniciously too ; the use was proper and permissible, the abuse
abhorred and punished. A poisoner as such is not a witch, she
becomes one in the eyes of the people the moment she uses pre-
ternatural means. A wise woman, healing sickness and charming
wounds, begins, to pass for a witch only when with her art she
does evil ; her means are as natural as the poison of the mur-
deress. To higher antiquity, witches were priestesses, physi-
cians, fabulous night-wives, whom men honoured, feared, and at
last made light of, but never dreamt as yet of persecuting and
executing. Maidens might turn into swans, heroes into were-
wolves, and lose nothing in popular estimation. In course of
time, when the Devil's complicity with every kind of sorcery
came to be assumed, the guilt of criminality fell upon all personal
relations [with him] ; but the people for the most part continued
to practise their long-accustomed charms in the innocent sense
of superstition, though a suspicion of sorcery was more likely to
overshadow it now than before.



•



Digitized by Google



CHAPTER XXXV



SUPERSTITION.

By Superstition is to be understood, not the whole body of
heathen religion, which we think of as a delusion, a false belief,
but the retention of particular heathen practices and principles.
The christian convert rejected and loathed the gods of the hea-
then, but still there lingered in his heart notions and habits,
which having no obvious reference to the old faith, seemed not
directly opposed to the new. Wherever Christianity has left a
vacuum, where its spirit could not at once penetrate the ruder
minds, there superstition or over-belief grew rank. In Low Ger-
man they say bi-glove by-belief, in Nethl. overgelof, bygelof, Dan.
overtro, Icel. hiatru, all modelled on the Latin superstitio, which
itself is traceable to superstes (surviving), and denotes a persist-
ence of individual men in views which the common sense of the
majority has abandoned. A fortune-teller was to the Romans
' superstitiosus homo.' And the Swed. term vidskepelse seems
primarily to mean a sort of magic, not superstition (p. 1036 ; see
Suppl.). 1

There are two kinds of superstition, an active and a passive, one
being more the augurium, sortilegium, the other more the omen
of the ancients. 2 If, without man's active participation, some
startling sign be vouchsafed him by a higher power, he prog-
nosticates from it good hap or ill. If the sign did not arise of
itself, if he elicits it by his own contrivance, then there is posi-
tive supers'tition. Naturally Christianity succeeded better in
combating the positive superstition that was mixed up with hea-
then rites, than the negative and involuntary, which swayed the
mind of man as the fear of ghosts does.

1 Also Swed. skrok, skr&k, superstitio; the ON. skrok, figmentum. OHG.
gameitheit superstitio, vanitas, Graff 2, 702. In Mod. Germ. I find zipfel-glaube,
Schmid's Schwab, id. 547. Lett. bUhnu tizziba, faith in idle things (blennas).

: Divine omnipotence produces miracles (p. 1031), a chance phenomenon mere
presage*, omina, portenta, in which sense Ulphilas renders ripara by fauratai\ja t
Mk. 13, 22. John 6, 26. 1 Cor. 12, 12. With tani I can hardly connect anything
but ON. tenlngr, talus, or OHG. zeno, provoco, Graff 5, 673 (see Suppl.).



Digitized by Google



1106



SUPERSTITION.



The usages of active superstition always have some practical
aim. A man wants to escape a present evil, to throw off a sick-
ness, to get rid of his enemy, or he wishes to know and secure
his future luck. And here we must not overlook how often,
according to a difference of period or nationality, the same cus-
toms acquire a new relation and meaning, 1 being often torn away
from their connexion, e.g. what had a distinct reference to sacri-
fice will, standing by itself, be unintelligible ; and the same was
the case with the objects of sorcery. What our forefathers hoped
or feared had reference more to war and victory ; the farmer of
today cares about his corn and cattle. If the heathen sorceress
with her hail destroys the host of the enemy, the modern witch
makes foul weather for her neighbour's field. So the farmer
promises himself a plenteous crop on the strength of an omen
that in olden time betokened victory. Yet farming and cattle-
breeding have a long history too, and a number of superstitious
rites connected with them stretch without a break through many
centuries. Likewise all the superstitions that look to domestic
life, to birth and death, wooing and wedding, are rooted in
nature, and almost unchangeable through the lapse of ages ;
superstition constitutes a kind of religion for all the lower kind
of household wants.

Divinations fofm a leading feature of superstition. Man
would fain lift the veil that time and space have cast over his
weightiest concerns; by the use of mysterious means he thinks
he can arrive at the truth. Divination lawful and unlawful has
always been a function of the priest (or head of a family) and
of the magician (p. 862-3) : the one belongs to religion, the other
to superstition.

Various words for divining and soothsaying were given at the
beginning of last chapter, when we had to settle the meaning of
magic. I have now to add an OHG. heilison augurari (AS.
halsian) ; heilisod omen, augurium ; heilisari augur (AS. halsere),
heilisara auguratrix. In MHG. these words had died out. One

1 It ia conceivable that remnants of the old Roman divinatio were still in vogne
at the time of the Lombards : 1 habebat tunc Agilulf quendam de snis aruspicem
jjiururo, qui per artem diabolicam, quid futurum portenderent ictu* fulminum in-
telligebat,' Paul. Diac. 3, 30. The Etruscan haruspicia were especially directed to
fulgura, 0. Mull. 2, 32.



igitized by Google



DIVINATION.



1107



must distinguish them from 0H6. heilizan salutare, AS. haletan
(see Suppl.).

The sacred priestly divination appears, like the priestly office-
itself (p. 93), to have been hereditary in families. A female
fortune-teller declared that the gift had long been in her family,
and on her death the grace would descend to her eldest daughter
(Sap. H, cap. 107) : from mother to daughter therefore, and from
father to son ; by some it is maintained that soothsaying and the
gift of healing must be handed down from women to men, from
men to women. To this day there are families that have the
peculiar gift of foreseeing what will happen, especially fires,
deaths and corpses : in L. Germany they call such people vorkie-
kers, fore-peepers. It is also said they can quad sehn, i.e. see
or scent any coming misfortune, nay, the power is even allowed
to horses, sheep and dogs : horses prophesy (p. 658), hounds
can see spirits (p. 667). And notice in particular, that such
men can impart their gift to him that treads on their right foot
and locks over their left shoulder ; this was apparently a very
ancient, even a heathen posture, it was a legal formality in tak-
ing possession of cattle (RA. 589), and may have been tolerated
among christians in other cases, e.g. one who is doing penance
has to step on tlie right foot of the hermit, Ls. 1, 593. The first
child christened at a newly consecrated font receives the power
to see spirits and coming events, until some one shall from idle
curiosity tread on his left foot and look over his right shoulder,
when the gift will pass away to him, Sup. I, 996 ; on the other
hand, he that looks through the loop of the wise man's arm
(p. 939) becomes a seer of spirits, he beholds the natural
and preternatural : even to the dog the gift descends, if
you tread on his right foot and make him look over your right
shoulder, Sup. I, 1111. Again, children born with the helmet
can see spirits, ghosts or witches (p. 874n.). In all this we see
the last quiverings of life in practices of the heathen priest-
hood, before they pass into mere conjuring and witchcraft (see
Suppl.).

Divination is directed mainly to the discovery of future things,
they being the most uncertain. The past is done and known,
or can be ascertained in many ways ; what goes on in the present,
at a distance, we seldom feel any temptation to find out ; an

vol. in. p



Digitized by LiOOQle



1108



. SUPERSTITION.



instance occurred at p. 1091n., where the pilgrim is enabled by
magic to see what is going on at his home. Yet the present has
its puzzles too, when methods have to be decided on, especially
property to be divided.

When events and deeds of the past were wrapt in obscurity,
antiquity had a thrice-hallowed means o£ discovery, the ordeals
or judgments of God, a retrospective divination of sure and
infallible success, such as judicial procedure demanded. But
to every German ordeal it is essential that the accused should
perform its ritus himself ; in no case could it be placed in the
judge's hands. This fact distinguishes it from the sieve-driving
or steve-turning practised since the Mid. Ages, which was per-
formed by wise women, witches, conjurors, and even by respect-
able persons, to bring concealed criminals to light :« the woman
held a sieve that was an heirloom between her two middle fingers,
uttered a spell, and then went over the names of suspected
persons ; when she came to that of the culprit, the sieve began
to sway and tilt over. 1 The plan was adopted against thieves,
and such as in a tumult had inflicted wounds ; and sometimes
to reveal the future, e.g. who should be a girl's sweetheart. I
find the first mention of it in the poem cited on p. 1048 : ' und
daz ein wip ein sib tribe, sunder vleisch und sunder ribe, da niht
inne waere/ this I take to be a lie, says the author; his in-
credulity seems to rest on the tilting over, the sieve is void,
has neither flesh nor bone. The sieve was also laid on a pair
of tongs, which were held up between the two middle fingers.
In Denmark the master of the house himself took the trial in
hand, balancing the sieve on the point of a pair of scissors, Sup.
Dan. 132. This sieve-running (sieve- chasing, sieve-dance) must
have been very common in France and Germany in the 16-1 7th

i 8ieve-running ia described differently in the Meckl. jahrb. 5, 108 : A sieve
inherited from kinsfolk is set up on its edge, an inherited pair of scissors is opened
and .ts points stuck into the sieve's edge deep enough to lift it by. Then two
persons of different families take it to a perfectly dark place, put the middle finger
of the right hand uuder the scissors' ring, and so raise the sieve. At the slightest
movement of course the ring will slip off the finger, and the sieve fall, as in the
dark it does not hang quite perpendicular. Then one begins to ask the other : 1 1
ask thee in the name of G., etc., tell me truth and lie not, who stole so and so?
did Hans, Fritz, Peter? ' At the name of the guilty party the ring slips off, the
sieve falls to the ground, and the thief is known. In all the other descriptions
I have read, the thing is done in daylight, and the sieve does not fall, but spins
round.



Digitized by Google



SIEVE-TURNING. KEY-SPINNING. 1109

•

cent., many books mention it, and couple together sieve-turners
and spell-speakers ; 1 it may here and there be still in use, conf.
Stender sub v. 'seetinu tezzinaht/ and his Gram. p. 299; it
seems the Lettons stick it on a pair of shears. But it was already
known to the Greeks, Theocritus 3, 31 mentions a tco<TKiv6(iavTi<i i
and Lucian (Alex. 7) speaks of kogkIvq fiapT€v€<r6ai among the
Paphlagonians; Potter 1, 766 thus describes the process of tcoa-
fcivofj.avT€ta : they held up the sieve by a string, prayed to the
gods, then ran over the names of the suspects ; at that of the
doer the sieve set off spinning (see Suppl.) .

In the same way people stuck a hereditary key in the Bible
(at the first chap, of John), 2 or a cleaver in a wooden ball, which
began to move when they came to the right name, Sup. I, 932.
I surmise that the revolution of the lotter-wood worn by spruch-
sprecher (lotter-buben, frei-harte, H. Sachs iv. 3, 58 s ) was also
for divining purposes; in the early Fragm. 15 c wo find: 1 louf
umbe lotterholz, louf umbo gedrate ! 9 On this I shall be more
explicit in another place.

It may be regarded as a relic of the judicium offae or casei
(RA. 932), that those suspected of a theft were made to eat of
a consecrated cheese : the morsel sticks in the throat of the real
thief (Sup. H, cap. 51). 8

1 Fischart's Damonom. p. 71. Hartm. on Spells 99. Simplic. 2, 352. Ettner's
Apoth. 1187. J. Praetorius on Sieve-running. Curiae Varisc. 1677. 4. Rommel s
Hess, gesch. 6, 61. In Burgundy * tonai le taimi,* Noels Borg. p. 374 ; taimi is the
Fr. tamis, Nethl. teems, in Teutonista tempte, but in Diut. 2, 209 tempf. If Graff
. has not misread this, we might make of Tamfana (pp. 80. 257. 278) a goddess named
after the sieve she held in her hand ; that would look heathenish.

s H. Stahl's Westfal. sagen, Elberf. 1831. p. 127 gives a fuller account : The
hered. key is put inside a hered. Bible, so that the ward part of the key lies on the
words * In the beginning was the Word,' and the ring stands out of the book. Thoy
tie it up tight with string, and hang it up by the end of the string to the ceiling.
Then two people hold their fingers under the ring, touching it gently, and the
injured party asks : * has there been a witch at my cow ? 1 The other must say No,
and the complainant answer Yes, and this they keep up for some time. If the cow
be really bewitched, the Bible begins to turn round, and then more questions are
asked. If there has been no witchery, or the wrong witch is named, the Bible
remains still. The turnings of sieve and key resemble those of the tcishing-rod,
p. 975.

* The Observationes ad Ivonis epistolas p. 157 have the following : * Formulae
in codicibus monasteriorum, quibus ad detegenda furta jubebatur oratio dominica
scribi in pane et caseo, postea fieri crucet de tremulo, quarum una sub dextero pede,
alia super caput suspect i viri poneretur, deinde post varias numinis invocationes
imprecari, ut lingua et guttur rei alligaretur, ne transglutire posset, sed eorum
[coram?] omnibus tremeret, neo haberet quo requiesceret. Cf. formulam Dunstani
Cantuar. editam a Pitthoeo in glossario capitulariorum.' Against crossing cheeses
(de cateit cruce non signandU) several ordinances were issued in the 15th cent. (docs,
of 1430, '48, '70, '77 in Monum. boic. 16. 50. 65. 58. 61).



Digitized by Google



1110



SUPERSTITION



Other methods of forecasting the future were likewise available
for detecting thieves or any malefactors.

The lot (OHG. hldz, Goth, hlauts, AS. hleat, ON. hlutr) was
the venerablest and fairest of all kinds of divination. A difficult
and doubtful matter was to be raised thereby above human
caprice and passion, and receive the highest sanction, e.g. in
dividing an inheritance, in ascertaining the right victim (conf. p.
230), and so forth. Lot therefore decides a present uncertainty,
but it may also extend to the future. Originally placed in the
hands of a priest or judge, it afterwards became an instrument
of sorcery (p. 1034-7), and sortilegus, sortiarius, sorcier are all
derived from sors. Our OHG. hliozan seems in like manner to
have passed out of the meaning sortiri into that of augurari,
incantare, which it retains in its MHG. form liezen, Hoffm.
fundgr. 2, 67. Er. 8123.

It was managed in two ways : the priest or the paterfamilias
cast the lot, and interpreted it when fallen, or he held it out
to the party to draw ; the first was for indicating the future, the
last for adjusting the present.

Let Tacitus describe the first kind : ' Sortium consuetudo
simplex. Virgam, frugiferae arbori decisam, in surculos ainpu-
tant, eosque notis quibusdam discretos super candidam vestem
temere ac fortuitu spargunt. Mox si publico consuletur, sacerdos
civitatis, sin privatim ipse pater familiae, precatus deos coelumque
suspicions, ter singulos tollit, sublatos secundum impressam ante
notam interpretatur. Si prohibuerunt, nulla de eadem re in
eundem diem consultatio; sin permissum, auspiciorum adhuc

fides exigitur/ Germ. 10. Here the lots are but preliminary to

the entire transaction, and if they prove unfavourable, further
divination is not proceeded with. I need not transcribe the
important explanations my Brother has given in his work on
Kunes pp. 296 — 307. A connexion there certainly is between
these lots and the runes and ciphers ; lot-books are mentioned
as early as the 13th cent., Ls. 3, 169. Kolocz. 70 (see Suppl.).

The Armenians prophesied from the movement of cypress
boughs : ' quarum cupressorum surculis ramisque seu leni sive
violento vento agitatis Armenii flamines ad longum tempus in
auguriis uti consneverunt/ as Moses Chorenensis (ed. 1736, p. 54)
tells us in the 5th cent.



Digitized by Google



LOTS. WATER IN A SIEVE.



1111



A long array of divinations seems to have been diffused over
Europe by the Greeks and Romans ; 1 from this source come
Hartlieb's accounts of hydromantia, pyroniantia (the fiur-sehen
of Altd. bl. 1, 365), chiromantia (MHG. the tisch in der hant, Er.
8136), on which see more in Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 271 (see Suppl.).
The crystal-gazing of the pure child, Sup. H, cap. 90, is the
' gastromantia ex vase aqua pleno, cujus medituilium (belly of the
jar) vocabatur ydarpi?.' 1

More to the purpose are customs peculiar to certain nations,
and not traceable to the above source : in these we either find
a different procedure, or the forecasts are gathered from natural
objects by lying in wait, listening, looking.

Our ancestors (ace. to Tac. Germ. 3) contrived to foresee
the issue of a battle by the spirited or faltering delivery of the
war song.

The ancient Poles reckoned on victory if water drawn in a sieve
was carried before the army without running through. I quote
the words of the Chronicon Montis Sereni (Menken 2, 227.
Hoffm. script, rer. lus. 4, 62) : Anno 1209 Conradus, orien talis
marchio, Lubus castrum soceri sui Wlodislai ducis Poloniae,
propter multas quas ab eo patiebatur injurias, obsedit. Wlodis-
laus vero, obsidionem vi solvere volens, collecto exercitu copioso,
marchiom mandavit, se ei altera die congressurum. Vespere
autem diei praecedentis Oderam fluvium cum suis omnibus trans-
gressus, improvisus supervenire hostibus moliebatur. Unus vero
eorum qui supani dicuntur vehementer ei coepit obsistere, monens
ne tempus pugnae statutum praeveniret, quia hoc factum nullius
rectius quam infidelitatis posset nomine appellari. Quem dum
dux timiditatis argueret, et fidelitatis qua ei tenereturcommoneret,
respondit : f ego quidem ad pugnam pergo, sed scio me patriam
meam de cetero non visumm.' Habebat autem (sc. Wlodislaus)
ducera belli pythonissam quandam, quae de flumiue cribro haustam
nec defluentem, ut ferebatur, ducens aquam exercitum praecedebat,
et hoc signo eis victoriam promittebat. Nec latuit marchionem

1 Alphabetically arranged in Fabricii Bibliogr. antiq. (ed. 3 Hamb. 1760), 4, pp.
59S— 613. Conf. Potter's Archaol. 1, 758—769.

3 Melber de Geroltzhofen says in Vbcabularins predioantium (sheet R 4) :
• tfigromantia. schwartz kunst die do ist mit vfftchung der dotten, mit den der
nigromanticus zaubert, oder mit den dryen ertten schollen, die der pfaff wirfft ynsz
grab, oder mit den wydhopjfen, die do lauffen by den grebernS The passage is also
quoted from Melber in Jod. Eychman's Vocab. predic, Niirnbg 1483.



Digitized by Google



1112



SUPEESTITION.



adventus eorum, sed mature suis armatis et ordinatis occurrens,
forti congressu omnes in fugam vertit, pythonissa primitus inter-
fecta. IUe etiam supanus viriliter pugnans cum multis aliis inter-

fectus est. What ia hero an omen of success is elsewhere a

test of innocence : a true-hearted boy carries water in a sieve, and
not a drop runs out, KM. 3, 254; according to Indian belief the
innocent can take water up in a lump like a ball. ' Exstat
Tucciae vestalis incestae precatio, qua usa aquam in cribro tulit,'
Pliny 28, 3 ; a witch sets a girl the task of fetching water in the
sieve, Norske ev. 1, 88 ; the vestal had also to carry fire in a
brazen sieve (supra p. 611), and a Dan. fairytale in Molbech's
Ev. p. 22 actually speaks of carrying the sun in a sieve. The
sieve comes before us as a sacred old-world vessel with miraculous
properties. What the myth imports the proverb treats as sheer
impossibilities : 1 er schepfet wazzer mit dem sibe, swer ane vrie
milte mit sper und mit schilte ervehten wil ere und lant/ he draws
water in a sieve, who by brute force, etc., Troj. 18536. ' Lympham
infundere cribro/ Reinard. 3, 1637 (see Suppl.).

By AS. accounts, tho Northmen had a wonderful standard
borne before their army, from whose indications they inferred
victory or defeat. In Asser's Vita Alfredi p. 33 ad an. 878 :
' . . . vexiilum quod reafan (for raefan, hreofen, ON. hrafn) vocant.
Dicunt enim quod tres sorores Hungari et Habbae, filiae videlicet
Lodebrochi illud vexiilum texuerunt, et totum paraverunt illud
uno meridiano tempore} Dicunt etiam quod in omni bello, ubi
praecederet idem signum, si victoriam adepturi essent, appareret in
medio signi quasi corvus vivus volitans ; sin vero vincendi in
fnturo fuissent, penderet directe nihil movens ; et hoc saepe pro-

batnm est/ The Encomium Emmae (Duchesne's Script. Norm.

169) says, the flag was of plain white silk, but in war-time
there became visible in it a raven, with open beak and flutter-
ing wings whenever victory smiled on them, but sitting still with
drooping feathers when it eluded their grasp. Ailredus Rieval-
lensis p. 353 declares this raven to have been the devil himself,
who does at times assume the shape of that bird (p. 997) ; we
more naturally see in it the bird of the heathen god of victory
(p. 671) : OSinn might give the victorious host this sign that he

i

1 The thread spun between 11 and 12 (Sup. I, 841) corresponds wonderfully.



Digitized by Googl



FLAG. NEIGHING. SHOULDE RBL ADE . 1113



was sending down his messenger. Yet no Scand. story alludes
to such a flag of victory.

Prophesying from the auspicious neighing of lwrses has been
dealt with, p. 658. Dempster in Antiq. Bom. 3, 9 says : ' equos
hinnitu alacriore et ferociore fremitu victoriam ominari etiamnunc
rnilitibus persuasum est/ At twelve o'clock on Christmas night
the superstitious listen at crossroads, at boundary- stones : if they
can hear swords rattle and horses neigh, there will be war the
coming spring (so war is foretold by the neighing in the Furious
Host, p. 938). At the same season maids listen at the stable
door for the neighing of stallions, and if they hear it, make sure
of a suitor presenting himself by Midsummer (Liebusch's Sky-
thika p. 143). Others lie down in the horse-manger at Christmas,
to learn future events (Denis Lesefriichte 1, 128). Misfortune is
near when the steed stumbles, e.g. the Servian Sharats (Vuk 1,
240).

Spatulamancia in Hartlieb (Sup. H, cap. 115) is a corruption
of scapulimantia, an art that seems not solely derived from
Romans or Byzantines. Lambeck 7, 224 says the Vienna library
has a treatise by Michael Psellus (I know not which one) irepi
a>fio7r\aTo<TKOTrla<i. Vintler too (Sup. G, 1. 126) mentions the
inspection of shoulder-bones. ' Divinationes sculterren-blat,' Altd.
bl. 1, 365. Jornandes cap. 37: 'Attila diffidens suis copiis,
metuens inire conflict um, statuit per aruspices futura inquirere.
Qui more solito nunc pecorum fibras, nunc quasdam venas in
abrasis ossibus intuentes, Hunnis infausta denuntiant.' 1 Among
the Kalmuks are sorcerers called dalatchi, because they predict
from the shoulderblade (dala) of slieep, swans and stags. They
let these bones burn in the firo for a time, then report the aspect
of the streaks and lines that have arisen on them. If the Are
have left many black marks on the blades, the dalatchi holds out
hopes of a mild winter; many white marks indicato snow
(Bergm. Nomad, streifer. 3, 184). The Cherkesses too have
soothsaying from shoulderblades, conf. Erman's Archiv 1842. 1,
123 (see Suppl.).

1 Such extispicia were performed on beasts slain for sacrifice ; hut animals
were also killed for the mere purpose of divination : 4 Becluso pectore (of a gooMe),
extraxit fortissimum jecur, et inde mini futura praedixit,' Petron. 137. 1 Quis invenit
Jittam jecoris t ' Cic. de Nat. D. 3, 6.



Digitized by Google



SUPERSTITION.



This comes very near the forecasting by the goose-bone (ex
anserino sterno), Sap. H, cap. 121, which appears among tiie
people in later times, probably even now, conf. Sup. I, 341 ; K,
163 ; Mockl. Jahrb. 9, 219 no. 46. I have marked a few passag-es
for extraction. Ettner*8 Ungew. apoth. p. 1144: 'And what
prognostica must not the breastbones of capon, goose and duck

i yield ! If the same be red, they ordain an abiding coldness ; or
if white, clear and transparent, then shall the winter's weather
be endurable.' Martinsgans by Joh. Olorinus variscus (Magdeb.

\ 1609. 8), p. 145 : ' Good old ladies, I present to you the breast-
bone, that ye learn thereby to foretell true as the almanack, and
become weather-prophets. The fore part by the throat signifies
the fore-winter, the hinder part the after-winter, white is for
snow and mild weather, the other for great cold.' Ganskonig by
Lycosthenes Psellionoros (Wolfg. Spangenberg) Strasb. 1607,
ciii : ' The breastbone which they call the steed (made into a
prancing horse for children) ; and well can many an ancient dame,
prognosticating by the same, tell by the hue infallibly, how keen
the winter's cold shall be.' Rhythmi de ansere (in Dornau 1,
403) : ' Then in my breast the merrythought, I trow it lies not
there for nought, for men therein may plainly see what winter
weather it shall be, and many a man holds fast thereto, accounting
me a prophet true.'

Those who thus looked after the weather were called weter-
sorgccre, Er. 8127 (weter -wiser man 7510), or iveter-kiesoere,
-chooser, whence the surname Kiesewelter, Gramm. 4, 848 ; in
Rauch's Script. 1, 430 I find a place ' bei der weterkiesen,' as if
certain spots were favourable to weather- choosing.

The Esthonians foretold weather and fruitfulness from bownets.
Gutslaff says in his book on Wohhanda p. 209 : 'I am told that
on this beck the husbandmen of old had their augurium respect-
ing weather, which they managed thus. They set in the beck
three baskets in a row, and not heeding the two outer, gave their
mind wholly to the midmost, what kind of fish would come into
the same. For if into this basket were gotten a scaleless fah, as
crab, quab or the like, they had ill weather and unfruitful year to
dread, and were fain to sacrifice an ox for to obtain good weather.
Whereupon they set the baskets in as before, and if again a
scaleless fish were found therein, then a second time did they



Digitized by



MERRYTHOUGHT. BOWNET. CORN. CROSS-WAY. 1115

sacrifice an ox, and set the baskets in for the third time. If once
more they found a scaleless fish, then this third time they sacrificed
a child, in hope to get good weather and a plenteous season.
And if yet again fislies not scaly were come into the middle
basket, they rested therewith content, and with patience abided
it. But when scaly fish were found therein, they cast them to
have fair weather and fruitful year, whereat they rejoiced greatly.'

A different thing altogether was the Greek IxOvofiavreia from

fish's entrails (Potter's Archaol. 1, 703).

As horses' neighing was watched for (p. 1113), so there was
listening at night in the growing cornfields : going into the
winter-crop on Christmas night to overhear the future, or on
May-night into the green com, Sup. I, 420. 854. The cereals
were a sacred thing, ' der lieilcgo ezesg,' N. ps. 140, 7 (Goth,
atisks), ' das liebe korn,' Gramm. 3, 665. So then, sitting in the
corn, one might hear the sound of voices, hear spirits conversing
on coming events. They listened also at cross-ways, Sup. I, 854.
962, where boundaries touched : the partings of roads 1 were
accounted meeting-places of sprites and witches (p. 1074 and Sup.
1, 647), conf. the ON. 'bar sem gotur (roads) mcetast/ Forn.
sog. 3, 22. Did images of heathen gods stand where the roads
forked ? We are told of people praying, sacrificing and lighting
candles ad bivia, Sup. C, p. 193 d ; and just before that, p. 193°,
we hear of them sitting at the cross-way, 2 without the corn being
mentioned : ' in bivio sedisti supra taurinam cutem, ut ibi futura
tibi intelligeres ? ' To me the bull's hide, like the bearskin
(p. 1010, conf. Reinh. p. lvi), indicates heathen sacrifice. And
here a Gaelic rite described by Armstrong seems to furnish a
valuable clue : A man is wrapt in tho warm skin of an animal
just killed, he is then laid down beside a waterfall in the forest,
and left alone ; by the roar of the waves, it is thought, the future
is revealed to him, and this kind of divination is called taghairn.
The 1 forse ' too was a sacred spot, as well as the forking of roads :

1 A Persian superstition : • sitting down at the junction of four cross-roads on
a Wedn. night, and applying to yourself every sentence spoken by the passers and
considering it as a good or bad omen,' Atkinson, p. 11. 12.

3 If after sapper on Christm. eve a girl shakes out the tablecloth at a crosstcay,
a man will meet her, and give her good even. Of the same height and figure will
her future husband be. The shaken cloth has taken the place of the spread, or, of
the animal's hide. Divination by sowing basilicum is known to Vuk 1, 22. no. 86
tWesely p. 58).



Digitized by Google



111G



SUPERSTITION.



this last is mentioned in the Edda, 'opt bolwisar konor sitja
brauto ncer, bar or deyfa sverS ok sofa/ Sa3m. 197 b . Some
people on New-year's day would sit on the house-roof, girt icith
a sword, and explore the future, Sup. C, p. 193 c . This again
must have been a holy place, for sick children were also set on
the roof to be cured, Sup. C, 10, 14 ; p. 195 c . Does this explain
why, when a person cannot die, some shingles in the roof are
turned, or taken right out (I, 439. 721) ? Also when a child has
convulsions, a plank is turned, J. Schmidt 121. A peculiar
practice is, to listen while you dangle out of window a ball of
thread fastened to a hereditary key, Sup. I, 954.

Sneezing {wraipeiv, sternuere) has from the earliest times been
fraught with meaning. Some take it for a mild form of apoplexy,
a momentary palsy, during which one loses the free use of his
limbs, Sup. H, c. 74. The Greeks saluted the sneezer with %V&h
Zev a&aovl conf. Anthol. Gr. ii. 13, 11. 'Cur sternumenti*
salutamus ? quod etiam Tiberium Caesarem, tristissimum (ut
constat) hominum, in vehiculo exegisse tradunt/ Plin. 28, 2.
' Giton ter continuo ita sternutavit, ut grabatum concuteret, ad
quern motum Eumolpus salvore Gitona jubet,' Petron. sat. 98. 1
The Arabs too salute at sneezing (Riickert's Hariri 1, 543). In
our Mid. Age poets I find : ( die Heiden nicht endorften niesen,
da man doch sprichet, Nu helfiu Got ! 9 durst not sneeze, though
etc. Turl. Wh. 35. ' Christ iu helfe ! so sie niesen/ Ms. 2, 169 b .
' durch daz solte ein schilt gesollen kiesen, daz im ein ander
1 heiles wunschte, ob dirre schilt kunde niesen/ Tit. 80. f s6 wunsch
ich dir ein niesen,' Ms. 2, 217 b . ' wir spreohen, swer niuset, Got
helfe dir!' Renn. 15190. 'Deus te adjuvet' (a.d. 1307), Pistor.
script. 1, 1024; conf. Konigshoven p. 302. Enchanted sprites
sneeze under a bridge, that some one may call out God help ! and
undo the spell, DS. no. 224-5-6. Mone's Anz. 4, 308. ' dir hat
diu katze niht genorn,' Helbl. 1, 1393. To the Greeks there
seemed something divine in sneezing : rbv irrapyjov Oebv fj^ovficBa,
Arist. probl. 33, 7; conf. 11, 33. Xen. Anab. iii. 2, 9. Theocr.
7, 96. 18, 16. Words confirmed by sneezing come true, Od. 17,

1 1 SternutantibuB salvere dictum antiqaior mos quam putatur,* Valerias in
Valeriana p. 66. ' Pourquoi on fait des soabaits en faveur de ceux qoi 6ternuont,'
Morin in Mem. de l'acad. des inscr. 4, 325. J. Oerb. Meuscben de antiquo et mo-
demo ritu salutandi sternntantes, Kilon. 1704. Oeseb. der formel ' Gott belf dir ! '
beim niesen, publ. by Wieland, Lindaa 1787.



SNEEZING. EARS, EYES, NOSE. LOVER. 1117

541-5. ' stemutationes nolite observare,' Sup. A. Whoever
sneezes during a narrative is bound to prove its truth. In the
Christmas nights do not sneeze, and the cattle will not die. The
passage in Hartlieb, Sup. H, c. 73, is curious; conf. Sup. I, 186.
266. 437 and M (Esthon.) 23 (see Suppl.).

Hinging in the ears, garrula auris, ^o/^So?, is lucky when in
the right ear. ' Absentes tinnitu aurium praesentire sermones
de se receptum est/ Plin. 28, 2, conf. Sup. I, 82. 802; booming

in the ear, F, 27. Quivering of the eye : aWerai o</>0a\/to9

poi 6 Sefyo*;, Theocr. 3, 37. Itching of brows and cheeks, Sup.
I, 141. D, 38 r. 140 v. 'si vibrata salitione insuetum alter
oculorum, dexter vel sinister palpitaret, si concuterentur ac veluti
exsilirent aut trepidarent musculi, humeri aut femora etc., mali
erant ominis,' Dempster's Antiq. Rom. 3, 9 ; conf. Suidas sub v.
oicoviaTLtcrj. The Indians thought twitching of t)ie right eye a bad
omen (Hirzel's Sakuntala p. 65). Itching in the right eye has

a good meaning, in the left a bad, says Tobler 30. Bleeding of

the nose : unlucky if on the left side, Sup. I, 825. If in going
out you catch against the door, or stumble on the threshold, you are
warned to turn back (248. 895). If your right hand itches, you
will part with money, if your left, you will take money. Itching
of the right eye betokens crying, of the left, laughing. If your
soles itch, you are going to dance, if your nose, to hear news.
Whoever gets a yellow finger has lost a relation (see Suppl.).

The many ways of finding out one's lover or suitor that is to
be are, so far as I see, unconnected with Roman or Greek super-
stition. The girl hearkens to the cackling of the cock (Sup. I,
101), or she throws her wreath of flowers (848. 1093; conf. 867),
or so me particular night in the year she pulls a billet of wood out
of tlte stack or a stick out of the hedge (I, 109. 958; F, 7. 49),
walking to it back foremost ; or on a dark night she clutches at
the flock in hopes of pulling out a ram (I, 952). Walking
backwards or standing naked is a usual requisite in this, as in
other cases (I, 506-7. 928; G, 1. 207). Another way is, being
naked, to throw one's shift out through the door (I, 955), or to
grasp backwards through the door at the lover's hair (I, 102), or
to spread the table for him (as for norns), and then he is bound to
appear and eat his supper off it. Harrys in Volkss. 2, 28 de-
scribes the so-called nappeUpfang : in a vessel full of clean water



Digitized by Google



1118



SUPERSTITION.



you set afloat little pots of thin silver plate marked with the
names of those whose fate is in question ; if a young man's pot
comes up to a girl's, it will be a match. The same is done in
some parts with simple nutshells. 1

Like the discovery of one's future husband, it was an important
matter to ascertain the sex of a child before it was born. This
could be gathered from the persons one met in going to church,
Sup. I, 483, from previous children (677. 747), from sneezing
(M, 23). That a woman would have none but daughters, was to
be learnt by other signs (I, 678. M, 22). An 0. Fr. poem in
Meon 3, 34 has the following :

voire est que je sui de vous grosse,
si m'enseigna Ton a aler
entor le mostier sans parler
trois tors, dire trois patenostres
en l'onor Dieu et ses apostres,
une fosse au talon feisse,
et par trois jors i revenisse :
s'au tiers jorz overt le trovoie,
c*etoit unfits qu' avoir devoie,
et 8*il etoit clos, cfetoit fille.

Throwing shoes over one's head, and seeing which way the
points look, reveals the place where one is destined to stay
longest, Sup. I, 101 ; G, 1. 220. The Sermones disc, de tempore
mention, among superstitious Christmas customs, that of calceos
super caput jactare, Sormo xi.

They also speak of some ' qui cumulos salis ponunt, et per hoc
futura pronosticant.' Sup. I, 1081 : 'on Christmas eve put a
little heap of salt on the table; if it melts overnight, you die
next year ; if not, not.' Again, in a house where one lies dead,
they make three heaps of salt (I, 846) . This has to do with the
sacred nature of salt (pp. 1046. 1076). Apparently of Greek
origin is the widely received custom of pouring out lead (I, 97;
H, cap. 96) ; even Ihre (de superst. p. 55) mentions it, conf.

i Divining by filberts was another thing : ' infra m an us meas camellam Tini
posuit, et cum digitos pariter extensos porris apioqne lustraaset, avellana$ nuctt
cum precatione mersit in vinum ; et sive in summum redieraut, aive subsederant,
ex hac conjectura dicebat,' Petron. 137.



Digitized by Google



BOY OR GIRL? SHOES. SALT. AN-GANG. 1119



' molybdomantia ex plumbi liquefacti diversis motibus/ Potter's
Arch. 1, 339 (see Suppl.).

But no species of superstition had more deeply penetrated the
entire Mid. Ages than the presages known under the names of
aneganc (an-gang, coming upon), widerganc, widerlouf. A beast,
a man, a thing, that you unexpectedly encountered on stepping
out of doors or setting out on a journey at early morn, while yet
the day is fresh, betokened weal or woe, and admonished you to
go on with what you had begun, or to give it up. When Saxo
Gram. p. 84 says ' congressionum initia/ what was the Norse word
he had in his mind? perhaps vrSr-gangr, or still better mot
(meeting) ? As the beginning of any business is critical (omina
principiia inesse solent, Ov. Fasti 1, 178), as the first stepping
into a new house, on to a new bridge, is cautiously set about
(p. 1021), and the god or daemon claims the first he meets (see
below) ; so men took note of every sign that attended a purposed
ride or journey. The M. Latin term for it is superventa (sc. res),
what surprises, supervenit (Fr. survient) 1 ; or even, taking it
literally, what floats above us in the air, though that indeed
would only apply to the flight of birds. Hincmar de divortio
Lotharii (supra, p. 1099) says: 'ad haec . . . pertinent, quas
superventas feminae in suis lanificiis vel textilibus operibus nomi-
nant.' These the Greeks called ivohia avjifioXa, and we have
most of them in common with them, with the Romans, nay with
Oriental nations. In view of the almost universal diffusion of
these 1 angange/ it is hardly credible that they first came to the
Germans in the wake of Latin literature : they rest on the older
kinship of all European nations, and the very earliest observer of
our kindred, Tacitus, remarked this mode of divination among
them : ' auspicia sortesque, ut qui maxime, observant . . . et illud
quidem etiam hie notum, avium voces volatusque interrogare/
And of horses, p. 658. Many of our old myths lay a stress on
the primitiae : we need only mention Wodan's promising the
victory to those whom he should first set eyes upon at sunrise,
p. 134 (see Suppl.).

I will first take passages that group several things together,
and then elucidate particulars.

1 [• And overcome ua like a Bummer's cloud.'— Macbeth.]



Digitized by Google



1120 SUPERSTITION.

To begin with Xenophon's Memorab. i. 1, 4: aX\' oi fiev
7rXet(TTot <f>a<rlv utto re riav opvLdtav ical rcov airavTcomoyv. aTrorpe-
irea&at re xal irpOTpeireaOai. And, i. 1, 14 : tou<? 8e tcai \i'0ov<;
teal f v\a Kal ra Ti^oirra Orjpla aifieaOai, i.e. ' obvia animalia/
not, as some have taken it, ' vulgaria, ubivis obvia.'

The earliest evidence from our own Mid. Ages, but one that
speaks very generally, is found in St. Eligius, Sup. A : c nullus
observet egrediens aut ingrediens domum, quid sibi occurrat, vel
si aliqua vox reclamantis fiat, aut qualis avis cantus garriat, vel
quid etiam portantem videat.' Greg. Turon. 7, 29: 'et cum iter
ageret, ut consuetudo est barbarorum, auspicia intendere coepit,
ac dicere sibi esse contraria.' We find more detail in John of
Salisbury's Polycraticus sive de nugis curial. 1, 13, which how-
ever I do not quote in full : f Si egrediens limen calcaveris aut in
via offenderis, pedem contine . . . Cum processeris, abscondita
futurorum aves quas ominales vocant tibi praenunciabunt. Quid
comix loquatur diligenter ausculta, situmque ejus sedentis aut
volantis nullo modo contemnas. Refert etenim plurimum, a dex-
tris sit an a sinistris, qua positiono respiciat cubitum gradientis,
loquax sit an clamosa, an silens omnino, praecedat an sequatn r,
transeuntis expectet adventum, an fugiat, quove discedat. Cormts
vero, quern non minori diligentia observabis, rebus majoribus
auspicatur, et usquequaque cornici praejudicat. Porro cygnus in
auguriis ales gratissima nautis, utpoto quae aquarum domestica
quadam gratia familiaritatis eorundem secreta praenoverit. Si
avis quae vulgo dicitur albanellus (see below) praetervolans viatn
a sinistris feratur ad dextram, de hospitii hilaritate ne dubites,
si contra, contrarium expectabis. Leporis timebis occursum, lupo
obvio congratulaberis ; ovibus gratanter obviam gradieris, dum
capram vites. Bobus triturantibus, libentius tamen arantibus
obviabis; nec displiceat si viani ruperint, quia mora itineris
hospitii gratia compensabitur. Mulus infaustus est, asinus
inutilis, equus quandoquo bonus est; habet vero jurgiorum et
pugnae significationem, interdum tamen ex colore et visu miti-
gatur. Locusta itinerantiura praepedit vota, econtra cicada via-
toris promovet gressum. Aranea dum a superioribus Slum ducit,
spem venturae pecuniae videtur afferre. Sacerdotem obvium
aliumve religiosum dicunt esse infaustum ; feminam quoque, quae
capite di8cooperto incedit, infelicem crede, nisi publico sit.'



Digitized by Google



an-gang: path-crossing.



1121



Petrus Blesensis (d. about 1200) epist. 65 : ' Somnia igitur no
cures, nec te illorum errore involvas, qui occursum leporis timent,
qui mulierem sparsis crinibus, qui hominem orbatum oculis, aut
mutilatum pede t aut cuculatum habere obvium detestantur; qui
de jucundo gloriantur hospitio, si eis lupus occursaverit aut
columba, si a sinistra in dexteram avis S. Martini volaverit, si in
egressu suo remotum audiant tonitrum, si hominem gibbosum
obvium habuerint aut leprosum' 1 Hartmann makes his daunt-
less Erek defy the danger :

8122. Keins swachen glouben er phlac (cherished),
er wolt der wibe liezen (lot-casting)
engelten noch geniezen (pay for, nor partake),
swaz im getroumen (dream) mahte
dar uf het er kein ahte (took no heed) ;
er was kein weter-sorgcere (no weather- watcher) :
er sach im als maore
des morgens xiber den wee vam
die iuweln (owls) sam den musarn
ouch hiez er selten machen
dehein fiur uz der spachen
daz man in dar an sa)ho,
er phlac deheiner spaehe.
ez was umbe in so gowant,
im was der tisch in der hant
als ra a)ro enge s6 wit,
und swaz ungelouben git (gibt, gives)
dane kerte er sich nicht an.

This is imitated by Wirnt, whose Wigalois also goes forth :

6182. dehein ungeloube in muoto (no superstition in mind)
in dem huse noch uf dem wege,
er lie (liez, left) ez allez an Gotes pflege (care).
Swaz im des morgens wider lief (ran against),
oder swie vil diu krd gerief (how the crow cried),
swie vil der musdre umbe geflouc (how the m. flew round),
der ungeloube in niht betrouc (deluded) :

1 Conf. Chrysostom (b. 354 d. 407) ad popul. Antioch. homil. 21 (Opp. Etonae
1612. 6, 610) : lloX-Wt* i\e\dwv rti rty oIkIov tt\v iavrov eWtv AvOpwirov irtp6<f>da\fiov
1j x«X«i5o»ra, ical oivvlaaro . . . i&» diravrticjj wap04vos, <pi)<riv, Awparrot i} wipa



Digitized by Google



1122



SUPERSTITION



wand* er (for he) niht dar Af ahte (heeded).
Wir haben maneger slahto (many a sort)
bosheit unde gelouben (ain and superstition) ,
da mit wir uns nu rouben (whereby we rob us)
aller unser SEelecheit (bliss),
ez ist vil manegem manne leit (loth, painful)
swenne im ein wip daz swert git (gives) ;
daz lie der riter ane nit (W. took no offence),
em' ahtet niht dar uf ein har,
ez wasre gelogen (false) oder war :
er het in Gotes gnade gegeben
beidiu sele unde leben.

swaz im des morgens wider gie (ging ; met him),
daz engefloch (shunned) der riter nie,
wan (for) guoten gelouben het er ie (ever) .

Berthold p. 58 : 1 So gloubent eteliche an boesen aneganc (evil
meeting) : daz ein wolf guoten aneganc habe, der aller der werlte
schaden tuot, und ist halt s6 unreine daz er die liute an stinket
(infects), daz nieman bi im genesen mac ; und daz ein gewihter
priester boesen aneganc habe, an dem aller gloube lit (faith lies)
... So gloubent eteliche an den miusearn ; so ist dem der hose
(hare) iibor'n wee geloufen. Als ist ir unglouben als (so) vil, daz
sin nieman ze ende komen mac/ Conf. Sup. I, 128. The word
1 aneganc ' is supported by Rudolfs Weltchron. (Cod. Zeisb.
114 ), in speaking of Moses :

er verb6t alien aneganc,
vogel-vluc, stimme oder sane,
daz da geloupte nieman an ;

and Walth. 118, 16 says of a wretched man : ' wizzet, swem der
anegenget an dem morgen fruo, deme g£t ungeliicke zuo/ whom
he on-gangeth at early morn, on him shall come misfortune.
The Nethl. Reinaert 1055 expresses the notion by ' tektn ende
ghemoet* token and meeting ; 1 Reineke, ed. Hakemann p. 52, by

gemote, and people still say 1 to mote komen.' The ON. fieill

(omen) is a more general expression ; but one lay of the Edda
(SaBm. 184 b ) mentions three signs favourable to the warrior at

1 Rein. 1107 : sulc mochte one daer ghemoeten,

hi sonde ons quedden ende gioettn,
die ons nemmermu dade goet.



Digitized by Google



PATH-CROSSING



1123



the swinging of swords (at sverSa svipon) : the first is, if the
dark raven follow him (fylgja ens deyqva hrafns), 1 which calls to
mind the raven in the flag of fortune (p. 1112) ; the other two are
clearly ' angange/ for it says : ' ef bu ert ut umkominn, ok ert
a braut Minn' if thou hast gone out and art on thy road ; then
the second sign is : f tva fu litr ft tai standa hrdcTrfusa hali,' thou
seest two fame-thirsty men (warriors) stand on the start ; 8 and
the third sign : ' ef )>u fiiota heyrir Mf und ask-limom, heilla
auftit verSr ef fu ser b& fyrri fara/ if thou hear a wolf howl
under ash-boughs, good hap is destined thee if then 8 thou see
him run forwards. It is Hnikarr (OSinn) that puts SigurS up to
these omens. But against the three signs of luck are set two
of misfortune : one is, if the hero have to fight toward set of sun
(si$-skinan$i systor mana) ; another, if in going forth to battle

he trip with the foot (ef fu foeti drepr). Then in the Gesellen-

spriiche I see notable instances of angang in the frogs of the
pool, the ravens, the three old women, the maiden with the goat
(A.w. 1, 91. 107. 111). Again, Ihre de superst. p. 82 : ' Ejusdem
indolis est, quod tradunt nostrates de occursu hominum et
animalium, e.g. si cui domo sua mane egredienti occurrat mendi-
cus, vetula, claudus, aut felts, canis, vulpes, lepus, sciurus, is dies
inauspicatus habetur. Observant haec prae aliis sagittarii et
piscatores, qui ejusmodi ominibus oblatis haud raro domum rever-
tuntnr et a proposito abstinent.' Lasicz 48 : ' Quin ipse quoque
rex Wladislaus, gente Lituanus, has a matre sua superstitiones
didicerat, ut eum diem infaustum sibi futurum crederet, quo
primum ealceum sinistrum fortuito accepisset. Ad hoc movebat
se interdum in gyrum stans pede uno, foras e cubili proditurus.
Quorum similia multa observantur a Samagitis ; quidam infeliciter
ee venaturos sibi persuadent si domo egressis mulier occurrat, seu
quis certum numerum capiendorum leporum, vulpium, luporum
nominet.' Lucas David's Chron. i. 146-7 says of the ancient

1 In Nialss. cap. 8 two avengers of blood have luck, because two raven* accom-
pany them all the way (hrafnar tveir flugo me* Nim alia lei*) : do they attend as
Oftin's messengers ? or because they scent the coming carcase ? Other passages
are : ' hrafn at meiSi hatt kallaSi,' 8»m. 208 b ; 4 hrafn flygr atutan af haineiffi, ok
eptix honum orn 1 sinni,' Fornald. s6g. 1, 428.

5 What is the exact meaning o( * & tai standa, sitja (Siem. 266"), spretta (269*) '?
tai can hardly be Dat. sing, or Acc. pi. of the fem. ta (toe) ; it seems rather to be
a case of a maec. noun, and to contain a notion of place.

> I take H as = turn, eo momento.

VOL. Ill* Q



Digitized by Google



1124



SUPERSTITION



Prussians, that they regarded an encounter with a sick man as
bad, with a mounted man as good, with a fox or hare as bad (see
Suppl.).

It is hard to get at the meaning of all these divers prognostics.

First, of human angang. Ill-luck is supposed to follow that of
an old woman, of a woman with dislievelled hair, or what comes to
the same thing, loosened lieadband (decouverte, discooperta, It.
scoperta). If an old wife meet you in the morning, if you have
to pass between two ' old wives, your day is unlucky, Sup. I, 58.
380. 791. 976. When a huntsman in the morning comes upon
an old woman, he lies down and makes her step over him, to ward
off mischief (Hessian pop. cust.). In Switzerland to meet a
woman is unlucky, at least on New-year's day (Tobler 447 b ).
Swedish superst. K, 53 holds all meeting with woman-folk bad,
unless it be a lon-hora, as the irapdevo^ in Chrysostom betokened
an unlucky day, and the iropvn a lucky. So in Sup. I, 177 : the
virgin or priest is an evil sign, the prostitute a good. 1 But Ihre
speaks expressly of a vetula, so does Arndt's Journey to Sweden
1, 44, and a Finnish song (Schroter's Runen p. 67) : ' go forth by
early morn, lest ancient crone with crooked chin do squint at thee/
This last hint plainly sets before us the notion of a witcli, still
more does the loose flying hair (p. 1089) that of a night-wife
(Sup. I, SIS), fortune-teller, heathen priestess, conf. the Cimbrian
TroXioOpit; p. 55. Veldek 21 b paints his Sibylla as andfas (hor-
rida crinibus), r daz mies lockehte hieno ir uz den 6ren ' (non
comptae mansere comae 6, 48). And this view is confirmed by
the approach of a woman spinning being hurtful (Sup. 1, 135), for
a witch is a field- spinster, i.e. a norn, a fate (p. 1088). So early
as Pliny 28, 5 : ' pagana lege in plerisque Italiae praediis cavetur
ne mulieres per itinera ambulantes torgueant fusos, aut omnino
detectos ferant, quoniam adversetur id omnium spei, praecipueque
frugum/ This again looks remarkably like the scrutinies held
by our goddesses as to whether spindles were spun full or not,
pp. 269. 274.

And it becomes to my mind doubly clear by the clergyman

1 Not true of Theodora at any rate, a bird who boded ill to the Byzantines :
ybp tois bpGxriv d\\wt tc koI apxofitvys inipas p\da<p7ifiot oluv6i, Procop. Hist,
arc. 9 (ed. Bonn, p. 03).



Digitized by Google


PATH-CROSSING. 1125

being put in the like case : a consecrated priest, says Berthold,
is accounted of ill omen to such as meet him. I can produce
another pretty old proof from Hincmar 1, 656 : 1 sunt etiam qui
dicant, quando in venationem pergunt, quod obviam sibi non
debeant habere clericum ; ' and more modern ones from Reginald
Scott's Witchcraft (Lond. 1665 fol.) p. 314: 1 if any hunters, as
they were a hunting, chanced to meet a frier or a priest, they
thought it so ill luck, as they would couple up their hounds and
go hom, being in dispair of any further sport that day ; 9 and
from Pauli's Schimpf und Ernst (1555) cap. 858 : 1 there went an
old dame to church betimes o* the day, and a parson meeting her,
did cross herself some six times privily. Wherefore sign you
yourself so at sight of me ? quoth the priest ; I hope I be not
the devil. The woman answered, It hath never failed, an I came
upon a parson betimes of a morning, but some untoward thing
befell me the same day.'

When a company of people suddenly fall silent, they say
' there's a priest passing/ Nethl. 1 er gaat een predikant voorby 9 ;
every one feels confounded at the omen. And in a better sense
also it is said ' an angel flew across the room/ 'Ep^ hruarfKOe.
In Switzerland they say, there is bad weather when a clergyman
walks out (Tobler 436 b ).

The sudden appearance of a holy man interrupts and breaks
up worldly business. Those who met him were bound to shew
respect ; paganism may have prescribed in such a case the im-
mediate performance of a certain formality. Christians would
transfer the omen from the pagan to the christian priest ; that of
the heathen priestess or wise woman must have passed over to
night-wives and witches, as the clerus admitted no women into
its ranks.

Why should the meeting of a blind (or one-eyed) man, a lame
man, a beggar be considered bad, and that of a hunchback or leper
good ? why that of a walker be interpreted less favourably than
that of a rider (Sup. K, 129 Dan.), and that of a water-bearer also
unfavourably (I, 257) ? The blind man, the cloaked [rider]
suggest Wuotan. It seems more intelligible why a man did
not care to have his sword handed him by a woman, and why in
the Edda the sight of two warriors is a pledge of victory.

To lovers the sight of the loved one must have been the



Digitized by Google



1126



SUPERSTITION



welcomest of signs : ' swer si des morgens angesiht, den tac im
niemer leit geschiht,' who upon her at morn doth look, that day
no manner harm shall brook, Ms. 2, 23 b (see Suppl.).

Animal encounters have their origin in pastoral and hunting
life, they are basod on contemplation of nature and on fabulous
opinions about the habits of beasts. Under this head there most
be a vast deal in Slavic, Esthonian, Finnic and Lithuanian tradi-
tion waiting to be collected, which at present I must do without.
Even Norse tradition seems not to have been accurately noted down
in this respect. Saxo Gram. p. 321 says of Slavs, not of North-
men: 'ad varia quoque negotia profecturi ex primo animalis
occursu votorum auspicia capiebant; quae si laeta fuissent,
coeptum alacres iter carpebant, sin tristia, reflexo cursu propria
repetebant.' The animals in question he omits to name. Im-
portant above all is that omen in the Edda of the wolf howling
and going onwards, whom we may fairly take for the victory-
boding beast of OSinn (p. 668). All other evidence agrees with
it, even the superstitions of to-day. Everywhere the brave un-
daunted wolf, the sight of whom awakens heart and hope, is set
off against the timid cowardly hare, the type of faint heart and
failure. Sigeb. gembl. ad an. 1143: 'obiit etiam Fulco rex
Hierosolymorum ; qui dum veuationi insistens leporem insequitur
ex improviso sibi apparentem, equus cui insidebat se super ipsum
praecipitem dedit, ipsumque vita et regno privavit ; 1 conf.
Vintler, Sup. G, 11. 52 — 55. Again : 1 on the way there chanced
a hare to run across their road ; the driver was troubled, and
spake, This betokeneth no good. If contrariwise a wolf had
crossed the road, it were a good sign/ Ettner's Unw. doctor
575-6 ; conf. Simplic. 2, 74. In Pauli's Schimpf u. E. cap. 138
(ed. 1550 cap. 135): 'in the morning they set forth, and being
come wellnigh unto the wood, Master, quoth the man, there ran
a wolf before us. The master said he had seen him well enough,
it meant sheer luck.' In Albertini's Narrenhatz, Munich 1617.
p. 96 : ' superstitious numskulls are affrighted if a hare cross the
path whereon they shall walk or ride, supposing that they shall
on that day abide a misadventure.' Goz von Berlichingen in his
Life p. 179 : ' and as we came on, behold, a shepherd feeding his
flock hard by, and for a token, there fell five wolves upon the sheep,



Digitized by Goog



PATH-CROSSING.



1127



that laid hold of them roundly, the which I gladly heard and saw,
and wished them luck, and us too, and said to them, Good luck
to you, good fellows, good luck everywhere, and I deemed it
lack, for even so should we lay hold one of another.' 1 Here we
have no angang proper described, but we can see the meaning
that warlike nations at first put into it. Wolf, stag, boar and
bear all stand exactly on a par in respect of their meaning, Sup.
I, 1 28. The Norwegian thinks it a bad sign to meet a hare, a
good one to meet a bear or a wolf (Danske's Reiseiagtagelser
1799. 2, 297): here the boar, whom the lay of the Raven's
wedding calls the * yppersto karl i skoven,' is justly placed before
the wolf. 2 Roman accounts take no notice of the bear, but they
do of the wolf; Pliny 8, 22 (34) : 'inter auguria ad dexteram com-
meantium praeciso itinere, si pleno id ore lupus fecerit, nullum
omnium praestantius.' Pliny also tells us the effect of a footprint
of the wolf, if a horse treads on it : ' tanta vis est animalis, ut ves-
tigia ejus calcata equis afiferant torporem ' 28, 10 (44) ; and 'rumpi
equos, qui vestigia luporum sub equite sequantur' 28, 20 (81).
Both J ohn of Salisbury and Peter of Blois have ' occursum leporis
timere.' In addition to Berthold and Hartlieb (Sup. H, cap. 67),
the Cod. pal. 341. 163* has a passage in point. Feldbauer 240 :

Dar zuo sah wir einen hasen (hare),
der ividerfuor uns (met us) an ilem weg ;
do daht ich deiz niht eben laeg :
er tet uns den ersten aneganc,
wan daz er snelle fur mich spranc.

To Greeks and Romans apparently it could under favourable
circumstances be a good omen (a?<r*o?) . 3 The weasel (yaXrj) had
a bad name among them : when it ran across the road, a public
assembly was postponed (Potter 1, 746). Theophrastus in

1 Goethe recognised the poetic effect of these words, and incorporated them in
his play.

2 To Turkish travellers too the wolf is a grateful, the hare an unwelcome sign ;
Vienna Lit. zeitung 1616. p. 1257.

1 Dio Cass. 62, 2 (Reim. 1006-7) : ravra dirovtra, \aywv nkv Ik toO k6\itov
rpo^Karo (ij BowSovUa, a Britoness) fiavrclq. ru>l Xptt/i^, ftww^ i» al<rl(fi tdpane,
rb re r\rj$oi T&» ijadh ayep6i)<re. Otherwise in Suidas : 0oj*I* 6 \ayui Swm^ctf
xoift rplfiov*. When the Germans under king Arnulf ttarted a hare and chased it,
they took Bome (Liutpr. 1, 8), but hare-hunting Danes were put to flight (Neocorus
1, 853 ; here Detmar puts a eat, 1, 164). To be licked by the hare was considered
lucky : ■ he weened a hare had licked him/ Trodelfrau 1682. p. 71.



Digitized by Google



1128



SUPERSTITION.



Charact. 16 says, if a weasel run past you, you must not go on
till some one else has paced the road, or you have picked up three
stones from it. So Centonovelle cap. 31 : 1 quando Puomo trova
la donnola 1 nella via/ The fox's angang is interpreted variously :
as bad in that passage from Ihre, as good by Lithuanian Superst.
N, 9. Domestic animals, such as the traveller keeps on his own
premises, and does not meet for the first time in the woods, are
hardly available as omens : they are too common, too tame and
dependent on man, to become significant to him. Yet they say,
if on setting out early you meet swine, you will not be welcome
where your steps are taking you ; if sheep, you will. According
to some, the wayfarer is a welcome guest if the sheep present
themselves on his right hand, and unwelcome if on his left. The
Etruscans, when a new magistrate rode into his province, observed
what horses and oxen he fell in with (0. Miiller 2, 118). Compare
the prophesying by horses (p. 662-4), where it is true there is no
chance meeting of the beast, yet stress is laid on his planting of
the right foot or the left. An instance in Procop. de b. Pers. 2, 5
p. 172 ought to be added.

The observation of birds was even more minutely carried out
than the encounter of quadrupeds, their free unhindered motion
through the air being of itself enough to invest them with some-
thing marvellous and spirit-like. The Greeks had a comprehen-
sive oi(oviariKi] (Suidas sub v.), the Romans reduced auspicia and
auguria to a system. 3 Boh. ptako-prawiti augurari, ptako-westec
augur, Pol. ptaszo-wieszczek. And heathens of the Teuton race
equally regarded birds as messengers of the gods and heralds of
important tidings (pp. 672, 763). ' What bird has brought that to
your ears ? ' means : who made you believe that, put it into your
head ? 8 'A bird sang that to me : jag horde en fogel sa sjunga,
en fogel var hiir, och sade for mig det eller dot/ said so and so,
Ihre de superst. p. 51. Mod. Greek and Servian folksongs not
unfrequently open with birds on the wing wheeling this way and

1 Our frthiUin, Bav. mOemelein, auntie, Bchm. 2, 576, sehonthierU, pretty
beastie 3, 369 ; Span, comadreja (Reinh. ccxxiv), Dan. den kjdnne, pulcra : all these
names attest the saoredness of the animal. The Servians call her lazitsa, but
address her by the caressing form laza : 1 lazo lazitchitse ! '

2 Jul. Caes. Bulenger de auguriis fGraevii thes. 5).

3 Westphal. 4 wecker vaugel heft diJs dat inner auren ehangen ? ' Slennerhinke

p. 8.



Digitized by Google



PATH-CROSSING.



1129



that, holding a conversation, Wh. Mailer's Saml. 1, 66. 102. 2,
164. 178. 200. Vuk 3, 326. Two black ravens (dva vrana ga-
vrana) caw from the white tower, Vuk. 2, 151. The prophetic call
of the cuckoo has been dealt with, p. 675 seq. ; he too belongs to
angang, his voice in the wood falls unexpected on the traveller's
ear, a good sign if on the right hand, a bad if on the left. Pliny
30, 10 (25) : ' aliud est cuculo miraculum, quo quis loco primo audiat
alitem illam, si dexter pes circumscribatur ac vestigium id
effodiatur, non gigni pulices, ubicunque spargatur;' conf. p. 1093
on cutting out footmarks. The Indie, superst. xiii. touches on
angaria avium. Eligius, Sup. A : ' nec in itinere positi aliquas
aviculas cantantes attendatis.' Birds whose encounter is pro-
phetic are called wegvogel, way-fowl, Sup. I, 600, but by far
the best qualified for the purpose were the krimmende raubvbgd
(rapaces aves) that won victories over other birds, and could pre-
dict the same happy event to heroes ; 1 accordingly birds of prey
play the foremost part in dreams. An anecdote in Procop. de b.
Goth. 4, 20 (ed. Bonn. 2, 560-1) shews how early this superstition
was domiciled among German nations : Hermigiscl king of the
Warni, riding over field, noticed a bird (of what kind, is not said)
on a tree, and heard him caw (so prob. a raven or crow). Under-
standing the song of birds, the king informed his followers that
his death in forty days was foretold. 2 It is ig&or up in the trees
that prophesy to Sigurfcr (p. 672) ; it is not settled whether they
were swallows, or perhaps she-eagles ? Dagr has a sparrow of
understanding, Ingl. saga cap. 21. Several passages in the O.
Span. Cid prove the observation of birds : 867 al exir de Salon
mucho ovo biienas aves ; 2376 con Dios e con la vuestra auce;
2379 con la buen auce (see Suppl.).

And as it was a principal point with the ancients whether the
flight was from right or left, Hartlib also (Sup. H, cap. 67) pro-
nounces flying on the right hand lucky, on the left unlucky. He
says the eagle must fly pouch-side of the traveller, i.e. on the side
where his travelling-pouch hangs. Nowhere else do I find the

1 Frid. Gail. Schwarz de antiquiss. Apollinis nature, BeroL 1843, p. 16.

2 Oirroi dvijp (EpneyiaicXos) (to Ov&pvwy rots Xoytptardroit if X w Mv T V lTTev6p.evos
6pvtv Tivd iwl Stvdpov T( KadrjfjUvrjv elde kcu xoWi. Kpwjpvaaw. efre N rijt Spvidot rrjs
<piM>yi}S^vpelt €(t€ AXXo pAv rt i^eiriardpevos, iwctvai Si rrjs 6pvi$oi pavTcvopLtvijt Ttparevad-
ptvo%, TOij xapovaty fi)#t>t ftpaaKfv ut redv^crai TtoaapaKWTo. ijpApous Q<TTtpoi>...Trj
TtcrcapatcwTT-jj &t6 rrjt rpo^aews T)pipq. vwjii<ra% ir€vpwp.evT)v dW*-X»j(re.



Digitized by Google



1130 SUPERSTITION.

' ar ' mentioned, but often the musar, in Hartman, Wimt, Bert-
hold ; which Benecke's Diet, to the first-named makes a small
bird of prey, the same that Burchard (Sup. C, p. 198 c ) calls
muriceps and explains as mouser. The poem of the Uebel wip
says 297—301 :

Swenne ich nach gewinne var,
s6 ist durft daz mir der musar
uber die strdze vliege
und mich des niht entriego,
ob ich ir niht enbringe ;

1. e. when I bring her nothing home, I have to make that my
excuse. This bird's flying over the road is a favourable sign.
In the Iliad 10, 274 a heron {epoaZio^t) flying on the right brings
luck. The raven, a bird of victory to the heathen, is spoken of
in the Norse quotations p. 1123 as 'accompanying/ but nowhere
else in connexion with an gang ; of the crow we hear plenty.
It was lucky 'si cornicula ex sinistra in dexter am cantaverit,'
Sup. C, p. 198 c ; the same in Petr. Bles., except volaverit for
cantaverit ; Kolocz. 146 says of children brought up in luxury,
who never felt the heavy hand of fate : ' si enwizzen wannen
die krdn sint gevlogen,' they never knew whence the crows flew.
Walth. 94, 39: 'ein unsceligiu (unblest) hra begonde schrien.'
MS. 2, 80 : ' ez hab ein sxaerziu hra gelogen,' told lies. On the
other hand : ' alba solet comix affectum scire tacentis,' Reinard.

2, 657. With the crow some would identify the Martin's bird,
whose flight is so fraught with meaning in Peter of Blois and
in Renart 10472, Reinaert 1047, Reineke 942. ' Sant Martins
vogd, wol uber her I daz ist nu gar der niuwe hant,* Liederb.
der Hatzlerin 24 l b ; i.e. such careless calling upon St. Martin's
bird is all the fashion now (conf. ' diu niuwe hant, alte hant/
Renner 2087 — 2111). A similar invocation in Reinaert: 'al
heil, edel voghel, kere herwaert dinen vloghel 1 1 But Nemnich
would make the falco cyaneus, a small bird of prey, the Martin't
bird, Nethl. Martens vogel, Fr. l'oiseau S. Martin, Span, pajaro
S. Martin ; and this would fit in with John of Salisb.'s albanellut
(Fr. haubereau), which expressly points to good hospitium, like
Martin's bird in Reinhart [and Petr. Bles.]. I find no clue in
the ordinary legends of the saint, to whom the bird must have



Digitized by Google



PATH-CROSSING



1131



brought something. 1 Again, in Vintler (Sap. G, 1. 158) sant
Martis-vogel betokens luck ; this spelling would almost lead to
the supposition that Martinsvogel was a corruption of 1 Martis
avis/ which would be the woodpecker, the Mdrzafulli (p. 673).
In Ls. 3, 543 we read: ' sant Martins vbgalin din machent
mangen umbecreiz ; ' while another passage (which even Reinh.
cxxvii borrows) in a Pal. MS. (Altswert 77, 19) has again ' Mertiss
vogelin/ and we are told it points the way to the Venus mount,
which adds to its mythical character. Our nursery rhymes give
sunte Martens viigelken a red coat or golden wing, but they are
sung on Martinmas-eve, and bring us back to the saint. So I
can come to no certain conclusion about this bird. Coming back
to the crow , we have yet more credentials, old and new. Virg.
Eel. 9, 15 : 'ante sinistra cava monuisset ab ilice comix.' Poema
del Cid 11. 12: ' ovieron la corneia diestra,' and 1 siniestra. 1
lienart 10473, speaking of the oisean S. Martin: 'assez si le
hucha a destre, et li oisiax vint a senestre.' The ancients do not
leave out the raven, as Plaut. Aul. iv. 3, 1 : 1 non temere est, quod
corvus cantat mihi nunc ab laeva manii, semel radebat pedibus
terram, et voce crocibat sua/ Olaf Tryggvason, though a christ-
ian, noticed whether the hraka (crow) stood on her right or left
leg, believing it to bode good or evil to him ; whonce his enemies
nicknamed him krdkubein. The ON. hungr-krdka foretold famine,
and illvi&ris-krdka ill weather. Cento nov. ant. 32 : ' segnor, jo
vit una cornacchia in uno cieppo di salice.' 1 Or mi di, donna,
verso qual parte teneva volta la coda? ' * Segnor, ella avea volta
verso il cul.' a Conf. the charadrius or galadrot p. 853n.

The woodpecker too was a sacred bird, p.673-5; in Lindenblatt's
Chron. p. 31 : 'ir speht hatte nicld recht geflogen/ i.e. not from
the right hand. To the Romans the screeching parra (green-
pecker ? peewit ?) boded mischief : ' impios parrae recinentis
omen ducat/ Hor. Od. iii. 27, lj 'picas et cornix est ab laeva,
corvus, parra ab dextera/ Plaut. As. ii. 1, 12. In Sweden the
flight of the lorn (a sort of heron, says Ihre) is presignificant,
Sup. K, 94. To see the magpie from the front is a good sign,
from behind a bad, I, 158. When you hear the first swallow in

1 1 The story of S. Martin and the martin is in Bosquet 219. 220.' — Suppl.
' ' Ml 1' ba vaticinato la cornacchia, che la mia Leila donna m' infinocchia,'
is fooling me, Tommaseo 1, 22-4.



Digitized by Google

i



1132



SUPERSTITION.



spring, stop at once (on your road), and from under your left foot
dig a coal out of the ground, I, 217. G, 1. 98 ; just as one cut out
the footmark on the spot where one heard the cuckoo (p. 1129). 1
Ms. 2, 118 b . 208 b : 1 nu jarlanc stet vil h6ch min muot, ich h6rte
den siiezen sane von einer swalwen da si fluoc,* as she flew.
Servants in Denmark notice whether they see the stork for the
first time flying or standing, Sup. K, 130. With the frog, all
depends on where you see him hop first, on land or in water,
I, 237. To meet a bald or plucked hen was reckoned bad :

Enmi sa voie a encontr6e

une geline pielee,

qui pasturoit en la charriere ;

a poi ne sen retorne arriere,

por ce quil i entendoit sort ;

a ses piez trueve un baston tort,

a la geline lest aler,

et ele sen prist a voler,

en son gelinois le maudist

• honte li viegne ! ' et il si fist.

Passages in Provencal poetry bearing upon angang are collected
in Diez's Lives of the Troub. p. 22-3 ; they relate to the raven,
crow and varieties of the falcon tribe (albanel, gavanh), the
criteria being their right or left flight, their going or coming, their
crying or keeping silence :

Los destres e'ls sevestres, los anans e'ls venens,
d } albanel, de gavanh, d'autras auzels ferens,
del corp e de la gralha, los cridans, los tacens.

Poes. der troub. p. 221. One would like to have fuller accounts
of this bird-interpreting as practised in the Mid. Ages (see
Suppl.). 8

1 Qawn prima hirundinem videris, hoc die ter : ' rogo te, hirundo, ut hoc anno
oculi mei non lippeant,' Fundgr. 1, 325.

3 The heathen Arabs watched the flight of birds : xeger and Ijavet are almost
synonymous terms [meaning to expound], zeger being used when you throw a
stone at the bird and shout to it ; if then he fiiet to your right hand, it is a good
sign, if to your I, ft, bad : ijavet is in general the interpretation of the names, the
alighting and the cries of birds that you encounter. The science seems to culmi-
nate in the knowledge of bird-language, which from the time of Solomon has never
fallen into oblivion in the East. The raven is reckoned a herald of misfortune
(Ruckert's Hariri 1, 591-2). Of Indian augury many examples might be given, for
instance in the Rdmfiyana: «hae aves tibi declarant horrendum periculum im-
minere/ Schlegel's Ind. bibl. 2, 225. A shepherd ascribed the discomforts that had



tized by Google



PATH-CROSSING.



1133



Oar early ages appear also to have seen a meaning in the over-
flight of certain birds. Ms. 2, l b on the lord of the Diirings :
' ob ime ein adelar (over him an eagle) z'allen ziten ist mit hohen
fliigen gewesen.' Eagles spread their wings over famous heroes
to shade them from the sun : when the heathen deputies came to
Charles's hall, 1 they saw ' daz die adelaren dar zu gewenit waren,
daz sie state bdren/ Rol. 21, 20. This evidently stands connected
with the eagle over Charles's palace (p. 633), perhaps even with
that in OSin's hall, Seam. 41 b . The dove hovering above was
mentioned p. 148 ; supervenire and adumbrare are even Biblical
language. By the side of f drupir iorn yfir ' I place an important
stanza of the Havamal, Seem. 12 b :

ominnis hegri, sa er yfir otfSrom hrumir,
hann stelr gefti guma ;
bess fugls fioSrom ec fiotraSr varc
t garSi GunnlaSar

(oblivionis ardea, qui super symposiis stridet mentemque hominum
furatur; ejus avis pennis captus sum in domo Gunnladae). It
is OSinn that speaks, who, after intoxicating himself with full
draughts of nectar at the house of GunnloS (p. 903-5), flies away
in eagle's shape, 1 6minnis hegri 1 being a circumlocution for the
divine bird. Hegri stands for hegri, hrfigri, AS. h nigra, OHG.
heigiro, hreigiro, ipuhio?, one large bird instead of another.
When OSinn swilled the drink he had longed for, and enjoyed the
favour of the fair giantess, he was fettered in eagle's feathers,
i.e. put on the form of an eagle. How like the myth of Zeus,
when, transformed into an eagle, he carries off Ganymede, and
makes him pour out nectar for him ! (see Suppl.). 2

The Romans framed a system of augury of their own, not
based on the flight of wildfowl, but on the domestic breed of
poultry. The Greeks practised an dXe/crpvofiavTeia by laying

dogged him all day long to the single circumstance, that early in the morning a
snake had crawled acrott his jxith.

1 The description of this hall, and the impression its splendour must have
made on the strangers, is wonderfully like what goes on in Asgard during Gylfi's
visit, Sn. 2. Conf. the similar Lombard story in the Chron. Salem, by Arichis
(Pertz 5, 479).

8 Those words in the Havamal, portraying the sublime rapture of immortality
aud likewise the art of poesy, Scand. commentators hare taken for a description of
ordinary drunkenness, against whose consequences we are warned in an Icel. poem
eatitled 4 Ominnis hegri.'



Digitized by Google



1134



SUPERSTITION



grains of corn on the letters of the alphabet, and letting a cock
pick them off. The Roman divination was simpler, according to
the eager or sluggish eating, or refusing to eat, of young fowls ;
every legion had its pullarins, who bred, fed and guarded the
fowls, and the consul held the augurium in his own house or tent :
' pullis regitur imperium Romanum, hi jubent acies 1 says Pliny
10, 24 ; and Procopius 1, 316 gives examples. 1 Yet they also
observed the cries of the cock and hen : ' gallina cecinit ' is
named amongst other bad omens for the bridegroom, in Terence's
Phormio iv. 4, 80 ; the gloss of Donatus makes it mean ' superi-
orem marito esse uxorem.' And in our own superstition (I, 83 ;
L, 23) a hen that crowed like a cock was held in horror. If a
listener under the henroost heard the cock crow, the omen was
happy, if the hen cried, it was sad (1, 105. 1055) ; the same thing
applies to droppings of the cock and hen (I, 230). The gander
too was supposed to prophesy (I, 847). The Eathonians dis-
tinguish between birds of bare and those of shaggy foot (M, 95).

Often it is neither the flight of wayside fowl, nor the chance
encounter of a quadruped, but their appearing, their residing
in the dwellings of men that bodes them weal or woe. The
swallow (L, 9) and the stork are birds of luck (p. 672), one is glad
to see storks build on one's roof (I, 215). He that first sees the
stork fly in spring, is sure to go on a journey. To the Lettons
the titmouse foretokened good, its name is sihle, and sihleht is
to foretell (p. 683). A weasel or snake on the roof boded ill
(Suidas sub v. Xenocrates) ; * anguis per impluvium decidit de
tegulis,' Ter. Phormio iv. 4, 29. So does a mouse nibbling at
your clothes, Sup. I, 184. Raven, crow or magpie on a sick house
is unlucky, or of double meaning, I, 120. 158. 496 (see Suppl).

There were corpse-birds, birds of dole, whose appearing signi-
fied actual or impending death. I suppose the turtle-dove with
her melancholy wail to have been such to the Goths, by their
calling her hrdivadubo (corpse-dove) ; neither rpvywv nor turtur
conveys this collateral sense, the bird merely mourns her lost
mate ; 2 tales about her are coll. in Aw. 3, 34. One of the way-

1 Record of 788 in Marini no. 56, p. 94 : ' et alia multa de vestra infidelit&te
cognovimus ad pullorum com turn ' (r. can turn).

J The Langobards used to erect, among the graves in their churchyards, poles
(perticas) in memory of their kinsfolk who had fallen in war or in foreign parts : od



Digitized by Google



COCK AND HEN, CORPSE-BIRDS.



1135



birds, the owl, is also, and preeminently, in place here (Sap. I,
789 ; L, 8). Hartmann contrasts her flight across one's path with
that of the musar, hers appears to have been baleful, as hia was
wholesome: Ms. 2, 174 says 'der iuweln flue' ne'er profited the
world. Ovid Met. 5, 550 :

foedaque fit volucris, venturi nuntia luctus,
ignavus bubo, dirum mortalibus omen.

Here metamorphosis strikes in : the owl was an enchanted person,
and slrxx, strinx (' e teetis strix violenta canat/ Tibull. i. 5, 52),
bruxa signify at once the bird and the witch that fly by night
(p.l039n.) : ' ululae, upupae, bubones toto anno in tectis funebria
personantes,' p. 481 n. ; ' male ominatos cantus ulularum,' Chron.
S. Trudonis p. 379. The OHG. holz-runa, holz-muoja, holz-muwo
(Gl. Flor. 988 b . 996 b . Sumerl. 10, 65. 27, 44. 29, 74) translate
lamia, but they rather express wailing bodeful birds, or sprites
(of both sexes), who are heard whispering and muttering
(rounding, mooing) in the wood, p. 433. Hence also their name
of klag-muhme (wailing aunt), klag-mutter, hlage-weib ; 1 in the
Ackerman v. Bohmen, ed. Hag. p. 38, ' klagmut ' should be
amended ' klagmuoter.' In the Upper Harz klagmutter, hlag-
weib, Tdagefrau mean a spectral yet winged being (Spiel's Archiv
2, 247) ; elsewhere it is called weh-hlage (Sup. I, 863), leich-huhn
(lich-hen), grab-mile, todten-vogel, and in Brunswick the lapsch,
because of its lazy lingering flight (Brauns. anz. 1746. p. 236),
' ignavus bubo,' which again calls up the old sense of feig (fey,
moribundus). Other prognostics of death are, when the raven
beklies, Sup. G, 1. 166, when a cock or hen trails straw, M, 77,

the top of the pole was fixed the wooden image of a dove, whose head or beak
pointed in the direction where the loved one lay buried ; Paul. Diac. 5, 34 (not
unlike the gyrating eagle on the palace-roof, p. 634). The dove represented the
sorrowing kinsman who set up the pole. Precisely so the Servians of to-day make
the cuckoo mourn for them (p. 682) : on a wooden cross 6 feet high are carved as
many cuckoos as there are survivors, esp. sisters, to mourn the dead. A girl who
has lost a brother can never hear the cuckoo sing without breaking into a flood of
tears ; kukumene ! is an interjection of grief, Montenegro, Stuttg. 1837. pp. 99. 100.
All this Betting up of doves and cuckoos brings to mind that of horse*' head* on
poles and roofs (p. 659), of eagle* on roofs (p. 633- 4).

1 The Lausitz Wends call our wehklage bote sedleiko, God's little chair
[saddle?] : it appears either as a white hen, or as a beautiful whiU child, whose
piteous wailing and weeping announces impending misfortune. In Bohemian too
sedli*ko is a seat and also the nightmare, perhaps because the demon mounts and
rides (incubus).



Digitized by Google



1136



SUPERSTITION.



when the gnladrot (charadrius) turns his head away from the sick
man (see Suppl.).

In the same way other animals give notice of a death : when
a priest is called in, and his horse lowers his head, Sup. M, 35 ;
when a black ox or cow has been killed in the house, I, 887,
which points right back to ancient sacrifices. Also the mole
burrowing in a human habitation 555. 601. 881, the cricket
chirping 555. 600. 930, 1 the woodworm ticking 901, and mice
nibbling at the clothes of a sleeper (see Suppl.).

Prophetic ants, Sup. K, 88 ; M, 99. A spider running toward
you early in the morning is unlucky, but there are luck-spinners
too, I, 134. Bosquet 219. A swarm of bees settling on a house
betokens fire, I, 160 or some disaster, 9 from those in Drusus's
camp downwards (Pliny 11, 18. Dio Cass. 54, 33. Jul. Obse-
quons de prodig. 1, 132). To Leopold of Austria they foretold
the loss of Sempach fight in 1386: 'da kam ein imb geflogen,
in d'linden er genistet hat, art's herzogen waffen er flog als do der
selbig herzog wol fur die linden zog : das diutet frombde geste, so
redt der gemeine man/ Wackern. leseb. 703. It is usually a
flight of grasshoppers that announces stranger guests (Justinger
p. 160, conf. 271), or else a good take of salmon, ib. 379. Other
intimations of coming guests in Sup. I, 71-2-3. 889. 1028 ; K, 63
(see Suppl.).

Lifeless things, especially elements, can furnish omens. Flames
standing on the lielmets or spears of warriors were a prognostic
of victory (vUtfi avp,$o\ov). Seem. 110* b mentions a fire of this
kind, but not what it signified : ' hyrr leingi mun d brodds oddi
bifaz'; and more plainly 151 b : ' af geirom geislar (rays) st6$o.'
Tac. Ann. 12, 64: ' signa militum arsere'j 15, 7 : 'pila militum
arsere.' Procop. de b. Vand. 2, 2 : t<op hopdrwv avroU ra axpa
irvpl iroKk<a KareXafiTrero, Kal avrtov at aiyjtaX teaieaOat hrl
nrXetarov cfyiatv iSotcovv. Greg. Tur. mirac. Mart. 1, 10: 'dum
haec agerentur, duae puerorum lanceae emissis flammis lumen
euntibus praebuerunt, ibantque fulgurantes hastae.' Before the
battle of Prague in 1620 a will o y wisp settled on the general's

> Sometimes these ' heimen or grillen ' mean prosperity to the house, Sop. I,
313. 609.

» ' Exam en apum in arbore praetorio imminente consederat,' Livy 21, 46.
• fastigium Capitolii examen apium insedit,' Tac. Ann. 12, 64.



Digitized by Google



!



BEES. FLAMES. THINGS FOUND. 1137

flag, and was taken for a pledge of victory. This too is the
Dioscuri's flame, that shone on the masts of ships, a saving sign
nnder stress of storm. Further, a candle that sneezes (spits), a
brand that snaps aver (Sup. I, 889) betoken guests again ; a candle
that goes out, death (150) ; one that burns roses (forms wick-
heads), good luck (252). To spill oil or wine, to pour water
under the table, were signs to the ancients, one good, the other
bad. The table squeaking, the rafters creaking, justified the
gloomiest auguries (Dempster 3, 9). Water sinking away or
rising indicated a death or famine (p. 590). When the fire
crackles, or salt is spilt, it is a sign of strife, Sup. 1, 322. 534-5.
64. Connect with this the mythic interpretation of the bickering
flame, p. 242 : the god is present in the flame as in the bodeful
thunder. Gaps formed by earth tumbling in (gropar) prognosti-
cate a death (M, 95) ; from the sound of the first three clods
thrown into a grave, you can tell if others will die soon. A
splinter splitting off the floor is a sign of guests (I, 71. 1032),
a hoop bursting off a barrel, of death (I, 149) 1 (see Suppl.).

The custom of sprinkling barleycorns on the hot fireplace, and
watching if they leap up or lie still, I find in Burchard alone,
Sup. C, p. 195 d , not in later authors; the Greek tcpcOopavrela was
different.

If in time of war two ears of corn were found on one stalk, it
was thought to prefigure the return of peace; 2 on the contrary,
for the cherry-tree to blossom twice in tlie year is a sign of war,
Sup. I, 1116 (see Suppl.).

Other things, without any augury or sorcery being founded on
them, are considered wholesome or hurtful : particularly things
found, begged or stolen. Thus the finding of a four-leaved clover,
of three whole grains in a baked loaf (Sup. I, 685), of a nail or
tooth off a harrow 539. 636, which enable the possessor to discern
witches (p. 1078), inventio acus vel oboli reservati (E, 11 r. b.),

1 Sneton. in Octav. 92 : * auspicia quaedam et omina pro certissimis observabat :
6i mane sibi calceu* perperam ac riniatcr pro dextero induoeretur, ut dirum (like
Wladislaus, p. 1123) ; si terra marivo ingredient© se longinquam profectionem forte
rorcuitt, ut laetum, maturique et prospcri reditus.

3 Eliaab. Charlotte of Orleans writes July 17, 1695 : ' I am well weary of the
war ; pray, dear Louise, acquaint yourself if it be true that near Giessen they have
found a stalk, which the Landgraf of Darmstatt hath in safe keeping, whereon are
II ears, and if the like was found at the end of the 30 years' war.' It is also
believed that lightning will not strike a house where a stalk with two ears is kept.



Digitized by Google



1138



SUPERSTITION.



of a needle (K, 46) according as it turns head or point toward
you (I, 235), of a felloe off a wheel 351, of a horseshoe 129. 220
(Hone's Yrbk 1600) ; a begged loaf 13, a ring made of begged
silver pennies 352 ; a stolen duster 431, tie of a meal-sack 216,
loaf 183-8, timber 1000 (Firmenich 2, 33), fishing-tackle (K, 48),
weaver's knots. In finding things the favour of fortune comes
into play ; to things begged the labour, to things stolen the risk
of acquisition lends additional value : three gulps of begged
wine drive away the hiccup. And not only stolen property in
a particular case, but a thief's hand (p. 1073n.), a spur made out
of a gibbet-chain (I, 385), the gallows-rope itself (386. 921.
G, 1. 217), possess a peculiar virtue ; conf. the origin of the gal-
lows-mannikin, Dent. sag. no. 83 (see Suppl.).

A wheel placed over the gateway brings luck (I, 307) ; is the
notion of fortune's wheel (p. 866) or the sun's wheel (pp. 620.
701) at work here? Splinters of a tree struck by lightning,
coffin-splinters are of use (I, 171. 208). The bridal bed mast
have only dry wood, but off living trees ; 1 other fancies about the
bridal bed 486-7. No picked up feathers, no hen's feathers
should be put in a bed 281. 346. 593.

Choosing of days prevailed among the Jews (Levit. 19, 26.
Deut. 18, 10), Greeks, and probably all heathens. Hesiod dis-
tinguishes between mother-days and stepmother-days, he goes
over all the good days of Zeus, and all the bad, "Epya te. r Hu.
765 (710) seq. Even if our names for the days of the week were
imported from abroad (p. 127), yet native superstitions may have
been mixt up with them from a very early time. ' Nullus ob-
servet ' so preached Eligius, ' qua die doraum exeat, vel qua die
revertatur, nullus ad inchoandum opus diem aut lunam attendat.'
Hincmar 1, 656: 'sunt et qui observant dies in motione itineris
et in inchoatione aedificandae domus.' Sueton. in Oct. 92 : f ob-
servabat et dies quosdam, ne aut postridie nundinas qaoquam
proficisceretur, aut nonis quidquam rei seriae inchoaret.' Pliny
28, 5 : ' ungues resecari 2 nundinis Romanis tacenti, atque a

1 Odofredus in I. legate digest, de supellect. leg. : * mulieres quando nubnnt,
volunt lectin 1 1 de lignia aiocis, Bed de arbore vivente. Bed in omnibus opinionibus
suis iatuae sunt.'

* Tbe nails in general are carefully watched : when they blossom, i.e. hare
specks of white, luck blossoms too. Much depends on which hand and what
finger the blossoms are on (Reusch). Pliny touches more than once on the



Digitized by



LUCKY DAYS. GUIDING BEASTS.



1139



digito indice, multorum pecuniae religiosum.' Even amongst us
the superstition survives, that the nails should be cut on a par-
ticular day, Friday especially. A day that will bring misfortune
is called verworfen, castaway, accursed (Sup. G, 1. 51). 1 The
ancient Germans appear to have kept Wednesday and Thursday
holy above all, after their chief gods W6dan and Thunar : the
Indiculus has a section ' de feriis quas faciunt Jovi vel Mercuric'
Later on I find no day more superstitiously observed than Thurs-
day, p. 191 ; also by the Esthouians, M, 59. One should not
move to a new dwelling on Thursday, for birds carry nothing to
their nests that day. On the other hand, Wednesday and Friday
are counted accursed witch-days, I, 613. 658. 745; separately,
Wednesday 567, Friday 241. 800. M, 59. 60. In records of
witch-trials (see the Quedlinburg), the devils mostly appear on
a Tliursday or Tuesday. Monday too is a bad day for a fresh
beginning (T, 771. 821). Tuesday is the time to begin journeys,
to form marriage contracts. 3 Fat Tuesday, Swed. fet-tisdag,
Fr. mardi gras favours enterprises (K, 79. 81). Sunday is lucky
(I, 243. 634). The christians had, beside the great festivals,
many days in the year marked by something special, above all
St. John's; and almost every holy day stood in a particular
relation to sowing, planting, cattle-breeding and the like. Tho
Dau. skjer-torsdag in K, 168-9 is Maundy Thursday. Hardly
ever was a nation so addicted to day-choosing as the christians
in the Mid. Ages. Tho old heathen yule-days and solstices
coincided with Christmas and St. John's (see Suppl.).

Closely connected with angang and day-choosing is another
widely diffused superstition. As a prosperous day's work de-
pended on a favourable encounter at early morning, as the escort
of wolf or raven augured victory ; so a tribe on its travels was
guided to its place of settlement by a divinely missioned beast.
Under such guidance colonies were founded, towns, castles,

resegmina unguium 28, 23 : ' e pedibas manibusquo cera pennixta ante so! is ortmu
alienae januae affigi jubent . . . digitorum resegmina unguium ad cavernas
formicarnm abjici jubent, eamque quae prima coeperit trahere, correptam subneeti
collo.' This significance of nail-parings is worth dwelling on, as our heathenism
attributes to them even a greater, making the world's end depend upon them
(p. 814, Naglfar).

1 See passages in a Homily of the 8th cent, on this superst., Pertz's Archiv 6,
500-1.

* So in Bohemia and Moravia. Lowe's Denkw. u. reisen 72. .



VOL III.



R



1140 SUPERSTITION.

I

churches built; the rise of new establishments and kingdoms
is hallowed by beasts, which, alien to all human ends, reveal the
higher counsels of the gods.

Greek and Roman story teems with examples. A raven loads
Battus and his emigrants to Cyrene (*opa£ fjyrjcraTo, Callira.
Hymn to Apollo 66) . The Irpini are so called from irpus, the
ivolf that led them (Strabo 2, 208) } Fluki sacrificed for three
ravens to shew him the way : ' hann fekk at bldti miklu, ok
blotaSi hrafna prid, J>a er honum ekyldu leid* visa, ]>viat b~a, hofSa
hafsiglingarmenn engir leiSarstein 5 faun ttma i NorSrlondum/
Islend. sog. 1, 27 ; the divine bird supplied the place of a load-
stone to seafaring men. It can hardly be a mere accident, that
the guides oftenest named are just the raven and wolf, Wuotan's
favourites, who presaged victory and weal. 9 In the Vita Severini
c. 28 the bear acts as guide. The hart and hind also shew the
way, as Procopius 4, 5 makes the hind do to Cimmerian hunters.
So in Jornandes of Hunnish huntsmen : f dum in ulteriori Maeo-
tidis ripa venationes inquirunt, animadvertunt quomodo ex im-
proviso cerva se illis obtulit, ingressaque palude, nunc progrediens
nunc subsistens, indicem se viae tribuit . . . mox quoque,
ut Scythica terra ignotis apparuit, cerva disparuit.' Here, instead
of the hunter story, Sozomen (Hist. eccl. 6, 37) has one about a
herdsman, though he knows the other one too : ' forte fortuna
bos oestro pereitus lacum transmittit, sequitur bubulcus ; qui cum
terram trans lacum vidisset, tribulibus suis nuntiat. Sunt alii

1 A bird admonished the Aztecs in Mexico to emigrate, by calling down from
the tree * tihui 1 ' i.e. let us go ! Majer's Myth, taschenb. 1813. p. 63.

9 A name of happiest augury for a hero must have been the OHG. Wolf-hrdban,
Wolfram, to whom the two animals jointly promised victory. And I notice that
no animal's name but the wolfs is ever compounded with * gang ' : Wolfgang (Lup-
ambulus a.d. 1000, Act. Bened. sect. 6 pars 1 p. 3) designates a hero before whom
goes the wolf of victory; a similar presage may lie in WUantgang (Goth. Visanda-
vandalareis, Procop. de b. Goth. 1, 18 OMwfo BcwdaMpios). The heathen faith
alone opens to us the meaning of old names, which are no product of pure
chance. There may be good reason for supposing that in the quaint old Spell
XIV Martin and Wolfgang are invoked as shepherds' saints : one had sway over
the crow (raven), the other oyer the wolf. Servian mothers name a son they
have longed for, Vuk, wolf : then the witches can't eat him up. So Greeks and
Romans thought AvkIotkos Lyciscu* a lucky name, OHG. glosses render lyciscus
(the animal) wolfbizo, and there may have been a man's name Wolfbizo, one bitten
by the wolf, and thereby protected. Vuk sub v. * vuko-yedina ' says, if one in the
family way eats of a lamb or goat that the wolf has bitten to death, the babe she
gives birth to will shew a wound, which they call vnkoyedina, i.e. wolfbizo. They
also cut the wolf's bite out of a lamb or goat, smoke-dry it, and preserve it as "a
sanative (see Suppl.).



Digitized by Googl



GUIDING BEASTS. BURIED ALIVE*, 1141

qui dicunt cervum quibusdam Hunnis venautibus, cum per lacum
ab illis fugeret, monstrasse viam.' Hunters the stag leads, herds-
man the ox, heroes the wolf. But christians, even warriors, will
rather have the deer for guide than the heathenish wolf : a doe
shewed the Franks the ford of safety over the Main, Ditm.
Merseb. ed. Wagn. 245 ; conf. Otto Fris. de gestis Frid. 1, 43
[and a white hart over the Vienne]. A raven the christians
would have taken for a messenger of the devil. Flodoardus in
Hist. Remens. 1, 24 (ed. Duac. p. 115) relates one instance of
the eagle : ' conscenso silvosi montis vertice, dum circumferentes
oculorum aciem de monasterii cordo volutant positione, subito
sublimi coelorum mittitur aliger index a culmine, per quern coelos
scansuro locus in terris beato deproineretur Theoderico. Nam
mysticus ales aquila spatiando gyrans et gyrando circumvolans
locum monasterii capacem secans aora designavit. Et ut ex-
pressius ostenderet quid Dominus vellet, unius fere horae spatio
supra ubi ecclesia construi dobuit lentis volatibus stetit ; et ne
hoc ab incredulis casu contigisse putaretur, ipso natali Domini
die quadriennio continuo supervolando monasterium circumire,
mirantibus plurimis, eadem aquila cernebatur.' A flying hen
indicates the site of the future castle, Deut. sag. no. 570. Boun-
daries are hallowed by the running or walking of a blind horse,
of a erah t RA. 86. Where the fratres Philaeni had won the
new frontier by running, they let themselves be buried alive
(hie se vivos obrui pertulerunt), Pomp. Mela 1, 7 ; the true
reason of this ratification by burial will be made clearer pre-
sently. Remus had seen six, and Romulus twelve vultures fly
auspicious at the founding of their city, Nieb. 1, 248 (see SuppL).

We know how the old Northmen conducted their migrations
and settlements under convoy of the gods. They threw over-
board the ondvegis-sulur or set-stokkar they had brought with
them from the old country, and wherever these drifted to, there
they landed. On such wooden posts was carved an image of the
god in whom they trusted, and he pointed them to their new
habitation ; see esp. the Isl. sog. 1, 76-7. 234.

But not only did beasts point out a placo for building on, it
was often thought necessary to immure live animals, even men,
in the foundation on which the structure was to be raised, as if
they were a sacrifice offered to Earth, who bears the load upon



Digitized by Google



1142 SUPERSTITION.

her : by this inhuman rite they hoped to secure immovable
stability or other advantages. Danish traditions tell of a lamb
being built in under the altar, that the church might stand un-
shaken ; and of a live horse being buried in every churchyard,
before any corpse was laid in it (p. 844). Both lamb and horse
occasionally shew themselves in church or churchyard, and the
apparition betokens a death (Thiele 1, 136-7). Even under other
houses swine and fowls are buried alive (1, 198). Superst. I,
472 says, a long spell of good weather can be brought on by
walling-in a cock ; and 755 a cow's i running ' be prevented by
bricking up a blind dog alive under the stable-door. In time of
murrain, the Esthonians bury one head of the herd under the
stable-door, that Death may have his victim (M, 69). 1 When
the new bridge at Halle, finished 1813, was building, the common
people fancied a child was wanted to be walled into the founda-
tions. To make Liebenstein Castle impregnable, thero was
walled- in a child, whom its mother for base gold had parted with ;
while the masons were at work, says the story, it sat eating a roll
and calling out, ' Mother, I can see you/ then, ' Mother, I see
a little of you still/ and when the last stone was let in, ' Mother,
I see nothing of you now ' (Bechst. Thiir. sag. 4, J 57 ; conf. 206).
In the outer wall of Reichenfels Castle a child was built in alive :
a projecting stone marks the spot, aud if that were pulled out,
the wall would tumble down at once (Jul. Schmidt p. 153).
Similar stories in Spiel's Archiv. 1, 160 with the addition, that
latterly, by way of symbol, empty coffins were built in. A ram-
part had to be raised round Copenhagen, but every time it was
begun, it sank down again : so they took a little innocent maiden,
set her on a chair before a table, gave her toys and thiugs to eat ;
then, while she amused herself with eating and play, twelve
master-masons built a vault over her, and amid music and loud
minstrelsy threw up the wall, which hath stood unshaken to this
day (Thiele 1, 3). Why they kept the child playing and happy,
and prevented her crying, I have explained at p. 46. It is the
vulgar opinion in Greece, that whoever first goes by, where they

1 Und liadden de dclver sich mit groten unkosten an holt, balken, stnik
(brushwood) daran versocht, den ort to dempen, konden nicht ; de olden seden,
* Aniniam quaeri, men Bcholde eiu kat edder hunt darin drenhen.' A Is diser gebleven,
wert it mit der lichte togeslagon (easily stopt up), Neocor. 2, 340. Conf. in chap.
XXXVI. inserting the threwmoiue into the ash.



Digitized by Googl



BUILT IN ALIVE.



1143



are laying the foundation-stono of a new building, shall die
within a year; the builders, to avert the calamity, kill a lamb or
a black cock on the stone, just as at Frankfort they made a cock
run across the new-made bridge, DS. no. 185. At Arta a
thousand masons wrought at a bridge : all that they raised in the
day rushed down at night. Then sounded the archangel's voice
from heaven : ' unless ye dig thereinto a child of man, the masonry
shall not stand ; yet no orphan nor stranger shall ye bury, but
the master-builder's wife.' When the wife came to the workmen,
the master pretended his ring had dropt into the foundation, and
the woman offered to fetch it out, then swiftly they set to work
to wall her in ; dying, she pronounced a curse on the bridge,
that it should tremble like a flower-stalk (Tommaseo's Canti pop.
3, 178). Still more touching is a Servian legend on the building
of Scutari : For three years 300 masons laboured in vain to lay
the foundations of the fortress ; what they built by day, the vila
tore down at night. At last she made known to the kiugs, that
the building would never hold till two bom brothers (or sisters) of
like name were put into the foundation. Nowhere could such be
found. Then the vila required, that of the three wives of the
kings she that carried out food to the masons the next day should
be walled up in the ground. When the consort of the youngest
king, not dreaming of such a decree, brings out some dinner, the
300 masons drop their stones around her, and begin to wall her
in ; at her entreaty they left a small opening, and there she
continued for some time to suckle her babe, who was held up to
her once a day (Vuk 2, 5). Once, when the Slavs on the Danube
purposed founding a new city, the heads of the people, after the
old heathen wont, sent out men early before sunrise, to take the
first boy they met and put him into the foundation. From this
child (Serv. diete, Boh. djte, Russ. ditya pi. doti, Pol. dziecie) the
town took its name of Detinets (Popov's Slav. myth. p. 25). And
the history of Merlin pp. (56 — 72 relates how, king Yortigern
casting to build him a strong tower, it did alway crumble down
or it were accomplished ; and the wizards spake sentence, that
the tower should in no wise bo achieved, ere that the yroundstone
were wet with a child's blood, that was of woman born, but of no
man begotten. May not we also connect with this superstition
some words in a sermon of Berthold p. 107? ' und wizze, wanne



Digitized by Google



1144



SUPERSTITION.



du kint gewinnest, daz der tiuvel reht einen torn mit den kinder*
hat uf dich gemuret/ has with the children reared a very tower
on thy back (see Suppl.).

Sect. 23 of the Indiculus superst., ' de sulcis circa villas/ leads
us to infer that round newly founded cities they ploughed fur-
rows, whose sacredness was a safeguard against the entrance of
evil. Precisely such was the Etruscan usage acc. to Varro :
f oppida condebant in Latio, Etrusco ritu, ruulta, id est, junctis
bobus, tauro et vacca, interiore aratro circumagebant sulcuin.
Hoc faciebant religionis causa die auspicato, ut fossa et muro
essent munita ; terram unde exscalpserant fossam vocabant, et
introrsum factum murum, postea quod fiebat orbis, urbs.' The
bull and cow were white, Ov. Fast. 4, 825 on the pomoerium of
Romulus :

Inde premens stivam signavit moenia sulco,
alba jugum niveo cum bove vacca tulit.

In the Comitium a vaulted chamber was built, and stocked
with the firstlings of all natural products that sustain man's life,
Fest. sub v. mundus. Nieb. 1, 251.

Some superstitious rites, apparently of great antiquity, are
practised on such different occasions in early and in recent times,
that it is hard to make out their meaning. In Burchard, Sup.
C, 195 c , a waggon is divided in two, and a corpse on the bier is
carried between ; in I, 929 a girl suspected of pregnancy is made
to pass through a harvest -wain so divided. Waggon aud plough
are reckoned holy implements, in the midst of which no cheating
or juggling can subsist.

About walking through a cutting in the ground and tha cleft
of a tree, see next chap., under Remedies. It is with a different
view that women creep through the stretched membrane in which
a newborn foal has lain, or through a horse-collar, Swed. sela,
Sup. K, 1G7.

Again, one is not to stride over another person (Sup. I, 45),
nor slip through under the pole of a vehicle 618 ; nor should
women in a certain condition mount across the pole or shafts 729.
925; they should also avoid having anything hanging or tangled
above them 688. 933. This resembles the rule, not to turn wood
in the Christmas week (Sup. K, 134), nor beat cattle with turned



Digitized by



DRAWING A FURROW. DREAM INTERPRETING. 1145

wood 58, lest it cause similar twistings and convulsions in man
or beast.

I close with a few words on interpretation of dreams. To
the A. Saxons dream meant jubilum, ecstasy (p. 901) ; so is the
OS. ' Drohtines drom* = heaven, Hel. 54, 11. 63, 14. 85, 21 to
be taken as 'Dei jubilum, gaudium/ as opposed to 'manno,
liudo drom' (p. 795), the transitory dream of this world. For
somnium stood the AS. sxoefen, OS. suebhan; the ON. svefn is
simply soinnus, and sofna to fall asleep, MHG. entsweben is
sopire, lull to sleep, which again has to do with OHG. snep (aer),
so that sleeping and dreaming properly mean trance or ecstasy,
the spirit's soaring away into the air (conf. arprettan, p. 1083).
This is closely conn, with Lat. sopor, and sompnus, somnus,
somnium. Both OHG. and ON. seem to confine their troum,
draumr to the sense of somnium. The Gothic word for ovetpo?
(dream) is lost to us. Instead of our proverb ' triiume sind
sckdume,' dreams are foams, I have found a more truly rhym-
ing ' traume sind gaume 9 (Ettner's Chemiker 469 and Apoth.
132), i.e. observations (MHG. goume, troume, but schume). 1
Even antiquity did not believe in all dreams, only in difficult
ones, dreamed at particular times or places. To interpret dreams
is in OHG. antfriston, N. Boeth. 51, more simply sceidan, MHG.
icheiden, Diut. 3, 97, bescheiden, Walth. 95, 8. Nib. 14, 2. 19,
2 ; traumscheider meant soothsayer. The AS. had swefn reccan,
ON. draurn rd&a (see Suppl.).

Dreams aro foretokenings of the future, rising: out of images
and impressions of the past; they and the figures in them might
bo called a writing or rune of destiny (p. 406 n.), as Wolfram finely
says of Parzival 245, 8 : ' sus wart gesteppet im sin troum mit
swertslegen umbo den soum/ so was embroidered his dream with
sword-strokes round the border. Like the birds, they are
messengers of the gods, and publish their commands ; but other
daemonic beings seud them too : ' ir boten kiinftigiu leit (coming
sorrows) sanden im slafe dar/ Parz. 245, 4. On p. 905-6 wo
had examples of the inspiring gift of poesy being imparted in a

1 Yet even in Diut. 3, 96 : 1 waz iuwe w&re ge*c<Lmet? i.e. dreamt. And schaara
is backed by a still worse rhyme : 4 traume Bind f&ume ' (Kirchhofer's Sprichw. 342)
for fcinu.



Digitized by Google



1146



SUPERSTITION



dream. As birds play the leading part in angaDg, as dreams
themselves are birds and come flying, we can understand why
even the subject-matter of a dream is so commonly a vision of
birch; in some few dreams of this kind we may perhaps detect
an echo of ancient myths. Kriemhild dreamt that two eagles
caught and mangled (erkrummen) before her eyes the wild falcon
she had reared ; so 1$ unn (the swallow ?) was seized by the
eagle Thiassi, and OSinn the divine heron pursued by the eagle
Suttungr. Such images filled the fancy of the olden time : a
couple of dancers in the Rudlieb 8, 49 are thus elegantly de-
scribed : 'ille velut falco se girat, et haoc ut hirundo* In Roth.
3845 : ' mir troumite nfihte von dir, wie ein valke qua me gevlogin,
nnd vuorte dich widir over mere.' In Sv. forns. 2, 64: 'jag
dromte att min herres falkar, de spiinde mig med sina klor, de
togo mitt hjerta utur mitt brost, och gjorde sig deraf ett bo.'
And there are disquieting dreams of bears, wolves, boars p. 921-3
(see Suppl.).

Much depends on the time when and the place where dreams
are dreamt. They are truest after midnight, toward morning :
1 post noctem mediam, quando sunt somnia vera/ Ecbas. 227.
Eracl. 3723 ; ghosts appear just before dawn (a case on p. 894).
Yet Herzeloide dreams ' umbe einen mitten tac,' Parz. 103, 25.

As it is a grave question with newly married folk, whose
light shall burn longest at the wedding feast, which shall first
fall asleep on the wedding night, or get up from the bridal bed
(Sup. I, 15. 485. 717; M, 17); so the dreams and visions of
the wedding night are prophetic (see ChildericVs in Aimoin
1, 8). Such a dream of Hvitastierna in Gothland, which ac-
quaints her with her posterity, is mentioned in the Gutalag
p. 106. No less important is the first dream in a new house
(Sup. I, 123; K, 61), but you must have counted all the rafters
before going to sleep. King Gorm is admonished to build a
house on a spot where none had stood before, and therein to
sleep and dream (Fornm. sog. 11, 4-6; conf. Saxo Gram. 1 79) 1 ;
whereas Halfdan the black (Saga cap. 7) is advised to dream in
a pigstye, and the dream will come true. Of dreaming in a new
bed, Fornald. sog. 1, 367. Again, a dream on New-year's night

1 • You've ideas like an old house ' we say on the contrary to one whose remarks
are not to the point.



Digitized by Google



DREAM INTERPRETING.



1147



comes true (Sup. I, 528). In Reinh. 88, when Chantckler has
told his ingeniously constructed dream, it is added : 1 manec
tronm erscheinet sich iiber siben jar/ comes to pass in 7 years'
time. A great many dream-interpretations, which the common
people hold firmly to this day, are to be found in the very earliest
times (see Suppl.).

Certain dreams are so deeply rooted in Teutonic legend, that
we must place their origin far back, e.g. that of the treasure
which one is to be informed of on the bridge 1 (see Suppl.).

Like dreams and angang, some other of the customs we
have noticed evidently rest on the strength of first and fresh
impressions.

We are glad to be rid of this heap of superstition ; yet, while
it filled the lives of our forefathers with fear, it ministered some
comfort also.

1 Agricola'a Sprichw. 623. Praetorius's Wiinschelr. 372. Abrnh. a S. Clara's
Jndas 1, 4. Ettner'a Ung. Apoth. p. 132. Musaus'a Volksm. 4, Go. R. Chambers's
Fireside stories p. 12, which prove the legend rife in various parts of Scotland.



Digitized by Google



CHAPTER XXXVI.



SICKNESSES.

By the anger of tbe gods diseases are decreed, yet also their
mercy reveals healing remedies to man. All deities can be healers,
they seem to givo their tiames to the herbs and flowers whose
healing virtues they make known. With the Greeks it- is chiefly
Apollo and his sister Artemis from whom this knowledge is
derived ; our Wuotan, where he touches Apollo rather than
Hermes, represents him in the capacity of healer too (p. 149) ;
with Artemis and Athena skilled in leechcraft, we may here match
our Holda and Frouwa, replaced by Mary in later legend. A
special god of physic, Asklepios or Aesculapius, is Apollo's son
and a mere emanation of him. Of divine heroes, those who
practised this art were Ilerakles, Prometheus the giver of whole-
some fire, and Chiron : to set by the side of these, we have the
Norse Mimir, our own Wate and Wieland, after whom a healing
plant Wielauds-wurz is named, and whose skill in smith-work
resembles that of Prometheus ; conf . chap. XXXVII.

As Homer celebrates Paeon's and Machaon's knowledge of
medicines and wounds, so the Gudrunlied says of Wate :

Si hasten in langer zite da vor wol vernomen (long known),

daz Wate arzet waare von einein wilden wtbe :

Wate, der vil ma)re, gefrumete manegem an dem libe.

The wild wife, who doctored (made a doctor of) this far-famed
Wate, might well be a wise-woman, a half-goddess (p. 431-2). So
in Scotch tradition (R. Chamb. p. 34) the mermaid points out
healiug herbs. Several such women appear in the Edda. Eir
belongs altogether to the circle of goddesses : ' hon er lathiir
beztr,' best of leeches, Sn. 36. I connect her name with tbe
Goth, dims nuncius, AS. arian, ON. eira parcere, and OHG.
Irinc (Goth. Eiriggs?); Eir would be the indulgent helpful
goddess and errand- worn an. But another passage, Saom. Ill*,

1141



Digitized by Google



WISE WOMEN.



1149



significantly places her among the handmaidens of wise Mengloff
(p. 423-4) :

Hlif heitir, onnur Hlifpursa,
j>rroja Thio&varta,
Biort ok Bliffur, Friff,
Eir oo Qrbo&a.

Some of them seem to be giantesses, Hlifjmrsa and OrboSa, who
in Sn. 39 is wife to G^mir, and these fit in with the notion of
wild wife; but the majority are transparent personifications of
moral ideas, Fri& the mansueta or parca (Goth, freidian parcere),
Jllif tutela or parca, from hlifa parcere, which comes to the same
thing as Eir, and throws a welcome light on the Latin parca
itself. All the more right have we now to place Biort in
immediate connexion with Berhta, as I conjectured on p. 272 n.,
and BWT with Holda : these healing women lead us on to wise
women, divine women. And that the gift of healing is in ques-
tion here, is plain from the preceding and not less important
strophe :

Hyfjaberg )>at heitir, en )>at hefir leingi verit

siukom ok sari gaman :

heil veror hver, \>6tt hafi ars sott,

ef |>at klifr kona.

I translate it : Hyfjaberg this rock is called, and has long been
to the sick and to wounds a solace ; whole becomes any woman,
though she have a year's sickness, if she climbs it. So that the
rock is a holy place, dedicated to MengloS and her maidens,
where every sick woman that climbed it has found relief. The
exact meaning of Hyfjaberg, or as some read it, Hyfvja-, Hyfara-
berg, I cannot yet determine ; enough for us, that such mount
of healing accords admirably with the conception one has to
form of the wise-women of olden time: prophetesses, Parcae,
Muses, all are imagined dwelling on mountains. Mengluft may
without more ado bo taken to mean Freyja (p. 30G-7), in
attendance ou this highest goddess would stand tho other
maidens of like nature; and to the art of healing we have a
right worshipful origin assigned. Now too it is conceivable, why
Brynhiklr, tho valkyr dwelling on her mountain, had 'lif me5
lajkning* (pharmaca cum medela) ascribed to her in Sa3in. 147 b :



Digitized by LiOOQle



1150



SICKNESSES.



she is a wise woman skilled in magic, a pharmaceutria, herbaria,
and moreover understands the binding up of wounds (uudir
dreyrgar yfir binda, Saem. 220 b ), like Hiltgund in Walthar. 1403.
Odd run lends her aid to women in travail, Sa3m. 239, and the
Tristan has made Isote's knowledge of physic famous. At
medicinal springs, by mineral waters, appears the white lady with
the snake (p. 588 n.), the beast of sovereign'st healing power,
servant to Aesculapius himself. The Servian vila too is a
physician, and heals wounds for a high fee, Vuk no. 321 [so the
Bulgarian yuda or samodlva, Aug. Dozon's Bolgarski pesni no.
3, etc.].

We see from all this, that medical science in heathen times was
half priestly, half magical. Experience and higher culture gave
the priests a knowledge of healing powers in nature, from the
sacredness of their office proceeded salutary spells, the use of
remedies was backed by sacrifice, nay, great cures and the avert-
ing of pestilence could only be effected by sacrifice. Thus all
through the Mid. Ages we find the christian priests also possess-
ors, above other men, of medicine and the art of using it. Yet
some part of the old pagan science passed into the hands of wise
men and women, who by retaining superstitious rites, and mis-
using real remedies, incurred the reproach of sorcery. Like
witchcraft (p. 1038-9), and for the same reasons, the old ways of
healing fell mainly into the hands of women (see Suppl.).

*

A physician was called in Goth, lekcis, OHG. Idhhi, AS. Icece,
ON. Iceknir, hvknari, 1 Swed. lakare, Dan. lage ; the Engl, leech
has sunk into the sense of peasant or cattle doctor. The MHG.
hlchencere, Idchencerinne meant sorcerer, sorceress (p. 1037),
though still perhaps implying the use of remedies, as in 1 lachenen
und fiirsehen/ Superst. D, 38 r., and lecken .= healing, Quedlinb.
witch-trials p. 77. From Teutonic nations the word must in very
early times have spread to Slavs, Lithuanians, Finns : O.S1., Boh.,
Buss, lekar', Serv. liekar, Pol. lekarz, Lith. lekorus, Fin. laakdri;
or can we have got it from the Slavs ? I have tried to shew a
Teutonic root for it no. 300, a Slavic might be harder to find :
to SI. liek, lek (remedium) answers our OHG. lahhan. Other



'Lrekuis hendur' ; 1 koknir vera, ok kunna b&t at sifi,' Siem. 194-5'



LEECH, PHYSICIAN.



1151



names are taken from the notion of helpiug, bettering, as betan,
boten (mederip. 1036) ; ON. grceSa (sanare), groeSari (chirurgus,
medicus), from gr68 (growth, getting ou, gain) ; MHG. heilsero
(medicus), Karl 45. Our arzt appears already in OHG. as arzdt,
O. iii. 14, 11, MHG. arzet, M.Nethl. ersetre, Diut. 2, 223* ;
O. Fr. artons, artox ; the root seems to be the Lat. ars, though
arz&t cannot come straight from artista. 1 The Prov. metges,
Ferabr. 547. 1913, mege (Raynouard 3, 173), O.Fr. mires, mine
are from medicus. 3 The ON. f lif' imputed to Brynhild is better
spelt lyf, being the Goth, luhi (which I infer from lubja-leisei,
herb-leasing = <f>apjxatceia, Gal. 5, 20), OHG. luppi, MHG. liippe ;
from the sense of permissible, healing (fxipfxatcov, arose that of
poisonous, magical, just as our gift meant at first donum, then
venenum. The luppari (reneficus) has a luppara (venefica) to
match him, the herb-man his herb-woman, herbaria, pharmaceu-
tria. In Sazo Gram. 16 a maiden cures wounds, at 25 he calls
Wecha medica ; and Thorlacius in Obs. 4, 279 has collected other
instances of women healers. 3 Amongst our peasantry there are
old women still who profess 'boten/ stroking, pouring, and charm-
ing by spells (Sup. I, 515. 865). It is remarkable that healing
spells can only be handed down from women to men, or from
men to women (I, 793; conf. p. 1107) : we have seen how so
ancient a worthy as Wate had learnt his art of a woman. It i3
principally shepherds that now pass for cunning mediciners (Sup.
L, 35 French); formerly any kind of herdsmen and hunters:
' bubulcus, subulcus, venator/ C, int. 43. In the Mid. Ages
itinerant leeches went about the country cheapening their drugs
and skill to the people, usually attended by a man who played
amusing tricks ; for proofs see RutebeuPs Diz de l'erberie (Meon
nouv. rec. 1, 185 — 191 ; oouvres 1, 250-9; simii. in 1, 468 — 477),
and the Easter play in Hoffm. Fundgr. 2, and in O. Boh. in
Hanka 7, 198. These vagrant herbalists, quacks, lithotoniists,

1 • Temperie (medicine) dz wurze kraft,' Parz. 643. 23. « Lahkindnto temperan-
do,' conf. Mous. 393. [Arz-at, ers-etre are prob. from ipx-tarpot : the Greek prefix
arch- becomes erz- in German words. — Trans.]

s The Ed. of the Garin 2, 89 would derive mire from the Arabic emir ; but a
Fr. r is often developed out of d, «, as lerre latro, beurro butyrum [these by assiuiil.
with an r already present] .

* Pomp. Mela 3, 6 of Gaulish women : • putabantur ingeniis singularibus
praeditae, et sanare quae apud alios insanatilia sunt,, ; whereas at Home we find
women forbidden to treat certain diseases.



Digitized by Google



1152



SICKNESSES.



are a mine of information on the methods of popular leechcraft.
Greg. Tur. 9, 6 mentions a conjuror and doctor Desiderius, who
woro a coat of goat's hair ; the 0. Slav, bali means physician, but
strictly conjuror, Glagolita 67 b (see Suppl.).

Crescentia, a pious persecuted saint, receives from Peter or
Mary, who fill exactly the place of pagan gods, the gift of healing
all diseases, Kolocz. 267, or acc. to the O. Fr. poem (Meon n. r.
2, 71-3) only leprosy. She herself might pass perfectly for a wise
woman, and is actually charged with being a sorceress. Queens
too in ancient times are credited with power to quench certain
maladies by their touch : in Rother 32\ 33* the queen strokes
the lame and crooked with a stone; and a similar virtue was
ascribed to hereditary sovereigns of France and England (Hone's
Yrbk p. 799). If a woman has had seven sons in succession,
the seventh can heal all manner of hurt (Sup. I, 786) ; by Ettner's
Hebamme 906, Maulaffe 699, his touch cures wens at the throat,
French Sup. L, 22 makes it the fifth son. There is no end of
superstitions about this seventh or fifth son : in E. Friesland they
say ho becomes a walrider ; does that mean one who rides to the
foughten field? conf. wel-recke, p. 41 8n. What seems a counter-
part of it is, that when 7 girls running are born of one marriage,
one of them becomes a werwolf, I, 1121. A child that has never
knowu its father is able to disperse tumours (fondre les loupes),
L, 21. A firstborn child, that has come into the world with
teeth, can cure a bad bite, K, 29. 37. All this borders closely on
the power to bequeath or transfer the gift of prophecy and the
art of weather-making, pp. 1088. 1107: the healing art was as much
sacerdotal as the business of fortune-telling (see Suppl.).

The distinction between sacrifice and healing would perhaps be
stated most correctly by saying, the one was aimed at sickness
threatened, the other at sickness broken out. Preventive sacri-
ficial rites have no doubt been preserved longest in pastoral life:
herdsmen made their cattle run through the flames, once a year, 1

1 One Roman rite I quote from Cato de re rust. 83 : Votum pro bubiu, ut Tale-
ant, sic facito. Marti Mlvano in silva interdius, in capita singula bourn votum
facito, farris adorei libraa iii. et lardi p. iv 8. et pulpae iv b., vini sextarios t rod. Id
hi uiium vas liceto conjicere, et vinum item in unum vas liceto conjicere. Earn
rem divinam vel servua vel liber licebit faciat. Ubi res divina facta erit. statin
ibidem consumito. Mulier ad earn rem divinam ne adtit, neve videat quomodo oat.
Hoc votum in anno$ lingulot, si voles, licebit vovere.



Digitized by Google



HUMAN DISEASES.



1153



or whenever pestilence approached. Bat sacrifices were also
performed in severe cases of actual sickness.

Our medical learning of today, as it did not proceed from the
people, has by degrees banished nearly all our native names for
diseases, and replaced them by Greek or Latin words. But as
those names often bring us face to fac<5 with old-world notions
about sickness and its cure, it will be needful to present at any
rate the most important.

In the Mid. Ages lcrank has only the sense of debilis, infirmus,
OHG. wana-heil, not of aeger, for which the term was siech, Goth.
siuks, OHG. sioh ; hence morbus was expressed not by krankheit,
but by 8ucht, Goth, sauhts, OHG. snht, ON. sott, whereas now wo
attach to sucht the moral notion of hankering, and only retain its
old meaning in a few compounds such as schwindsucht, gelbsucht,
etc. There is the same relation between the ON. fird (desiderium,
aegritudo animi) and UJcJrrd (lepra), conf. Sw. tra, helletra, Dan.
traa, helletraa, TJV. 2, 180. General words, expressing also the
bodily pain of sickness, are OHG. suero, MHG. sivcr, and OHG.
MHG. we, wetago, wetage (like our siechtage). But a sick man is
also called in OHG. bettiriso (clinicus), O. iii. 14, 67; MHG.
betterise, Parz. 502, 1. 813, 16 ; AS. beddrida bedridden: a term
specially used of men enfeebled by age, 1 der alte betterise/ who
can no longer rise out of bed. In Scand. this painless ailment of
great age was called Ana sott, from king On or Ani, who had
secured long life by sacrificing his sons (p. 46), and at last lived
on milk like a child again, Yngl. saga cap. 29 (see Suppl.) .

It was christian to hold sickness a dispensation of God, heathen-
ish to see in it the handiwork of sprites, and something elvish.
Accordingly it is personified ; it comes upon, surprises, attacks,
seizes, takes hold of, overpowers man : Satfiwv iirfypae, arvyepos
&£ oi expae Satjicov, Od. 5, 396 [the daemon afflicts ; in the next
line the gods heal]. In the Hel. 92, 1 : 'mid suhtium bifangan,
bedrogan hebbiad sio dernea wihti. thea wredon habbiad sie
giwittiu benumune ; ' and in Versus Hartmanni (Canisius ii. 3,
203 : 9 fugit pestis ab homine, quam daemon saevus miserat* No
wonder that in the Edda an oath is exacted from diseases, as
from living creatures, to do no harm to Balder, Sn. 64. Like
death or destiny (p. 406), pestilence carries off : ' suht farnam/



Digitized by Google



1154



SICKNESSES.



Hel. 125, 20; in the Swed. oath 'tra mig!' we mast supply
' tage ' take : ita me morbus auferat ! In the Cod. Vindob. th.
428 no. 94 I find the phrase ' eine suht ligen, zwo suht ligen/ to
lie one sickness, two s. ; ' sich in die suht legen/ lay oneself (lie
down) into, Reinh. 302. 320.

This daemonic nature of diseases makes people call them by
friendly flattering names' to keep them away, just as they do to
horrible uncanny beasts, and avoid uttering their right name ;
they call a disease the good, the blessed, Schm. 2, 87. 3, 212. 222,
and the pestilence is addressed as gossip. There will be more
examples to quote in speaking of particular diseases (see SuppL).

Fever, O HG. fiebar, AS. />/<»•; Goth, heito, Mat. 8, 15 and
brinno, Mk 1, 31. Lu. 4, 38, both for Trvperos, and both fern.;
OHG. has no corresp. kfz&, prinna. The Swiss have hitz and
brand (Tobler 74'), and the AS. adl, Beow. 3469. 3692 seems
to be burniug fever, from ad ignis, so that the OHG. would be
eital. An OHG. rito masc, Gl. Mons. 391, from ritan to ride,
not from ridan to writhe, as fever does not twist' like the cramp ;
and the AS. word should be spelt rida, not wrroa; Lye has
riderocT febris. It is imagined as an elf who rides the man with
rein and spur : ' der alp zoumct dich,' bridles thee ; ' der mar
ritet dich/ p. 464; ON. ' mara fracfkann/ Yngl. s. cap. 16; 'der
rite bestuont in/ stood upon him, Alex. 2208. In En. 10834
and Eracl. 3166 suht, fieber, rite are named side by side, are
therefore distinct; in En. 10350 ' suht und rite*; 9694 f suht
und fieber*', 9698 'diu minne tuot kalt und heiz mer dan der
viertage rite/ love makes hot and cold like the quartan ague.
In curses : ' babe den riden und die suht umb dinen hals ! ' about
thy neck, Morolt 715. 'die suht an iwern 16sen kragen ! ' your
unruly neck, Reinh. p. 302-12. ' nu muoze der leide ride vellen !'
sore fever fell him, Karlmeinet 110. Ride seems to be especially
ague, which is sometimes called frorer, Sup. I, 183 ; though we
also hear of ' ritten frost ' and ' ritteu hitze.' Imprecations com-
mon in the 15- 1 6th cent, are : ' may the ritl shake you, the jarritt
(yearlong fever), the gmhe rite (swift r.) be at yon ! ' 'May the
ritt shake you to your bones/ Garg. 96*. ' Ins ritts namen habfc
rhu/ H. Sachs iii. 3, 10°. They said: 'whence brings him the
ritt?' the same as the devil, p. 1113. Boner's well- told Fable
48 deserves attention : the rite appears in person (in what shape ?),



Digitized by



HUMAN DISEASES.



1155



and holds a dialogue with the flea. It is plainly [not ?] of Mid.
Age invention ; Petrarch epist. 3, 13 relates it of tho spider and
the gont, and calls it anil is fabella. In Bavaria fever is personi-
fied as beutelmann, shaker, Schm. 1, 219 ; a spell against fever
speaks of 72 fevers. Russian superstition supposes nine sisters
who plague mankind with fevers ; they lie chained up in caverns,
and when let loose, pounce upon men without pity (Gotze's
Russ. volksl. p. 62). My explanation acquires certainty from
the Esthonian phrase 'ayan walged, ayan halli* I ride the white,
I ride the gray, i.e. I have the ague (Rosenplanter's Beitr. 12,
42-3).

The Greek eVtaXr?;?, i<J)ia\Tr]<i, literally on-leaper, was a dae-
monic incubus, an alp, elf, who causes the feverish oppression
of nightmare ; and rj7rid\rj<; y rjTnoXrjs nightmare, and rfirlaXoft,
i)7rtoXo9 fever,' fever-chill, meant the same thing, though gram-
marians tried to separate them by difference of accent. Add to
this, that in Aristot. hist. an. 8, 26 TjirioXo^ turns up in the sense
of butterfly, and the notions of spirit, elf and butterfly constantly
run into one another (pp. 829. 917). In Lith., drugis is butterfly
and fever-bird, in Lett., dnidsis flying moth and fever. Lith.
druggis kreczia, Lett, drudsis kratta; tho fever shakes (one).

An AS. manuscript on diseases and remedies quoted by Wanley
pp. 176 — 180 (conf. supra p. 140) has at p. 180 celf-ddle laacedom,
cure for elf-burn, ailfcynne-sealf, elf-salvo, nihfgengean seal/,
night-wives' salve. 1 Elsewhere I find an ailment wlf-sidenne.

By the red and the white dog in Ettner's Unw. doctor 436 wo
prob. are to understand measles or rose-rash ; red dog again in
the Leipz. avanturier 1, 86. The Persians call scarlet-fever
al, and picture it as a rosy maid with locks of flame, Atkinson
p. 49. 50 (see Suppl.).

By a0l 't (gicbt f.) we understand a pain in tho limbs, arthritis ;
in older Germ, it was neuter : ' daz gegihte brichet (breaks) sie/
a. Heinr. 886. Ulr. Trist. 1461. 'daz gegihte brach ir hend
nnd frieze/ Rab. 1060; hence our ' gicht-bruchig,' palsied, 'daz
wiietende gihte' Renner 9904. As we also find darm-gicht (in-
testinal g.) for colic, and ' sun-giht ' on p. 61 7n. meant the sun's

1 Ibid. 1 wi5 aelfcynnesealf and wi5 nihtgengan, and ham monnom /><• denfol
mid hetnuf,' against elf-salve and nightgangers and the men the devil homes (con-
sorts) with (sop. p. 890).

VOL. III. 8



Digitized by Google



1156



SICKNESSES



gait, going, turning, I think gicht was a general term denoting
the shooting, twisting and tugging of pain in the body ; and a
derivative corresp. to the Goth, gahts (innagahts, Grainm. 3,
51 8) . M. Nethl. jicht, Icel. ikt, S w. gikt, Dan. gigt. The Gothic
renders irapaXvriKO^ by us~UJ>a, as if beside one's limbs, having
no use of them ; an OHG. urlido is not found. ' Ein siechtuom
heizet pogrd r=»leme, a lame palsied state, Parz. 501, 26 is a
corruption of podagra, which was also twisted into podagram.
More Teut. are fuoz-suht, AS. fot-ddl (podagra) ; zipperlein I
do not find before the 16th cent. M. Nethl. fledersin, flederan*
(arthritis), Leven van Jesus p. 52, and < fl. in vote ende in lede/
Doctrinale 3, 1030; in D'Arsy's Woordenboeck, Amst. 1699,
' fledecijn, flerecijn, la goutte (chiragra)'; did the word mean a
moth or butterfly that brought on the disease ? (see Suppl.).

The flying gout that shifts from one part to another (arthritis
vaga) was called in N. Germany (Holstein, the Baltic coast), at
least as late as the 17th cent., ' dat varende, lopende deer,' and
in some parts of L. Sax. and Westph. ' de varen, de varende, de
lopende varen,' the faring, running (sprites or things). So that
this disease again was regarded as a spiritual-animal being which
had been conjured into the body. Still plainer are the names
' die fliegenden elbe,' 'die gute Jcinderen' (Brunswk), 'die gute
holde' (abt Gottingen), exactly what the elvish 'things' were
called that witches conjured into people (p. 1074). And they
likewise were imagined in the form of butterflies or worms, which
caused gnawing pains and swellings in the joints of the hands
and feet. 1 The disease being an obstinate one, and often hard
to cure, the common people set it down as the work of witches.
It is also called the hair-worm, and in the Netherlands jumping
gout. A spell classifies gouts as running, staying, trembling,
evening, and growing gegicht.

But the operations of the holden must have been far mora
extensive, and concerned in many more diseases. The Hollenzopf,
Wichtelzopf (plica polon.) was spoken of, pp. 464. 474. In Rass.
the plica is volmets, which borders on V61os p. 625 n., but comes
from \6\os, vlas, hair. A witch confessed (Voigt's Abh. p. 122)

1 Joh. Weyer's Arzneibucb (J. Wier, Piscinarius, b. at Grave in Brab. 1515, A
at Tecklenb. 1588), Frkft 1583, p. 27. Hear. Meibom de artbritido vaga acorbotina,
Helmest. 1668. 1, cap. 1.



Digitized by Google



HUMAN DISEASES.



1157



tliat there were nine sorts of holdichen : the riding, splitting,
blowing, wasting, flying, swelling, deaf, dumb, blind.

The Poles also call worms that breed diseases in man biale
ludzie, white folk, i.e. elves (Biester's Neue Borl. mon. schr.
1802. 8, 230).

We apply the term fluss (rheuma) to several morbid affections,
some slight, others dangerous to life, as stickfluss catarrh, schlag-
fluss apoplexy. The latter is said to touch, hit, strike ; MHG.
der Gotes slac (stroke) ; later, die gewalt (might) Gottes, die hand
Gottes, Ettn. unw. doct. 224. 'traf mich Gottes gewalt* = 1 had a
stroke, Brunsw. anz. 1745. p. 2022 (from Life of Mat. Schwarz,
an. 1547) ; conf. supra p. 19n. Yet the ' stroke of God' 1 ex-
presses also the quickness and ease of this mode of death (mors
lenis repentina), compared with those that chain us long to a
bed of pain : hence another name for apoplexy was 8 das selig,*
the blessed. We may compare the dwarf-stroke, dverg-slagr,
palsy, p. 461. The Bohemians distinguish Bozj moc (God's
might) epilepsy, from Bozj ruka (God's hand) apoplexy (see
Suppl.).

The term falling sickness for epilepsy occurs as early as Dint.
2, 193 b , 'valjandia suht (caducum morbum)'; 'daz fallende
libel/ Fundgr. 325 ; ' fallender siechtag/ Hutten 5, 171. Other-
wise : the sorrow, the misery, the sore trouble, the evil being, the
scourge, the weed (Jul. Schmidt p. 136). M. Nethl. vallende evel,
Mod. Nethl. vallende ziekte, Sint Jans evel, grot evel, gramschaj)
Goods, wrath of God, Huyd. op St. 1, 569. In Melander's Joco-
ser. 1, 434: ' may the gnucken touch you!' gnuk being LG.
for knock. ' The tropf has touched him,' Erasm. Alberus 39,
i.e. the stroke [apoplexy ?] ; M. Lat. gutta, gutta cadiva, O. Fr.
la goute : * choent de gole* Ren. 25203, brought on by holding
the plompe (lotus, p. 654) in the hand. A particular species of
the drop occurs under the name of nesch or nesch-tropf. Schmid's
Swab. Diet, gives from a MS. nasch as hiccough, singultus,
which (like sneezing, p. 1116) seems to have been regarded as
a mild case of apoplexy; Popowitsch p. 511 quotes nosclitn as
hiccough, and in OHG. we find nescazan as well as fnescazan,
singultire, Graff 3, 782. I derive them all from the Goth, hnasqus

1 Aiis fi&vriyt, II. 12, 37. 13, 812 ; but not meaning a disease.



Digitized by Google



1158



SICKNESSES.



mollis, delicatns, AS. hnesc [Engl, nesh, SI. nezhno], to which
also belongs OHG. hnascon, nasc6n, our naschen, to have a sweet
tooth. Mone's anz. 6, 463 pronounces nosch- tropf to be flying
gout, and gives a noseh-segen (-charm) : ' I command tbee, nosch,
with all thy fellows, for with thee are tho stech and the krampf,
gespat, gescho88, geicht and gesicht. 9 A further charm speaks of
77 noschen: 'wo will go into the man's house, and suck his
blood and gnaw his bones and eat his flesh'; but they get
conjured into a withered tree. A severer, longer ailment than
hiccough seems to be meant ; Mone connects nosch with ' nesso '
in the OS. spell, but a LG. u answers to a HG. hs, not to sh,
sell ; to mo the connexion of tho word with naschen, explain it
how you will, seems indisputable : ' s6 dich diu suht benatcfa
(nibble at), daz dir hut und har abe ge ! ' skin and hair come off
(see Suppl.).

Krampf, spasm , convulsion, in children usually fre Ue, freisig,
gefrais, Sup. I, 474. 722, fritiel, Jul. Schmidt p. 121. 137.
Schiiuerchen, LG. schiirken (jumping toothache, tic douloureux),
liter, little shiver, twitch. But freis, frais often stands for
epilepsy too (Abele's Gerichtsh. 2, 429. 4, 218. 311).

Leih-weh, grimmen (krimmen, Nethl. krimpen), gripes, belly-
ache; die obere grimmc, m aims-mutter (Wier 107*) ; hachmulttr,
barmundj barmutter, Staid. 1, 136; 'the bermutter has bit me/
I havo the colic, Schm. 1, 217; Austr. bervater and bermutter
(Hofer 1, 77-8) ; tvarmund, Staid. 1, 334 ; tribe, Fundgr. 321,9

also means colic acc. to Hoffm. Ruhr (dysentery), durchlauf,

darmgicht (acc. to Gloss. Flor. 981») uzsuht, Gl. Flor. 984* zuzsuht ;
further, in Staid, aussucht (diarrh.). Rothe ruhr (bloody flux),
'der rothe schaden' (Aushelm 3, 236).

Lungensucht, AS. lungenddl (pneumonia) ; ' schwivge- oder
lunge-sucht' in Schweinichen 2, 256 is surely for schicinde- ? In
Austria ' der schwund,' our schwindsucht consumption ; Abele's
Gerichtsh. 2, 303 says it seizes an ell's length of gut every year.

Sciten-stechcn (pleuritis), OHG. stechido ; M. Nethl. lanc-erel,
Rein. 5401. Huyd. op St. 1, 569, from lane, Fr. flanc, OHG.
lancha = ilia, lumbus, but I have not found an OHG. lanch-upil
morbus ilium.

Wasscr-auchtf dropsy. OHG. has also wazar-chalp (water-calf)
hydrops, Diut. 2, 181. Mone 8, 494; conf. mond-kalb (mola,



Digitized by Googl



HUMAN DISEASES.



1159



caro in utero nascens), Melander's Joe. ii. no. 450, Engl, moon-
calf, misbirth, about which there must be some floating mythical
notions, for we also find a proper name Sonnenkalb, and aber-
kalb, afterkalb or eberkalb means an illegitimate child (see
Suppl.).

For abortus we have misgeburt, fehlgeburt, miskram ; verbs :
to upset, tip over, spill, etc. 'zy heft de kar omgeworpen/
Tuinman's Spreekw. 1, 88; 'tis gone wrong with her, Schwein.
2, 314, conf. 321 ; not straight, Kantzow 2, 30; Dan. 'at giore
omslag ' ; of proper birth : to bring to the (right) place. Esth.
tiiyad nurgad (empty corners), mooncalf ; ' ulle katte rainnema/
slip out of (miss) the hands, opp. to ' last polwede poalet tostma/
get (lift) the child on the knee. We have: 'there's a row/
■ the house cracks' (the birth is near), 'the house has tumbled'
(it is over), Sachs, prov. blatt. 14, 127 ; ' the oven breaks down/
Schm. 1,33. In MHG. 'diu kamer wart entlochen/ unlocked,
Mar. 46. Ber mutter, which is used of colic, strictly denotes the
hysterica passio, and is represented not only as a toad, Schm. 1 ,
188, but as a mouse that runs out of the body, and has a sword
laid across the stream for it, Ettn. hebamme p. 194-5, as in the
superstition described above, p. 1082 (see Suppl.).

Herz-gespan, tension of heart (cardialgia), herz-spann, Sup. I,
873. 949, otherwise herz-weh, herz-kulk (ventriculi colica): ' some-
thing lies and stands before my heart/ MHG. hcrze-swer ; swer-
mage, Diut. 2, 273. This is not the same thing as the heart-
worm, of which it is vulgarly supposed that every man has one
in him, and would die if it crept out of his mouth (Ettn. hebamme
p. 890), or got on his tongue, Chr. Weise's Droi kliigste leute
pp. 8. 9. The ancients called a swelling of the tongue fidrpaxo?
and rana. The heiss-hunger (hot-), ftovXifio?, appetitus caniuus,
was also accounted for by an animal: 'vermis tacertae similis in
stomacho hominis habitat/ Gl. Jun. 381. ' wir suln uns alio
brceten, den zadelwurm tceten (kill) der uns dicke hat geuagen/
oft has gnawed us, Seifr. Helbl. 3, 247.

Headache, houbit-we, Fundgr. 320-1 ; houbit-suht, Diut. 270;
farren, Sup. I, 865. perh. the ' faren • of p. 1156. Tobe-suht
(amentia), Iw. 3233, brain-sickness. Wirbel-sucht, vertigo, I,
436.

OHG. ltuosto, cough, MHG. /waste, our huste (in Zurich wiieste),



Digitized by Google



1160



SICKNESSES.



ON. hosti, AS. Jiwoxta, Engl, whoost. A cold in the head:
schnupfe, schnaube, schnuder, in Switz. pfniisel ; Ilildegard has
naseboz, coryza. MHG. struchc, Fundgr. 321, 1. Ls. 1,403-4.
Hoarseness: krarn me, Fdgr. 322. Catarrh: OH G. tampho, Graff
5, 142, dumpho in Hildeg. St. Anthony's fire (because healed in
his hospitals?) : rothlauf, in Switz. wolhen, flicgende wolhi, flying
cloud, Staid. 2, 456 (see Suppl.).

Gelbftuht, elephantiasis in Gl. Mons. 384 ; our gelbsuclit is the
jaundice. ' To fasten yellow smocks on folk/ is that to conjure
the jaundice into them ? Gelesuht and fich are ficus morbus,
piles, A&.fic-udl; in Altd. bl. 2, 199 ' der rot vich* for hasmor-
rhoids; in Helbl. 2, 1190 'der rote siechtuom und daz vie macht

iuch bleich unde gel.' OHG. misal-Muht (lepra), Graff 2, 875;

Goth, pruts-fill, which in Gramm. 2, 20 I traced correctly to
]>riutan [to trouble, tease, our driessen, verdruss], and 2, 598
recognised pruts as anorn. Gen. for brutis. pruts is torment,
vexation, and applied to sickness, leprosy ; the OHG. form would
bo druzifi-fel. In Slavic languages trud is trouble and illness,
tho Boh. trud having exactly the two meanings of dolor and
lepra, Pol. tr^d eruption. OHG. hriupi (scabies), rdda (impetigo),
Gl. Flor. 988 b , zittarlus, tetter-louse, ringworm (impetigo), Diut.
1, 496 b . A modern slang term is schneider-courage (Adelung v.
kratze), schneider-kurzweil, tailor's pastime (Ettn. unw. doct.
349). The AS. gieffa (scabies, impetigo), Engl, tick, is the OHG.
juchido, Graff 1, 593. The rose (erysipelas), running fire, ignis
sacer (Ivonis epist. p. 85*. 184 b ), OHG. omo, AS. oma, ON. dma.
OP red spots on a child's face they say 'the Jiidel has burnt
him,' Sup. 1, 473. AS. ]>eor,Jyeorweorc is inflammation, J>eorwyrm
impetigo vermicularis 1 (see Suppl.).

Stone, gravel, calculorum dolor: in Gotz. v. Berlich. 103, 'der
reissende (tearing) stein.'

A sort of excrescence or fungus (suam) was called mal-annus
(das iibel jar), Spell VII; in Ratherii opp. ed Ballerini p. 15:
' carbunculi vel inalae pustulae, quera malum vulgo dicunt
malampnum.' And the plant used in healing it bore the name
ofmalannus too, OHG. achalm, Graff 1, 132 (see Suppl.).

1 The Greeks too fancied the impetigo was caused by a small beetle. Pliny 27,
11 (75) : lapis vulgaris juxta flumina fert museum siccum, cunum ; hie fricatur altcro
lapide, addita hominis saliva; illo lapide tangitur impetigo. Qui tangit, dicit,
^ctfycrffj KavOapifcs, \vkoi &ypt(n Cufxc Siwkcc, beetles begone, the wild wolf chases jou.



Digitized by Google



HUMAN DISEASES. 1161

Many other names of diseases I suppress; a still greater
number must have eluded my research. My design was, out of
this neglected mine of wealth in our language to bring specimens
that should prove what mythical fancies the people associated
with the origin of diseases. Like other evils, they seemed to be
destined and devised by gods, spirits, magicians ; nay, to become
themselves malign living agents (p. 1153). Much remains
obscure : what is meant by iilfheit, that plague of plagues (p.
442 n.)? what by the haupt-geschein which is exorcized in Ayrer's
Fastn. sp. p. 148-9, and turns up in other stories too (Schm. 8,
366) ? Now in Renner 12180 we find ' ir habt daz houbt-geschide 1
(rh. vermide), meaning apparently folly, infatuation. If ' head-
sheen ' be right, I would explain it by the OHG. houbet-skimo
(capitis radii), N. Cap. 68 : for it is an ailment that throws a
nimbus or nebula round one's head, and makes one see everything
double; H. Sachs names it ' der plerr, augenplerr* ii. 2, 27 b . iii.
3, 9*. iv. 3, 13 ab , and we still say 'die blerr kriegen/ to be lost in
amazement [blurred?]. Eating chervil is supposed to produce
this doubleness of vision, Fragm. 37 b, °. Garg. 148*.

A Finnic song makes an old woman, Launawatar (Schroter p.
48 seq.) or Louhiatar (Kalev. 25, 107) become the mother of nine
sons (like the nine holden above) : werewolf, snake, risi (?),
lizard, nightmare, joint-ache, gout, spleen, gripes. These mala-
dies then are brothers of baneful monsters ; and in the song the
last-named disorder is singled out for exorcism.

The Mod. Greeks picture the smallpox as a woman frightful to
children, and euphemistically name her avyx^P^^^V indulgent,
exorable (conf. ON. Eir), or more commonly evXoyla one to be
praised and blest (Fauriel's Disc. prel. lxxxv).

One more disease has to be noticed, which from quite the early
part of the Mid. Ages was ascribed to demonic diabolic agency.
I begin with a passage in the Vita Caesarii Arelatensis (d. 542),
said to have been written by his pupils Cyprianus, Messianus
and Stephanus, lib. 2 cap. 14 (Acta Bened. sec. 1, p. 673) : 1 Ille
autem, quid infirmitatis haberet ? interrogavit. Dixerunt, dae-
monium quod rustici Dianam appellant; quae sic affligitur, ut
paene omnibus noctibns assidiie caedatur, et saepe etiam in
ecclesiam ducitur inter duos viros ut maneat, et sic flagris dia-
holicis occulte fatigatur, ut vox continua ejus audiatur. . . .



Digitized by Google



1162 SICKNESSES.

Oculis meis vidi plagas, quas ante aliquos dies in dorsum et in
scapulas acceperat, in sanitatem venire, pridianas autem et in ipsa
nocte impressas recentes inter illas intextas, quas prius perpessa

fuerat.' Greg. Tur. mir. 5, Mart. 4, 36: 'Cum de cultura

rediret, subito inter manus delapsa comitantiuin terrae corruit,
ligataque lingua nullum verbum ex ore potens proferre, obmutuit.
Interea accedentibus accolis ac dicentibus earn meridiani daemonis
incursum pati, ligamina herbarum atque incantationum verba

proferebant.' Ducange has other passages sub v. daemon men-

dianus ; the name seems to have arisen out of Ps. 91, 6, where
Notker translates ' mittetagigo tiefel/ whom Greek writers also
call fiecTjfifipivb*; Baificov : the disease must have been of an
epileptic nature. The Bohemians name it polednice (meridiana),
but the Poles Dziewanna (p. 993 n.), which is Diana again, and as
Diana often means the same thing as Holda, it is essential to
remember that this goddess also loves to appear at the hour of noon
(Praetor, wcltbeschr. 1, 476), and that white ladies are seen at the
same season (p. 963-4-6), whose original is Berhta the bright. So
that the malady can safely be traced to the operation of deities
and elves. That here Holda and Berhta do strike in, has already
been inferred on other grounds, p. 477-8, in speaking of the aunt
in the rye, the woman in the wheat, who passes through the corn
at noontide, like the Wendic pshi-polnitsa : some call her pshi-
polontsa, she appears between 12 and 1 to labourers in heathy
districts, especially to women weeding flax, she is clothed
in white, and talks of flax-raising, how it is planted, reared,
worked and spun ; she is said to have wrung the necks of women
that would not answer her ; the people dread her, and are glad
she has not shown herself this long while past. Observe, that in
Gregory too the demon appeared to the woman at her field labour,
and she falls to the ground, as the Russian peasants do before the
' weeping widow ' who breaks their bones : in Gaul it was taken
for a mental disorder. But in all these shapes of terror we can-
not fail to recognise the motherly divinity of the heathens.

Of course, spirits have equally to do with animal diseases. An
OS. formula adjures the nesso and his nine young ones to depart
out of the flesh and skin of the spur-lamed horse. Dog's mad-
ness is said to come of a worm seated under the tongue, and this
1 tollwurm 1 can be cut out. One ailment of horses is called the



Digitized by Google



ANIMAL DISEASES.



1163



Mowing worm (Spell XV), which reminds of the blowing holden,
p. 1157. Another, of horses or of oxen, is the hunsche : Staid. 2,
61 makes it burning of the spleen or cold tumour, otherwiso called
' the evil wind/ Tobl. p. 70 ; in Lower Hesse it is swollen udder
iu a cow, and the charm there muttered against it is :

Die hunsche und der drache (dragon)
die giengen uber die bache (beck) ;

die hunsche die vertrank (was drowned, al. verschwank

vanished),
der drache der versank.

A charm in Mone's Anz. 465 begins : ' there went three blessed
virgins over a hiintschen hill, the hiintschen meets them, and one
says, here is the hiintsche.' Certainly the word seems to contain
the OHG. adj. hunisc, MHG. hiunisch, and may refer to giants
or to Huns (p. 523) ; the ' hiinische berg ' tells in favour of the
first, in case a giant's mount is meant. Adelung writes ' der
hintsch' and explains it as asthma. A L6. formula substitutes
for hunsche site, i.e. schleihe, tench (see Suppl.). In popular
belief a witch can charm her elves or holden alike into man and
beast. The Servians call an incurable disease in sheep metiU
They Bay, once the Germans having caught the Devil, asked him
what was a cure for the metii ? He answered, when all tho
sheep were dead but one, they must carry the remaining one
round the pen, and then no more would die but that one (Vuk
sub v.). In other cases the first head of cattle that falls is to be
buried, and a willow shoot be planted on the mound.

As the several diseases and plagues were ordained and sent by
gods or daemons, there were also special remedies and cares that
proceeded from such higher beings first of all. In the Catholic
superstition of the later Mid. Ages there had grown up a regular
system, as to which particular saint, male or female, was to be
invoked for the several pains and sorrows of almost every limb in
the body 1 (see Suppl.).

Out of a mass of superstitious modes of healing, I select the
following.

A very ancient custom was, to measure the patient, partly by
1 Haupt's Zeitsckr. 1, 143 1. Koquefort sub v. mal.



Digitized by Google



1164 SICKNESSES.

■way of cure, partly to ascertain if the malady were growing or
abating. We might even quote the Bible under this head, 1 Kgs
17, 21. 2 Kgs 4, 34, where Elijah and Elisha measure them-
selves over the lifeless child, and thereby restore him to life.
And the practice of measuring the limbs when handing tapers up
to the altar (Diut. 2, 292) is worth considering, though it is
supposed rather to keep away coming evils. In the Bihtebuoch
p. 46 the question is asked : 1 ob du ie geloubet6st au hecse und
an lachenerin und an segenerin, und ob du taate daz si dir rieten
(got them to advise thee) ? und ob du ie gesegnet oder gelachent
wurde oder gemezen wurde, und ob du ie bekort wurde ? 1 In
Ls. 3, 9 a woman, wishing to fool her husband, says : 1 tuo dich
her, la dich mezzen,' come and be measured ; then ' also lang ich
in maz, unz er allez vergaz/ I measured him till he forgot every-
thing. Another, who wants to persuade her husband that he is
'niht guoter sinne/ not of sound mind, says to him, Cod. kolocz.
141 :

' S6 habt her, und lat iuch mezzen,
ob ihtes (aught) an iu si vergezzen.'
Sie was ungetriuwe,
sie nam ir risen (rods) niuwe,
sie maz in ndth der lenge,
do was ez im ze enge,
sie maz im twerhes (across) uber houpt :
' swaz ich spriche, daz geloupt,
blaset dar durch (blow thro* these) mit gewalt,'
sie nam die risen zwivalt,
' und tret mir uf den rehten fuoz,

so wirt iu iuwer siihte buoz ('twill boot your sickness) ;

ir suit iuch in daz bette legen

und suit iuch niergen regen (not stir),

biz daz ir derhitzet (till you get warm)

und ein wenc (a little) erswitzet,

so ezzet drithalp rockenkorn (2 J grains of rye),

86 wirt iuwer suht gar verlorn.'

Renn. 12183: 'strecket inch nider, und Idt iuch mezzen.' This
measuring is also quoted among sorceries (Sup. D, 38 r. 140 r.).



Digitized by



MEASURING. STREWING ASHES



1165



Pregnant women measure a wick the length of the saint's image,
and tie it round their body (F, 31). Wier's Arzneibuch p. 31-3
mentions a disease called in the Treves country nacht-grif
(brought on by the grip of a night-spirit ?) ; to ascertain its
presence, you proceed thus : draw the sick man's belt about his
naked body, lengthwise and breadthwise, then take it off, and
hang it on a nail with the words 1 0 God, I pray thee by the
three virgins Margarita, Mariamagdalena and Ursula, be pleased
to vouchsafe a sign upon the Bick man, if he have the nightgrip
or no'; then measure again, and if the belt be shorter than
before, it is a sign of the said sickness. By the Schles. prov. bl.
1798. 27, 16—20, scarce a village in the Liegnitz country but
lias its messerin, always an old woman. When she is asked to
*ay whether a person is in danger from consumption, she takes
'v thread and measures the patient, first from head to heel, then
from tip to tip of the outspread arms j if his length be less than
his breadth, then he is consumptive : the less the thread will
measure his arms, the farther has the disease advanced ^conf.
p. 1 158) ; if it reaches only to the elbow, there is no hope for him.
The measuring is repeated from time to time : if the thread
stretches, and reaches its due length again, the danger is
removed. Tho wise woman must never ask money for her
trouble, but take what is given. The Mark, forschungen 1, 247
says a woman is stript, and measured with a piece of red yam
spun on a Sunday. Compare the measuring of corn and water,
Sup. I, 258. 953, and supra p. 491-7 (see Suppl.).

Much can be done by stroking and binding. A patient's body
is commonly stroked with the hand or sleeve or the back of a
knife; often a thread is also tied round the part affected, or tho
medicine tied on by it. Of this binding more hereafter.

In Poland, when the white folk (biate ludzie, p. 1157) torment
a sick man, a bed of pease-halm is made, a sheet spread over it,
and the patient laid thereon ; then a person walks round him,
carrying a sieve-ful of ashes on his back, letting the ashes run
out, till the floor all round the bed is covered with them. The
first thing in the morning they count all the lines in the ashes,
and some one goes silently, greeting no one on tho way, and
reports the same to the wise woman, who prescribes accordingly
(Biester's Mon. schr. as above). The spirits leave their tracks in



Digitized by Google



1166



SICKNESSES.



the ashes, which are strewn as for the earth-mannikin p. 451 n. ;
conf. Sup. M, 40 (see Suppl.).

On the drawing and pouring of water by the wise woman,
see Sup. I, 515. 865. Charming of apoplexy by a hatchet on the
threshold, G, line 70.

The efficacy of fire and flame was proved on envenomed
wounds, by burning them out ; Saem. 27 b already mentions ' eldr
vi$ s6ttum/ fire against sicknesses. On erysipelas they struck
fire [out of flint], Sup. I, 710. To insure cattle against fire, they
drove them over the holy needfire, p. 604 seq. (see Suppl.).

An old cure for fever was, to lay the child on the oven or the
roof: ' mulier si qua filium suum pomt supra tectum (conf. p. 11 1G)
aut in fomacem pro sanitate febrium,' Sup. C, 10, 14. 1 posuisti
infantem tuum juxta ignem,* C, p. 200*. If a child does not get
bigger, it has the elterlein (elderling) ; push it into the baking-
oven a few times, and the elterlein will leave it, I, 75. This
mode of cure follows the plan of goddesses and night-wives in
laying children by the flame, p. 1059.

A salutary process for children and cattle was to make them
walk or creep through tunnelled earth, hollow stones or a cloven
tree. This either prevented or neutralized all magic, or worked
homeopathically. So early as the Canones Edgari, acc. to the
AS. version in Thorpe p. 396: ' treow-wurSunga and stau-
wurSunga and )?one deofles craeft, j^ror ma pa did purh pa eorSan
tih&J ' Mulieres, quae habent vagientes infantes, effodiuni
terrain eb ex parte pertusant earn, et per illud foramen pertrahunt
iufantem/ Sup. A. Nurses take a new-born babe and thrust it
through a hole, G, line 137; a child that will not learn to walk
is made to crawl under blackberry -vines fixed in the soil at both
ends, I, 818. Sheep, when sick, have to creep through the cleft
of a young oak : ' nulius praesumat pecora per cavam arborem aut
per teiram foratam transire/ A.

Perforated stones are occasionally mentioned in early records :
' from pyralan stane,' Kemble 2, 29 (an. 847) ; f durihilin 6tein/
MB. 2, 296 (an. 1130). Ital. pietra pertusa. Some are called
needles* eyes, one of which stood between Hersfeld and Vacba
near Friedewald; and they seem to have been placed on the
former site of hollow trees, which were held in high esteem,
but had died : ' NadeLbhr est lapis perforatus, in locum arboris



Digitized b



CREEPING THROUGH EARTH OH TREES.



1167



excavatae, in media silva venatoribus ob feraruin silvestrium
copiam frequente, a Mauritio Hassiae landgravio ad viam positas,
per quern praetereuntes joci et vexationis gratia proni perrepere
solent.' 1 Thi9 handseling of huntsmen and travellers went on long
after all faith in the healing power had evaporated. In Gaul
it seems to have kept a firmer hold, and taken a wider range ;
e.g. in Poitou: Mes enfants trop faibles reprennent des forces,
lorsqu'ils ont ete assis dans le trou de la pierre saint Fesse;
cette pierre informe placde au milieu d'un champ est respectee
par les laboureurs, et la charruo laisse un espace libre a l'entour/
Mem. des antiq. 8, 455 ; similar traditions ib. 1, 429. 430.

This creepiug through a gap in oak, earth or stone seemingly
transferred the sickness or sorcery to the genius of the tree or
soil. 2 From Magdeburg country I have heard the following :
Let two brothers (if twins, the better) split a cherry-tree in the
middle, and pull any sick child through, then bind the troe up
again ; as the tree heals up, so will the child. Near Wittstock
in the Altmark stood a stout gnarled oak, whose boughs had
grown into and made Iwles in each other : the afflicted who crept
through these holes recovered; all round the tree lay numbers
of crutches that convalescent cripples had thrown away (Temmo
p. 116-7). In Sweden these round openings in intertwisted
boughs are called elf -bores, and women in labour are forced
through them. We are not always told what diseases were
cured by this method ; here is a passage proving that as late
as last century the English peasantry still practised it for
ruptures : ' In a farmyard near the middle of Selborne (Hants)
stands at this day a row of pollard-ashes, which, by the seams
and long cicatrices down their sides, manifestly shew that in
former times they have been cleft asunder. These trees, when
young and flexible, were severed and held open by wedges, while
ruptured children stript naked were pushed through the apertures,
under a persuasion that by such a process the poor babes would
be cured of their infirmity. As soon as the operation was over,
the tree in the suffering part was plastered with loam, and care-

1 Pauli Hentzneri itinerar. (an. 1598-9), Breslau 1617. p. 5.

3 N.B., in the O.Fr. Tristan 1321 — 34 when the dwarf Frocine confides to the
blackthorn the secret of king Mark having horse's ears, he first puts his head under
the hollow root, and then speaks. His secret thus passes on to the thorn.



Digitized by Google



1168 SICKNESSES.

fully swathed up. If the part coalesced and soldered together,
as usually fell out where the feat was performed with any
adroitness at all, the party was cured; but where the cleft
continued to gape, the operation, it was supposed, would prove
ineffectual. We have several persons now living in the village,
who in their childhood were supposed to be healed by this
superstitious ceremony, derived down perhaps from our Saxon
ancestors, who practised it before their conversion to Christianity.

At the south corner of the area near the churoh, there stood

about twenty years ago a very old grotesque hollow pollard-ash,
which for ages had been looked on with no small veneration as
a shrew-ash. Now a shrew-ash is an ash whose twigs or branches,
when gently applied to the limbs of cattle, will immediately
relieve the pains which a beast suffers from the running of a
shrewmouse over the part affected. For it is supposed that
a shrewmouse is of so baneful and deleterious a nature, that
wherever it creeps over a beast, be it horse, cow or sheep, the
suffering animal is afflicted with cruel anguish, and threatened
with the loss of the use of the limb. Against this accident, to
which they were continually liable, our provident forefathers
always kept a shrew-ash at hand, which, when once medicated,
would maintain its virtue for ever. A shrew-ash was made
thus: 1 into the body of the tree a deep hole was bored with
an auger, and a poor devoted shrewmouse was thrust in alive and
plugged in, no doubt with several quaint incantations long since
forgotten. As the ceremonies necessary for such a consecration
are no longer understood, all succession is at an end, and no
such tree is known to subsist in the manor or hundred. As to
that on the area, the late vicar stubbed and burnt it when he was
waywarden, regardless of the remonstrances of the bystanders,
who interceded in vain for its preservation" (see Suppl.).

1 Bob. Plot's Nat. hist, of Staffordshire, Oxf . 1686. p. 222 : 'A superstitions
custom they have in this county, of making nunrow trees for the cure of unaccount-
able swellings in their cattle. For to make any tree, whether oak, ash or elm, a
nursrow tree, they catch one or more of these nursrows or fieldmice, which they
fancy bite their cattle and make them swell, and having bored a hole to the center
in the body of the tree, they put the mice in, and then drive a peg in after them
of the same wood, where they starving at last communicate forsooth such a virtue
to the tree, that cattle thus swoln being wiped with the bought of it presently
recover : of which trees they have not so many neither, but that at 6ome places
they go 8 or 10 miles to procure this remedy.'

* Whito's Nat. hist, and antiq. of Selborne, Lond. 1783. 4, p. 202-4.



Digitized by Google



PLUGGING UP. BURYING. 1169

This superstition of the mouse-ash holds together with some
things we have already touched upon. Thus, plugging the
mouse in is very like shutting up one's ill-luck in the hollow
oak, p. 878 ; and we are helped out by a statement in Luther's
Table-talk (ed. 1571. fol. 53 b ) : f a hole is bored in a tree, the
soul placed therein, and a plug driven in after, that it may stay
in/ We know that on other occasions, when soul or spirit
quits the body, it takes the shape of a mouse, p. 1082.

Baibiht is what the Lettons call a fancied cure for headache :
the sufferer is measured a few times round the head with the
inner bark of the lime, and then has to crawl through this bast.
We also find that through holes bored in this healing tree water
is poured and drunk. 1

It partakes of angang, that the first three corn or sloe blossoms
one sees in the year should furnish a remedy for fever, Sup. I,
695. 718. 784. 1018; conf. the 2\ grains of rye, p. 1164.

At the Vogelsberg gouty persons wear on the ring-finger
of the right hand iron rings made out of nails on which men
have hung themselves. Gout-charms are worn on the breast,
wrapt in unbleached linen, with flaxen threads without a knot.
Both fall under the head of amulets and adligatio. Healing
girdles were already known to Marcellus, AS. horn. 2, 28.

Diseases and remedies are also buried in the ground : in the
ant-hill, Sup. I, 864. Of this class is a cure of epilepsy per-
formed in the 10th cent, by burying peachblossoms, which
Ratherius in Praeloquiis lib. 1 (ed. Mart, et Dur. p. 808. ed.
Bailer, p. 31) relates doubtingly : Factum sit, infectum sit,
narratum est quod refero. Cujusdam divitis filius gutta quam
cadivam dicunt laborabat. Medicorum omne probatissimorum
erga eum inefficax ingenium ad desperationem salutis paternum
atque maternum deduxerat animum, cum ecce unus servorum
suggerit, ut flores arboris persicae optime mundatos primo lunis

1 Physica Hildegardis 3, 10 de cupresso : Quod ai aliquis homo a diabulo vel
per magica irretitus est, praefatum lignum, quod cor dicitur, euro terebro perforet,
et in fictili vase aquam vivi fontis tollat, et earn per idem foramen in aliud fictile
vas fundat, et cum jam infundit dicat : ' ego f undo te, aqua, per foramen istud in
virtuoaa virtute, quae Deua est, ut cum fortitudine quae tibi adest in natura tua
fluas in hominem istum qui in sensu suo irretitus est, et omnes contrarietates in
eo destruas, et eum in rectitudinem in quam Deua eum posuit, in recto sensu et
scientia reponas.' Et aquam istam per novem dies jejunus bibat, et etiam tociens
hoc modo benedicatur, et melius habebit.



Digitized by Google



1170



SICKNESSES.



(i.e. lunae) die Aprilis mensis in vase vitreo colligerent, qnod
sub radice fjusdem arboris, insciis omnibus, ab nno quo vellent
snffodereftir, eodem die reversuro ipso a quo positnm est, anno
vergente, si fieri posset hora qaoque eadem, et effosso vase flore*
in oleum conversos, arborem siccatam inventuro, qaod sub altare
positum presbytero quoquo ignorante, novem missis super eo
celebratis sanctificaretur, et statim post accessum ejusdem morbi
novem vicibus in haustum diatim scilicet aegro daretur, cum
orationo Dominica, ita duntaxat at post ( libera nos a malo 9 a
dante diceretur ' libera Deus istum hominem (nomine ill.) a gutta
cadiva/ et quibus novem diebus missam quotidie audiret, azymum
panem cibumque quadragesimalem post jejunium caperet, atque
ita Deo miserante convalesceret. Si tamen factum est, ille con-
valuit, servus emancipatus est, etiam heres adscriptus, medicina
ab innumeris ad probata multis quoque salutis contulit remedia.

The elder- tree is good for toothache and ague : for the former
the sufferer sticks an clihr-branch into the ground with the words
' begone, bad spirit ' ; in the case of ague ho puts it in without
saying a word, but his fever sticks to the elder, and then fastens
on the first person who comes to the spot unawares, Dan. Sup.
K, 162. Specially wholesome is an elder that grows over bee-
hives (op bjintjekoven) ; the bast is peeled off* upwards (not
down), and a decoction of it is given the patient to drink
(Lapekoer fen Gabo scroar. p. 31-2).

It is worth noticing how the sickness is transferred to a tree,
i.e. to the spirit who inhabits it. Spell no. xxvi begins with
the words : ' bough, I bend thee, so fever leave me'; another has :
' Lift thee up, cider bough ! Antony* s fire, sit on it now ! I've
had theo a day, thou have it alway!' One that has the gout must
go three successive Fridays after sunset under ^firtree: 'firtree,
I complain to thee, the gout torments me sore, etc.'; the fir
withers, and the gout leaves off. • Deus vos sal vet, sambuee,
panem et sal ego vobis adduco, febrem tertianam et quotidianam
accipiatis vos, qui nolo earn.' Westendorp p. 518 reports a
Nethl. custom : to be rid of ague, one goes early in the morning
(in der uchte) to an old willow, ties three knots in a bough, and
says to it : ' goo morgen, olde, ik goef oe de kolde, goe morgen,
olde ! 1 then he turns, and runs away fast without looking round.
Sup. T, 1071- : he that has 'fever-frost* shall go in silence, and



Digitized by Google



PASSING IT ON. SWATHING.



1171



across no water, to a hollowed willow, thrice breathe his breath
into it, quickly block vp the hole, and hasten home, neither look-
ing behind nor speaking a word ; and the fever shall keep away.
In Spell xliv the gont is handed over to a young pinetree with a
courteous ' good morrow, dame Pine ! *

Diseases can likewise be transferred to animals. ' Praecordia
vocamus uno nomine exta in homine, quorum in dolore cujus-
cunque partis si catulus lactens admoveatur apprimaturquo his
partibus, transire in enm morbus dicitur, idque in exenterato
perfusoque vino deprehendi, vitiato viscere illo quod doluerit
hominis; et obrui tales religio est/ Pliny 30, 4 [14]. 'Sunt oc-
culti interaneorum morbi, de quibus mirum proditur: si catuli,
priusquam videant, applicentur triduo stomacho maxime ac
pectori, et ex ore aegri suctum lactis accipiant, transire vim
morbi, postremo exanimari, dissectisque palam fieri aegri causas ;
ruori et humari debere eos obrutos terra... Quod praeterea traditur
in torminibus mirum est : anate apposita ventri, transire morbum,
anatemque emori/ 30, 7 [20]. So, even within the last few
centuries, people have put young whelps to the human breast,
and let them suck. That a corn (clavus, ^Xo?) should be called
by us hen's eye (Boh. kufj oko), magpie's eye (Nethl. exter-6g),
and crow's eye, arose out of a belief in the possibility of these
transfers. Tobler 18 b tells us, if a Swiss calls out on the spot
where a magpie has sat, ' zigi, zigi, dgest, i ha dreu auga (I've
3 eyes), ond du gad zwa,' he gets rid of his magpie's eye.

The flying gout is cured by the patient being completely
swathed in clean flax : when he lies in it snug as a bug in a
rug, a sheepskin is spread over him, and the sweating medicine
administered. This envelopment is a remedy renowned in the old
Beast-fable. Tho lion taken with a fever is to wrap himself in
the hide of a wolf of 3J years who has been flayed alive, and to
sweat; this we have already in the Aesopic fable (Reinh. cclx).
Our old German poem goes more into minutias : the lion's illness
was caused by an ant having crept into his brain ; Reynard pre-
scribes wrapping the hide of an old wolf about him, putting a
bearskin on him, and a catskin hat on his head : when the cat's
fur is warmed, the ant creeps out into it. Such wrapping in the
newly stript hide of an animal was really practised in the Mid.
Ages on various emergencies, for puny infants prematurely born,

VOL. III. T



Digitized by Google



1172



SICKNESSES.



for those cut out unborn (p. 388), for a bad fall. In a Nethl.
comedy of the 16th century, 'De boae frouwens/ they sew up
the sick woman in a page's skin, ' in eine vriske pagenhut benei~
jen.' Schmidt on the East Mongols p. 229 remarks, that these
tribes also, to cure a disease, put their feet in the opened breast
of a horse fresh killed. The application of warm flesh is several
times mentioned : 1 vivum gallinaceum pidlum per medium divi-
dere, et protinus calidum super vulnus imponere sic ut pars
interior corpori jungatur,' Celsus 5, 27; 'cut open a black hen,
and lay it on the shaven head,' Ettn. hebamme 795 ; fresh-killed
flesh on a wound, Belg. mus. 7, 446 (see Suppl.). 1

Again, the hirzin rieme, hart-strap, cut out of Randoltfs hide
for the sick lion (Reinh. 1951), is found actually prescribed
as a remedy, Bresl. MS. of the 14th century in Fundgr. 1,
325 : ' Fur daz vallende ubel. Du salt warten, swenne iz en
an-ge (attacks him), so nim einen hirzinen riemen, unde bint
im den umbo don hals (round his neck) di wile im we si, unde
sprich, " In nomine, etc. so binde ich hie den sichthum dises
menschen in disem knopfe," unde nim den selbem riemen denne,
unde knupfe (tie) einen knoten dar an ; den selben riemen sal man
denne binden dem siechen unibe den hals ; unde derselbe mensch
sal sich enthalden (abstain) von dem wine unde von dem fleische,
biz (till) daz er kume da (where) man einen toten man begrabe
(burying), da sal man den riemen losen dem siechen von dem
halse, unde sal den selben riemen begraben mit dem toten
manne, wan der selbe rieme sal dem toten geleget werden under die
schulter (laid under the dead man's shoulder), unde sal einer
sprechen, der den riemen leget, etc. der sichthum gewirret im
nimmer mere.' Elsewhere it is prescribed for epilepsy, to gird
oneself with a wolfskin, Belg. mus. 6, 105 (see Suppl.).

The modern pharmacopoeia is almost confined to vegetable and
mineral medicines ; the ancient comprised all manner of animal

1 ' His diebus occulto Dei judicio idem Eraclius (episc. Leodiensis, d. 971)
morbo, qui lujnu dicitur, miserabiliter laborabat. Patiebatur autem in natibus,
erat igitur videre miseriam ; tarn graviter enim vis valetudinis grassabatur, tit
mirum in modum carnes viri lupino modo oonsnmeret, corroderet, devoraret;
solumque solatium, non quidem spes evadendae aegritudinis, Bed saltern dilatio
mortis erat, quod quotidie duo pulli gallioarum eplumes et evisoerati mane, duoque
vespere, vice caruium viri consumendi morbo, ac si lupinae rabiei, apponebantur.'
The chickens were fastened on with bandages, Chapeaville 1, 191-4. Skin inflam-
mation and eating ulcers are called wolf : one walks, rides, till he gets the wolf,
Lat. intertrigo, Gr. vapdrpt/x/ia. [Sheepskin proposed for Prince of Wales] .



Digitized by



SWATHING. SYMTATHY. CHARMS.



1173



stuffs. The hearts of certain birds, the flesh, blood and fat of
certain beasts possessed a peculiar healing power. 1 Monkey's
flesh does the sick lion good (Reinh. celx), though the ignorant
wolf recommends that of the goat and ram. 3 The blood of birds
and of the fox heals wounds, Pentam. 2, 5. Crow's blood be-
witches, Sup. G, L 202. Blood from the cock's comb, brains of
the female hare are of service, Ettn. hebamme 875. Of a piece
with this is the superstitious healing of leprosy by the blood of
innocent boys and pure maids, that of the falling sickness by the
blood of slain malefactors, Sup. I, 1080. Spittle, and even mere
breath, are medicinal 3 (see Suppl.).

A great many appliances heal or hurt by sympathy. Thus
jaundice is rendered incurable by a yellow-footed hen flying over
the patient, Sup. I, 549 ; it is cured by looking into black
carriage-grease (66). Spanning a pot or bowl with the hand
brings on tension of the heart (11. 949) ; twisting osiers gives a
wry neck or the gripes (373 ; conf. p. 1146). Fever is abated or
laid by laying a field under flax while repeating a charm : as the
seed comes up, the fever goes off (Hofer 3, 131). On rose or
red rash (erysipelas) you are to strike sparks with stone and steel
(I, 383. 710) ; to make evil bounce off your body, as water off
the millwheel (p. 593) ; to break a loaf over the head of a tongue-
tied child (I, 415) ; to knock a tooth that is pulled out into the
bark of a young tree (630). The people have many such
specifics for hiccough, earache, toothache, etc., I, 151. 211. 260.
581-4. 722. 950 (see Suppl).

Remedies are very often tied on, are worn fastened round the
arm, neck, or waist. These the writers of the early Mid. Ages
call ligamenta, ligaturae, phylacteria. $v\aKTi)pui are preserva-
tives, protective pendants, amulets, often of thin metal plate
(blech), so that OHG. glosses render them pleh, plehhir, but also
of glass, wood, bones, herbs, silver and gold; ligaturae ap-
parently mere ties of thread. The later word is an-gohenke,

1 Wanley p. 75 (oonf . 220) cites a 1 tractatus Idparti fabulosus ' : Medicina ex
qnadrupedibus.

5 4 Mit der belclien (fulicae atrae) f iiezen wirt detn man mazleide buoz,' Ls. 3,

564.

3 Herodotus 2, 111 speaks of a blind man recovering sight ywawbt ofyv
YtfAfieyoi roll 6<f>0a\novs, frit irapd rbv iuvrijs aV8/>a /towor w«f>oiTr)ice, 4XW d*3p<i*



Digitized by LiOOQle



1174



SICKNESSES.



appendage, I, 869. 870. Cipher- writing and runes were also
appended, not always for healing, but contrariwise to bewitch
and injure. Here are testimonies to both kinds : ' Ut clerici vel
laici phylacteria vel fahaa scriptiones aut ligaturaa, quae imprn-
dentes pro febribus aut aliis pestibus adjuvare putant, nullo modo
ab illis vel a quoquam Christiano fiant, quia magicae artis in-
signia sunt/ Capitul. 6, 72. ' Admoneant sacerdotes non liga-
turaa oaaium vel herbarum cuiquam adhibitas prodesse, sed haec
esse laqueos et insidias antiqui hostis/ Capit. add. 3, 93. In
Greg. Tur. mirac. 2, 45 we read of a sick boy to whom the
wizard (ariolus) was fetched: 'Hie vero venire non differens,
accessit ad aegrotum, et artem suam exercere conatur, incanta-
tiones imraurmurat, sortes jactat, ligaturaa collo auapendit.' In
Lex Visig. vi. 2, 4 : ' Qui in hominibus vel brutis animalibus,
seu in agris sen in vineis diversisque arboribus, raaleficium aut
diversa ligamenta aut etiam scripta in contrarietatem alterios
excogitaverit facere.' In Lex Sal. 22, 4 : ' Si quis alteri aliquod
maleficium superjactaverit, sive cum ligaturia in aliquod loco
miserit.' The Indiculus (Sup. B; C int. 43 and p. 195 b ) speaks
of such ligaticrae and nefaria ligamenta, both healing and hurt-
ful ; Kopp's Palaeogr. 3, 74 seq. gives other passages on amulets
and ligatures. Hincmar 1, 654 says: 'Turpe est fabulas nobis
notas referre, et longum est sacrilegia computare, quae ex
hujusmodi de oaaibua mortuorum atque cineribus carbonibuaque
extinctis (supra p. 621) . . . cum filulia colorum multi-
plicium, et lierbia variia ac cocleolis, et serpentum particulis
composita, cum carminibus incantata deprehendentes comperi-
mus.' These particoloured threads remind one of Virgil's verse :
' tenia tibi haec primum triplici diversa colore licia circumdo/
and 'necte tribus nodis ternoa, Amarylli, colores' (Eel. 8, 73-7) . l
If it was the Romans that taught our fathers the use of amulets,
they must have done it very early, for what says Boniface?
Epist. 51 (an. 742) : ' Dicunt quoque se vidisse ibidem mulieres
pagano ritu phylacteria et ligaturaa in brachiis et cruribus
ligatas habere, et publico ad vendendum venales ad com-

1 Among tho Lettons the bride on her way to churoh must throw a bunch of
coloured threads and a coin into every ditch and pond she sees, and at each corner
of the house, as an offering to the water and home sprites. Merkel's Letten, p. 50 ;
conf. Sup. M, 11.



Digitized by Googl



CHARMS. LOCKING UP.



1175



parandum aliis offerre.' And Beda 4, 27: 'Nam et multi
. . ad erratica idolatriae medicamina concurrebant, quasi
inissam a Deo conditore plagam per iucantationes vel phylacteria
. cohibere valerent.' A phylactery with relics from neck
to breast in Sigeb. Gembl. 828. In Bonaventurae centiloq. 1, 2D
(Opp. ed. Venet. 5, 130): 'Maleficinm est peritia per quam
mulieres faciunt aliquas ligaturas in damnum vel in commodum
alicujus, ut de crista galli et de rana et de imagine cum eis.'
Even Pliny 30, 1 [30] speaks of tying beetle on. The fuli-zant,
foal's tooth, Ms. 2, 160 b I have noticed p. 658n.; Pliny 28, 19
[78] alludes to this custom also : ' dentes qui equis primum
cadunt facilem dentitionem praestant infantibus adalligatV
The godfather mentioned with 'fulizant' is, I suppose, to put
it round the godchild with his own hands ? The tying-on of
simples is treated more fully in the next chap, (see Suppl.).

Bewitching a newly-married couple was alluded to, pp. 1073-9G.
The witch, by merely muttering a spell during the wedding, if
she be present, can incapacitate both husband and wife for
having children. Hincmar 1, 654 relates a case, and states the
composition of the material employed as a charm; on his state-
ment is founded a passage in Gratian's decree ii. 33, 1 § 4.
Such sorcery is named tying the senkel or nestel, turning the lock,
binding, because it is accompanied by the secret tying of a knot
or locking of a padlock. 1 Nestel means a tie (ligula) ; it is a
senkel when the ends are tipped with metal, to make it sink
faster. It is also called tying up the breach, tying the tippet or
nether garment, Fr. nouer Vaiguilette. There are said to bo fifty
sorts of these ties, and a vast number of unintelligible txe-spellsr
The lock when fastened, the knot when tied, was thrown away,
not hung on the bewitched.

Many forms are observed in pregnancy and childbirth, Sup. I,
41. 176. 293. 337. 364. 489. 561. 654. 673-4. 688. 691. 702. 724—
732. 817. 859. 924-5. 933. M, 12. 18—23. If the woman put
her husband's slippers on, if on the wedding-day the bridegroom
tie the bride's garters, she will have easy labours. Does this
account for the custom, whose antiquity I shall presently prove,
of the bride on the wedding-night exchanging her shift for the

1 Antidotes in Ettn. hebamme p. 291-6. Wegner's Schauplatz p. G25 seq.
3 Bodin, transl. by Fischart, p. 74-5. [Tie as many knots as one has warts, etc.]



Digitized by Google



1176



SICKNESSES.



bridegroom's shirt ? Vintler says, Sup. G, 1. 170 : ' da sind dan
otlich briute (some brides), die legent ir hemd an irs mannes ort
(place)/ More clearly in Turlin's Wh. 148: r diu kiinigin wart
gebriset in ein hemede ;

als er dir si gelegen bi (lain down beside thee) ,
und er dar nach entslafen si (gone to sleep),
so lege tongen (stealthily) sin hemede an ;
und ob din sin gesuochen kan (wit can contrive),
daz ez werde heimlich getan (be secretly done),
sich (see), daz dich iht verdrieze (fail not),
din heinde sin hovpt beslieze (envelop his head) ;
daz sol an dinem vlize sten (depend on thy pains) :
dar nach soldu iiber in gen

an sime Jwmde, daz wirt dir vromen (pro6t thee).

Among the Greeks a birth was forwarded or checked by
superior divine beings, the eileithyiai, handmaids of Hera, who
were gradually merged in a single Eileiihyia, the Roman Tjucina.
In our Edda Oddrun the sister of Atli has skill in childbirth, she
posts over land to the expectant mother, flings the saddle off her
steed and strides into the hall (Sarni. 239), kneels down before
the maid, and speaks her charm. They spoke of • kiosa maeSr
fra mogum ' (exsolvere matres a pueris), Ssem. 187 b , aud gave
the office to norns. There must have been from the earliest
times sympathetic means of delivering and of obstructing, which
are practised to this day : to cross the legs, to fold the hands
before the woman in labour was obstructive, to leave loose or
disengage was helpful ; probably the energetic unsaddling of the
steed had this meaning. Ovid's Met. 9, 298 :

Dextroque a poplite laevum
pressa genu, digitis inter se pectine junctis
sustinuit nixus ; tacit a quoque carmina voce
dixit, et inceptos tenuerunt carmina partus.

310. Divam residentem vidit in ara,

brachiaque in genibus digitis connexa tenentem.

31-1. Exsiluit, junctasque manus pavefacta remisit
diva potens uteri : viuclis levor ipsa remissis.



Digitized by Google



BINDING, LOOSING. DROPPING- WELLS. 1177



* Assridere gravidis, vel cum remediura alicui adhibeatur, digitis
pedinatim inter se implexis veneficium est, idque compertuni
tradunt Alcmena Herculem pariente. Pejus si circa unum
timbove genua ; item poplites alternis genibus imponi/ Pliny 28,
O [17]. 'Ferunt difficiles partus statira solvi, si quis tectum in
c|Uo sit gravida transmiserit lapide vel fnissili ex his qui tria
animalia singulis ictibus interfecerint, hominem, aprum, ursum.
Probabilius id facit hasta velitaris, evulsa e corpore hominis, si
terram non attigerit/ 28, 4 [6], (see Suppl.).

A poisoning case was sometimes met by forcible remedies : the
tnan was hung up by the heels, and after a time one of his eyes
pulled out, in hopes of the venom oozing out at that aperture :

* tamen intoxicatus Albertus in Austria, et diu per pedes sus-
pensus, oculum perdens evasit/ Alb. Argent, (ed. Basil. 1569)
p. 167 (see Suppl.).

Water, springs, fire (pp. 1166. 1173) have power to preserve
health or restore it (pp. 586-8. 605-6. 618-9. 621 — 4) ; especially
a spring that has burst out t)f the rock at the bidding of a god or
saint. The snake that lies coiled round the holy well, or is seen be-
side it (p. 585-8n.), maybe likened to the serpent-rod of Aescula-
pius. Healing water or oil trickles out of rocks and walls. The
mother that was walled in (p. 1143) continued for a time to nourish
her babe through a hole in the wall, till at last she died. At that
hole there is a continual dropping, women whose milk has run
dry go there to get healed : the mother's milk had streamed so
long that it sets other breasts flowing too. I know of a similar
story in Italy : 1 est quoque non procul ab hoc oppido (Verona) ,
in valle quadam Policella dicta, locus Negarina nomine, ubi
xaxum durissimum visitur, in quo mammae ad justam muliebrium
formam sculptae sunt, ex quarum papillis perpetuae stillant aquae,
quibus si lactans mulier papillas asperserit et laverit, exsiccatus
aliquo (ut fit) vel morbo vel alio casu illi lacteus humor revocatur/
Hentzneri itinerar. p. 201. A rock which drops milk is mentioned
in Fel. Faber's Evagator. 1, 449; and the Lith. Laumes papas
(teat) is the name of a hard stone.

To the tombs of saints a direct healing power was ascribed in
the Mid. Ages, everything in contact with them brought help,
even a draught of the water poured over bones, garments,
splinters and earth. Turf and dew off" the grave can heal (Greg.



Digitized by Google



1178



SICKNESSES.



Tur. vitao patr. 6, 7). 1 Beda 3, 9 tells of St. Oswald : 'In loco
ubi pro patria diinicans a paganis interfectus est, usque hodie
sanitates infirmorum et hominum et pecorum celebrari non desinant.
Unde contigit ut pulverem ipsum, ubi corpus ejas in terram cor-
ruit, multi auferentes et in aquam mittentes suis per haec infirm is
multum commodi afferrent : qui videlicet inos adeo increbuit, ut
paulatim ablata exinde terra fossara ad meusuram staturae virilis
reddiderit.' 8,11: ' De pulvere pavimenti in quo aqua lavacri
illius effusa est, multi jam sanati infirmi' 3, 13: 'Habeo quidem
de ligno in quo caput ejus occisi a paganis infixum est .
tunc benedixi aquam, et astulam roboris praefati immittens obtuli
aegro potandam : nec mora, melius habere coepit.' 4, 3 of St.
Ceadda (d. 672): 'Est autem locus idem sepulcri tumba in modum
domunculi facta coopertus, habente foramen in pariete, per quod
solent hi qui causa devotionis illo adveniunt manum suam immit-
tere, ac partem pulueris inde assumere, quam cum in aquas mise-
rint atque has infirmantibus jumentis sive hominibus gustandas
dederint, mox infirmitatis ablata molestia, cupitae sanitatis gaudia
redibunt.' 4, 61 of Earconwald : 1 Etenim usque hodie fsretrum
ejus caballarium, quo infirmus vehi solebat, servatum a discipulis
ejus, multos febricitantes vel alio quolibet incommodo fessos
sanare non destitit. Non solum autem suppositi eidem feretro vel
appositi curantur aegroti, sed et astulae de illo abscissae atque ad

infirmos allatae citam illis solont afiferre medelam/ Relics not

only heal, but bring fortune, peace and fruitfulness, pretty much
as the jewels of elves and dwarfs did in particular families :
' ubicunque hae reliquiae fuerint, illic pax et auymentum et leiiitas
aetis semper erit' (Pertz 1, 71). 2

1 Greg. Tur. mirao. 1, 21 takes from Euscbius 7, 18 the tale of a metal image
of the Saviour and the woman of Ctesarea, whose issue of blood was stanched:
1 Hujus ad pedem statuae in basi herba quaedam nova specie nascitur. quae com
exorta fuerit, crcscere usque ad $tolae illius aereae indununti jimbriam Bolet. quam
cum Bumiuo vertice crescens herba contigerit, vires inde ad depellendos omnes morbos
languoresque conquirit ; ita ut quaecunque fuerit ilia infirmitas corporis, haustu
exiguo madefacta salutaris graminis depellatur; nihil omuino virium gerens, si
antequam aereae fimbriae summitatem oresoendo contigerit, decerpatur. hano
statuam ad simUitudinem vultus Jesu tradebant, quae permansit etiam ad nostra
(Ensebii) usque tempora, sicut ipsi oculis nostris inspeximus.' — The beautiful myth
is also copied by AgobarduB (Opp. ed. Baluze, Par. 1666. 2, 248-9). It was essential
for the plant to have grown up to the hem of the garment, it was only by touching
it that it acquired healing efficacy.

s Les reliques sunt forz, Deus i fait grant vertui,

iloc juit un coutrait, set anz out ke ne be mut,



Digitized by Google



RELICS. LIMBS HUNG UP



1179



The legends are full of the marvellous deliverances vouchsafed
to pilgrim patients at the tombs of saints. An incredible number
of sick had recourse to this method ; but it is cleverly parodied
in our Beast-apologue (Reinh. pp. cv. cxxvi) : the hare with his
fever, the wolf with his earache, are cured the moment they lie
down on the grave of the martyred hen. From such delusion
the heathens were free : I nowhere find it stated that they sought
healing from relics or at the mounds of their kings and giants.
They resorted however to sacred woods, p. 72-4 (see Suppl.). 1

In Greece, particularly in Boeotia, it was customary for patients,
on recovery, to set up in the temple a metal model of the part of
the body which had been affected. Amongst dvaO/jfiara an in-
scription mentions irpoacowov, tit66<s, alBolov, %elp, &c. ; 2 these
votive offerings were afterwards melted down to make sacred
vessels. The custom of votive tablets with limbs depicted on
them may indeed have been imported into Germany by the
Romans while yet heathens, unless we will admit that our fathers
themselves had known them before. The passage from Gregory
given p. 81 says expressly : 'membra, secundum quod unumquem-
que dolor attigisset, sculpebat in ligno,' and further on, ' visi enim
in eo barbari gentili superstitione, modo auri argentique dona,
modo fercula ad potum vomitumque ebrii offerre, cultumque quo
nihil insanius, istic simulacrum inanis dei, ac ut quemque affecti
membri dolor presserat, sculpebat in ligno suspendebatque opitu-
laturo idolo.' This was done in Ripuaria in the 6th cent. Eligius
refers to the same thing, Sup. A : ' pedum similitudines, quos per
bivia ponunt, fieri vetate, et ubi invenerit igni cremate; per
nullam aliam artem salvari vos credatis nisi per invocationem et
crucem Christi ! ' and the Indiculus § 29, 1 de ligneis pedibus

tut li os li cruBsirent, H tiers li sunt estendut :

ore sailt bus eu peez, unkes plus sain ne fud. Rom. de Cbarlem. 192—5.

Les reliques sunt forz, granz vertuz i fait Deus,
que il ne venent a ewe, uen partissent les guet,
nencuntret avcogle ki ne scit reluminet,
les cuntrez i redrescent, e lea muz funt parler. 255-8.

1 The origin of relic-worship I shall investigate in another place.

2 Corp. inscript. 1, 750 no. 1570, where Bockb says : * Donaria medicationis
causa Amphiarao oblata. qui ex oraculo per somnium dato restituti in sanitatem
erant, ii partim membri quo laborarant rjfigiem dicabant (p. 474 no. 497-8), partim
alia donaria, quemadmodura etiam in fontem Amphiarai dejicere nummoa solebant.'
Conf. Puusan. 1, 3.



Digitized by Google



1180



SICKNESSES



vel manibus pagano ritu' ; a woman with a palsied arm is ad-
monished in a dream * ut instar semivivae manum ceream for-
mando exprimeret, et ad sanctae Idae tumnlum deferret 9 (begin,
of 10th cent., Pertz 2, 573). At the same time even these au-
thorities teach us an important distinction : the Greek brought
his dvdOrjfia out of gratitude, when the malady was healed ; the
German hung up the limb in the temple or at the cross-roads,
with a view to obtain relief thereby, ' opitulaturo idolo/ and f per
nullam aliam artem salvari vos credatis.* And for this purpose
a wooden or perhaps waxen image sufficed, which would have
been a paltry present to the succouring deity ; conf. another pas-
sage from Gregory in my EA. 674, and Ruinart's note thereon.
So that this German heathenry is of a piece with the sorcery
by wax images (p. 1091), and with heathen sacrifices, which
kept up an analogy between the thing prayed for and the thing
offered : those who wished for children presented a child of wax,
wood or silver, while conversely a figure of wax or silver served
as penance for slaying the body. But what shocked the early
teachers as sheer paganism was afterwards humoured and licensed
by the church. A votive tablet at Alt-ottingen represents an
unhappy man with an arrow passing through his eyebrow into
the eye-pupil (Schm. 1, 242). 1 At places famed for pilgrimages
we find hands, feet, etc. of wood or wax fastened to the walls ;
outside the church were hung up the crutches on which the sick
had come, and which they needed no longer in going away
healed: 1 ut incredibilis materies scabellorum atque oscillorum
post perceptam sanitatem a redeuntibus ibi remaneret,' Acta
Bened. sec. v, p. 102 ; conf. Pertz 2, 574. Among the Greeks
the sick often slept in the temple of the deity in whom they put
their trust, and received in a dream instructions as to cure ; 2
much the same occurs in medieval legends, e.g. that passage in
the Life of St. Ida. Put together with this the first dream in a
new house or stable, p. 1146 (see Suppl.).

There were superstitious signs, by observing which you could

1 Diseases also were hung up piotorially : thus, before miraculous images
in Bavaria and Austria, among the waxen hands and feet you may Bee a crab- or
toad-like figure, understood to be the ' ber-mutter ' that crawled about in the
body, Schm. I, 188. Hofer 1, 78. Wolf's Deutsche sagen p. 491.

3 Jac. Phil. Tomasini de donariis ac tabellis votivis, Patavii 1654, 4, cap. 34, p.
214—26 vota pro aegrotantium salute.



Digitized by Google



SIGNS OF DEATH. PLAGUE.



1181



tell whether one dangerously ill would fall a prey or get well :
the cries, the flight, the wheeling of birds have been noticed on
p. 1135. Burchardt (Sup. C, 195 d ) instances the lifting up of
stones to see if any live beast were underneath ; which is like
snatching up a handful of earth and looking for a living creature
in it (F, 9). The look of the bird Galadrot, and the position of
Death, whether at the patient's head or feet (p. 853) were sig-
nificant omens. That standing at the feet was an advantage we
find already in Pliny 30, 10 [24] : 'Eundem (ricinum, tick) in
augurio vitalium habent : nam si aeger ei respondeat qui intu-
lerit, a pedibus stanti interrogantique de morbo, spem vitae cer-
tain esse : moritnram nihil respondere. Adjiciunt, ut evellatur
(ricinus) ex aure laeva cam's cui non sit alius quam niger color.'

It is believed in Scotland to this day, that if you cannot

see the raannikin in the sick man's eye, he is sure to die : the
bystander's image is no longer mirrored in the lustreless pupil
of the breaking eye. And as far back as the AS. dialogue
between Adrian and Ritheus (Thorpe p. 48) : f Saga me, on
hwam raaeig man geseon mannes deaYS? Ic Jie secge, twego
manlican beoS on mannes edgum : gif )?u j>a ne gesihst, ]>onne
s wilt (dies) se man, and bi$ gewitpn (gone) aer j>rim dagum.'
Put by the side of this, that the tcopn is not to be seen in a
bewitched man's eyes either, and in a witch's eye it is seen
upside down, or double (pp. 1074-80). When a dying man can-
not get his release, a shingle of the roof is to be turned
(Sup. I, 439), three tiles taken up (721), or any hollow house-
utensil inverted (664). The like means are adopted in convul-
sions (853) and childbirth (561) : ' if it go hard with her in
travail, the husband shall take three shingles out of the roof and
put them in again wrong side up,' Ettn. hebamme p. 663 ; conf.
supra p. 1116.

I have kept to the last what I had to say of the plague and
the numerous traditions based on its appearing. After great
floods, when heavy fog and sultry mist poison the air, it suddenly
breaks out and spreads resistless over the earth.

To the Gr. Xotfio? (p. 888) correspond, in gender as well, our
OHG. sterpOy scelmo (MHG. schelme), Gl. jun. 219 scalmo, fihu-
sterbo, ON. skelmis-drep or drep alone; OHG. wuol, Diut. 1,



Digitized by Google



1182



SICKNESSES.



50 l a , AS. wol, gen. w61es. The Latin names pestis, lues are
fern., so are the Serv. kuga, moriya ; but masc. again the Boh.
Pol. mor, Lith. maras, Lett, mehris. The Serv. Slov. kuga is the
M. Nethl. Itoghe (Detmar. 1, 81. 113. 127. 148. 377), and even
a MHG. poem (Meyer and Mooyer, p. 46 s ) has Jcoge. MHG.
usually ' der gdlie tot,' swift death, Wigal. 3726 (Nethl. ga-d6t,
Maerl. 1, 230. 293) ; but also f der grosse tod,' great death, Swed.
diger-ddden (ON. digr crassus, tumidus) ; ON. svarti dau&i, Dan.
' den sorte dbd,' black death, perhaps even in allusion to Surtr
(p. 809). 1

To the Greeks the whizzing shafts of wrathful Apollo brought
the plague : a man dying suddenly is slain by Apollo*s artillery,
a woman by that of Artemis ; conf. the destroying angel, 2 Sam.
24, 16. Hermes, protector of the flock, carries round it the ram,
to ward off murrain ; afterwards he carries it round the city also,
Kpio^opos* Virgins were sacrificed to stay the ravages of pes-
tilence. Pliny 26, 9 [60] says a maiden can cure boils (panos)
by laying verbascum on them : Experti affirmavere plurimum
referre, si virgo imponat nuda, jejuna jejuno, et manu supina
tan gens dicat, 1 Negat Apollo pestem posse crescere, cui nuda virgo
restinguat ! ' atque retrorsa manu ter dicat, totiesque despuant
ambo. The ceremony was transferred from the heavy scourge to
lighter ones : the disrobing of the maiden was required for allay-
ing drought (p. 593-4), and in many other cases (see Suppl.).

That angel of death means Death himself, who comes to gather
his own. A Lombard legend speaks of two angels, a good aud
a bad, who traverse the land : ' Pari etiam modo haec pestilentia
Ticinum quoque depopulata est, ita ut cunctis civibus per juga
montium seu per di versa loca fugientibus, in foro et per plateas
civitatis herbae et fructeta nascerentur. Tuncque visibiliter
multis apparuit, quia bonus et mains angelus noctu per civitate/n
pergerent, et ex jussu boni angeli malus angelus, qui videbatur
venabulum manu ferre, quotiens de venabulo ostium cujuscujique

1 Paul. Diac. 2, 4, pahits a desolating plague in colours that recall the vivid
picture Boccaccio has sketched by way of Introd. to his Decameron. How Sweden
and Norway were wasted during the Great Plague, is described in Afzelius 4, 179.
180 and especially in Fave, pp. 135—148, after beautiful folk-tales.

3 4 Massilienses quoties pestilentia laborabant, units se ex pauperioribtu offerebat
alendus anno integro publicis et purioribus cibis. Hie postea ornatus verbenis et
vestibus sacris eircumdurebatur per totam civitatem cum exsecrationibus, ut in
ipsum reciderent mala civitatis, et sic projiciebatur,' Petron. cap. 141.



Digitized by Google



TLAGUE.



1183



domus percussisset, tot de eadein dotno die scquenti homines
interirent. Tunc per revelationem cuidam dictum est, quod
pestis ipsa prius non quiesceret quam in basilica beati Petri, quae
ad vincula dicitur, sancti Sebastiani martyris altarium poneretur.
Factum est, et delatis ab urbe Roma b. Sebastiani reliquiis, mox
ut in jam dicta basilica altarium constitutum est, pestis ipsa
quicvit,' Paul. Diac. 6, 5. In the year 589, when the Tiber had
overflowed, and a plague had arisen which carried off many men,
St Gregory ordered a solemn procession of the Cross ; 80 peoplo
in the church dropped down ' alien gahes 9 at his feet and died ;
then, rising from prayer, 'sach er sten uf dem Dietriches huso
einen engel mit pluotigem swerte, der wiskete daz *elbe swert dutch
sinen geren (wiped it on his skirt), do verstuont (understood) der
heilige man, daz der 6wige Vater sines zornes hin ze den liuten
erwinden wolte/ would turn from his anger. 1

Like such an angel of death, the Norse Hel rides about on her
steed (pp. 314. 844), which is no other than the dead-horse seen
in churchyards, p. 1142 (see Suppl.).

A Voigtland tradition makes the plague come on as a blue
vapour, shaped like a cloud, Jul. Schmidt p. 158. By this is
meant the sultry mist that precedes a pestilence ; ' blue vapour '
suggests the fire of the Thunder-god, p. 178. A plague that
raged in the Odenwald shewed itself in the shape of a little blue
flame in the sacristy of the town-church at Erbach ; and they
walled it in. In Amm. Marcel. 23, 6 (a.d. 363) : 1 Fertur autem
quod post direptum hoc idem figraentum (Apollinis simulacrum),
incensa civitate (Seleucia), milites fanum scrutantes invenere
foramen angustum : quo reseraio ut pretiosum aliquid invenirent,
ex adyto quodam concluso a Chaldaeorum arcanis labcs jrrimor-
dialis exsiluit, quaB insanabilium vi concepta morborum, ejusdem
Veri Marcique Antonini temporibus ab ipsis Persarum finibus ad
usque Rhenum ct Gallias cuncta contagiis polluebat et mortibus*

Again, in the year 1709 the plague at Conitz in Prussia was

charmed into a hole of the lime-tree in the churchyard, then a
plug kept ready for the purpose, and fitting exactly, was driven

1 Deutsche predigten ed. by K. Roth p. 76 ; conf. Hoffm. fandgr. 1, 77. Greg.
Tar. 10, 1. 2. Dietrich''* house is the moles Hadriani, named St. Aiigelo's castle
after this very angel who shewed himself to the praying processionists. Our
legends like to name large Roman buildings after Theoderic, notably the amphi-
theatre of Verona, Deut. heldeuaage pp. 40, 203.



Digitized by Google



1184



SICKNESSES.



in ; since which she has never contrived to shew her face in the
country again (Tettau and Tomme p. 222). This agrees with
the blocking-up of Unsselde and the shrewmouse (pp. 878. 1168),
but also with the general notion of diseases being transferable to
trees. The immuring of the plague in church and temple is based
on its having issued from the divinity (see Suppl.).

Augustine's Do verbo apostol. 168 pictures the plague as a
woman that prcwU about, and can be bought off with money :
' Proverbium est Punicum, quod quidem Latine vobis dicam, quia
Punice non omnes nostis ; Pun. enim pro v. est antiquum :
Numum vult PestUentia ? duos illi da, et ducat se.'

During the great pestilence under Justinian, men saw brazen
barks on the sea, and black men without heads sitting in them .
wherever they sailed to, the plague at once broke out In a city
of Egypt the only inhabitants left alive were seven men and
a boy ten years old ; they were escaping with their valuables,
when in a house near the town-gate all the men dropped down
dead, and the boy alone fled ; but under the gate a spectre seized
him, and dragged him back into the house. Soon after, a rich
man's steward came to fetch goods out of the house, and the boy
warned him to haste away : at the same instant both man and
boy fell dead to the ground. So says bishop John (Assemanni
biblioth. orient. 2, 86-7).

The Mod. Greeks think of the plague as a blind woman that
wanders through the towns from house to house, killing all she
can touch. But she goes groping and feeling round the wall, and
if you are wise enough to keep in the middle of the room, she
can't get at you. According to ono folk-tale, it is three terrible
women that traverse the towns in company, one carrying a large
paper, another a pair of scissors, the third a broom Together
they walk into the house where they mean to find victims : the
first enters their names on her list, the next wounds them with
her scissors, the last sweeps them away (Fauriel's Disc, pre!
lxxxiii). Here are the three Fates (p. 410) or Furies and
Eumenids converted into death-goddesses.

There is a beautiful Breton lay in VillemarqnS 1, 46 — 51, called
Bosen Elliant, the Elliant plague. A miller, so goes the tale,
saw a woman robed in white sitting, staff in hand, at the ford
of the river, wishing to be carried over. He took her on his



Digitized by VjO



PLAGUE



1185



horse, and set her down on the other side. Then she said,
* Yonng man, and knowst thou whom thou hast put across ? I
am the Plague; and now having ended my journey round
Bretagne, I will go to mass in Elliant church ; every one whom
I touch with my staff, shall speedily die, but thee and thy mother
no harm shall befall' And so it came to pass : all the people in
that bourg died, save the poor widow and her son. Another
folksong makes him convey her on his shoulders : nine children
are carried out of one house, the churchyard is filled up to the
walls : 1 beside the churchyard stands an oak, to its top is tied a
white kerchief, for the Plague has snatched away all the people.'
She was banished at last by songs being sung about her : when
she heard herself called by her name, she withdrew from the
land, and never came back. The request to be carried across is
exactly like those of the goddess Berhta and beings of elf kind.

Of the Lithuanian Giltine, plague or death-goddess, I should
like to know fuller accounts. She massacres without mercy :
' kad tawe, Gil tine pasmaugtu (plague choke thee) ! ' is a familiar
imprecation (Mielcke sub v. Donaleitis 141). The plague is also
named Magila [SI. mogila, a grave], or simply diewe (goddess),
and they say in cursing ' imma ji Magilos, imma ji diewai ! '
From Polish Lithuania, Adam Mickiewicz 1 reports as follows on
the morowa dziewica, plague- maiden : —

Kiedy zaraza Litwe. ma uderzy6,
jej przyjscie wieszcza odgadnie zrzenica ;
bo jeali sljusznu waidelotom wierzyd,
nieraz na pustych smetarzach i bljoniach
staje widomie morowa dzieurica
w bieliznie, z wiankiem ognistym na skroniacb,
czoljem przenosi bialjowieskie drzewa
a w reku chustka skrwawiona, powiewa.
Dziewica sta,pa kroki zljowieszozemi
na Biolja, zamki i bogate miasta ;
a ile razy krwawe chuBtka. skinie,
tyle palac6w zmienia sie. w pustynie ;
gdzie nogn sta,pi, swiezy gr6b w>rasta. s

1 Konrad WaUenrod's Poezye, Warszawie 1832. p. 96.

3 * When a plague smites Lithuania . . . then, if we may believe the waidelots,
in lone burial-grounds and fields stands visible the plague -maiden in white raiment
with fiery wreath about her temples, bears on her brow divining-rods (?), and in hei
hand a bloodstained kerchief toavet. The maiden steps with deliberate pace into
villages, oastlos and wealthy towns ; whenever she spreads out her gory kerchief,
palaces turn into wildernesses ; where with her foot she steps, a fresh grave grows



Digitized by Google



1186



SICKNESSES.



Woycicki, 1, 51, calls her Powietrze, which properly means air,
vapour (p. 1183), but also plague. Clothed in white, she stalks
along ou stilts, tells her name to a man she meets, and wants to
be carried on his shoulders through all the Russias : amidst the
dead and dying he shall go unhurt. Well, he carries her
through thorp and town : where she waves her kerchief, every-
body dies, and all men flee before them. Arrived at the Pruth,
he thought to drown her, and jumped into the river, but up she
floated light as a feather, and flew to the woodland, while he
sank to the bottom.

In another story 1, 127 she is called Dzuma (Russ. Serv.
chuma) : while she prevails, the villages stand deserted, the cocks
are hoarse and cannot crow, the dogs no longer bark, yet they
scent the Plague from afar (p. 66G), and growl. A peasant saw
her, in white garb and waving hair, clear a high fence and run up
a ladder, to escape the howling dogs : he hurries up to the ladder
and pushes it over, so that the Plague fell among the dogs ; then
she disappeared, still threatening vengeance.

Sometimes the Dzuma rides through the wood in a waggon,
attended by owls and uhus (great horned owl) : this ghostly
procession is named Homen, Woyc. 1 ,130 — 3. 159 — 163. But the
Plague could only last till New-year's day ; then those who have
fled troop back to their homes, taking care however not to walk
in through the door, but to climb in at the window.

A tale narrated by a Wendish peasant, Job. Parum Schulze, 1
falls somewhere in the middle of the 17th century : So it came to
pass, that a man, as I have always heard tell, that was Niebuhr
by name, where now Kuffalen dwell, that was afterward Luchau,
as he rideth home from town, there comes a man alongside, and
begs that he may ride a little in the cart, for that he was right
weary. This Hans Niebuhr asks him iu Wendish, as that tongue
was then commonly used, ' whence, and whither away ? 9 and
takes him up on the cart. At first he will not declare himself,
but this Niebuhr, being somewhat drunken, begins to question
more sharply. Then he declared himself, saying, * 1 will to thy



up.' I am not sure that I have rightly rendered 1 bialjowieskie drzewa,' nor whether
the adj. can be conn, with 4 bialowieszcka ' p. 474 n.

1 Of Siiten village, K listen parish, Liineburg. About 1740 he composed a
chronicle, Ann. der Br. Luneb. churlande, jahrg. 8, Hanover 1791. p» 28*2-3.



Digitized by Google



PLAGUE



1187



village with thee, where I have not yet been; for I am der
Pest (m.y Then did Niebuhr intreat for his life, and the Plague
gave him this lesson, that he should leave him in the cart outside
the village, and strip naked and have no clothing at all on his
body, but [going home,] take his pot-hook, and coming out before
his house, run all round his homestead with the sun, and tlien bury
it under the doorstep : f if one but carry me not in ' quoth the
Pest, 'in the smell that hangs about the clothes/ Now this
Niebuhr leaves him in the cart a good piece from the village, for
it was night ; takes the pot-hanger, runs naked out of the village
and all round it, then sticks the iron under the bridge, which iron
I myself saw in the year 1690 when the bridge was mended, but
nigh eaten away with rust. When this Niebuhr came back for
his horse and cart, quoth the Plague : ' had I known this, I had
not declared myself to thee, this device whereby thou hast locked
me out of the whole village* When they were come up to the
village, Niebuhr takes his horses out of the cart, and leaves him
sitting thereon. Neither was any sickness from pestilence per-
ceived in that village ; but in all the villages around the plague
did mightily rage.

So far Schulze's homely narrative. Removing the pot-hook off
the hearth seems to stand for leaving the house open : from a
deserted house death has nothing to take. As the retiring house-
holder symbolically ' lets down the haal on the hearth/ the new
one on taking possession must ' tuck it up 9 again. 1 Running
round the house or village resembles that carrying of the ram
round the city, and the undressing agrees with the Roman
custom.

Then, as the Plague is slow of foot, she gets herself driven
into the village in a cart, or lugged in pickaback, like homesprites
and will o' wisps that jump on men's shoulders, pp. 512-3. 916.

Swedish stories make the Plague enter a village from the south,
and stand still before the first homestead, looking like a pretty
little boy with a rasp or grater (rifva) in his hand, and rasping
with it. When he did that, there still remained one or two alive
in a house, as the grater could not take everything along with it.
But when he got to the next village, there came after him the
Plague-damsel (pestflicka), she swept with a broom outside the
1 Wulfter'B Deduction, beil. nos. 4. 6. 135.

VOL. III. U



Digitized by Google



1188



SICKNESSES



gate, then all in the village died. But she was very seldom seen,
and never except at daybreak (Afzelius 4, 179).

In Vestergotland they had decreed a human sacrifice to stay
the ' digerdod/ and two beggar children having just then come in,
were to be buried alive in the ground. They soon dug the pit
open, gave the hungry children cake spread with lard, and made
them sit down in the pit : while they ate, the people shovelled up
the earth. ' Oh/ cried the younger child, when the first spadeful
was thrown over it, ' here's some dirt fallen on my bread and
lard.' A mound was quickly thrown up over them, and nothing
more was heard of them (Afz. 4, 181). Compare the walling up
of children in the foundation of a new building, p. 1142, and the
offering of a young heifer in the holy fire during cattle-plague,
p. 608.

In Norway the Pesta is imagined as a pale old woman who
travelled about the country with a grater (rive, a toothed instru-
ment for tearing up sods or hay and corn) and a broom (lime) :
when she used the grater, some few got off with their lives, but
where the besom came into play, there perished every born soul.
A man having rowed her over a piece of water, and demanding his
fare, she said, 'you'll find your quittance on the bench at home;'
and no sooner was ho home, than he sickened and died. She
often appears in red clothing, and whoever beholds her falls into
a great fear (Faye p. 135).

The Servians say their Kuga is a real woman, who goes wrapt
in a white veil : many have seen her so, and some have carried
her. She came to one man in the field, or met him on tho road,
aud said, ' I am the Kuga, carry me to such a place ! ' He took
her up pickaback, and without any trouble carried her whither
she would. The Kugas (plagues) have a country of their own by
the sea, but God sends them when people do wickedly and sin
much. While the plague rages they never call her kuga, but
kuma (cummer, gossip), to make her friendly. And during that
time they dare not leave any vessels unwashed at night, for she
will pass through the kitchen, and if she spy any such, will scour
and polish all the spoons and dishes (which detains her in the
house) ; at times she even makes away with the bacon out of the
loft, Wtb. sub v. Kuga ; and new ed. of Serv. songs 1, 149 note.

Here again she comes out in the fashion of ancient goddesses,



Digitized by Google



PLAGUE.



1189



Holda and Berhta, who cannot abide disorder in the house,
pp. 268. 274.

Among the Slovens, cattle-plague (kuga) is a spotted calf that
kills sheep and oxen by its cry (Murko p. 74).

The devil is reported to have said, there was but one cure for
the kuga, that was mattock and hoe, meaning burial (Vuk sub v.
metil).

A Finnic song (Schroter 60) adjures the Plague to take herself
away to steely mountains in the gloomy North : saddle-horse and
carriage-horse shall be given her for the journey. She is called
rutto, the sudden, like our MHG. gahe tot.

In L. Germany they have folktales about the Heidmann (heath
man) who peeps in at your window at night : any one ho looks
at then, must die within year and day ; just so does Berhta look
in at the window (p. 274), so does Death (p. 772). In Tyrol too
they tell of a ghost that goes about at the time of one's death :
whatever window lie looks into, people die in that house, DS.
no. 266.

In the Lausitz Snwrtnitsa in white array prowls about the
villages : to whatever house she directs her step, a corpse will
soon be there. In the house itself she announces her presence
by thumping and turning the boards up. Convulsions in the
dying are signs that Smertnitsa is getting the better of them,
Laus. mon. schr. 1797. p. 756.

There cannot be the slightest doubt left, that all these various
personifications of the plague are to be viewed as effluences of
superior divinities of antiquity, whose might, merciful and awful,
they display by turns. Veiled in white they stride along, like
Berhta, and like the mother that walks in the corn at noon.
Plague-maiden and fate-maiden meet and touch, morowa dziewica
with Marena, Morena (p. 771), the harmful goddess with the
healing pitying Eir (see Suppl.).



Digitized by Google



CHAPTER XXXVII



HERBS AND STONES.

Pliny has thrown a peculiar charm over his Natural History by
not disdaining to record minutely even the superstitious views of
the vulgar about animals and plants. How his reverence for
antiquity, his elegance of exposition, stand out against the dry
gravity of our present students of nature, who never waste a
glance on the customs of their country, and to whom all the force
and grace of Teutonic idiom is but small beer (see Suppl.).

1 Krut, 8teine unde wort hunt an kref ten gr6zen hort ' (herb and
stone and wholesome word have of healing powers rich hoard),
says our Freidank 111, 6; and as there lies in dwarfs a special
acquaintance with the healing virtues hidden in herbs (pp.
450-1 n. 457), it is worth noticing, that in the mouth of a kiug of
that race, Goldemar (pp. 453. 46(5. 509) is placed the dictum,
' Christianos fidem in verbis, Judseos in lapidibus pretiosis, et
Paganos in herbis ponere/ Meibom's Script. 1, 186. Paganism
does present a rich store of mythical notions on the origin and
manifold virtues of these plants.

1. Herbs.

As among men, so among Herbs, the noble tower above the
base : they were created by gods in some secluded sacred spot,
they sprouted up where innocent blood had been shed, they were
brought over by birds, and so on. Under the goddess's footfall
the flower springs up, as all growth withers where sorrowing
lovers part. On the mountain's top, to which the lover had
carried up his dying love, and poured out her last reviving
draught, grew healing herbs that blessed the land at large (Marie
de Fr. 1, 268). Mountains foster what is rarest in the realm of
plants. Zeus and Hera laid them down on Ida's top (II. 14, 347) :

Toio-i 8' V7r6 x0a)V Bla <f>vev veodrjkia iroirjv,
\<dt6v B 1 eparjevra I8e tcpotcov tjS' vatcivdov,
Trvfcvbv Kal fiaXatcov, &? airb ^douo? vyfrocr' eepye'

1190



Digitized by Google



herbs: origin, names



1191



(under them bountiful earth teemed up a new vegetation, dew-
sprinkled clover and saffron and hyacinth, thick and soft, etc.).
A similar bed of flowers still haunts the imagination of our
Minnesingers (Walth. 39. 40. Hadloub 2, 194-5), but men have
to gather the grass and flowers for that amid singing of birds.
To the Medieval way of thinking it was most natural to make
healing herbs grow out of the graves of holy men, as we plant
flowers on the tomb and pick some for remembrance. Even on
the huorco's barrow grows wound-healing rosamarina, the pluck-
ing of which turns men into doves, Pentam. 4, 8. The saint's
grave nourishes a peartree, whose fruit cures the sick forthwith
(Greg. Tur. mirac. 1, 47). We have seen p. 1178n. how at the
foot of a holy statue a nova species (quite the Homeric veo&n\i)s
above) grew up to the skirt of the robe, and then became a
healing plant 1 ; with this I connect what Pliny tells us 24, 19
[106] : 'herba in capite statuae nata, collectaque alicujus in vestis
panno et alligata in lino rufo, capitis dolorem confestim sedare
traditur' (see Suppl.).

Many herbs and flowers are named after gods, but as we are
seldom told the occasion of a name being given, it admits of
more than one explanation. The god produced the plant, or he
uses it, he loves it, loathes it, in shape or colour it resembles
some part of his person, his raiment, arms, and so forth. Thus
the names Baldrs bra (p. 222, conf. supercilium Veneris), Freyju
hdr (p. 303) come from the beaming lustre of the flower;
Fomeotes fohne (p. 240), Niar&ar vottr (p. 218) from the leaves
lyiDg like five fingers side by side. Donner-rebe (-vine) is the
Lett. Pehrkones. Donnerkraut, Donnerbesen (p. 183) may, like
barba Jovis, be accounted for by the bushy tanglement of their
tendrils; but how Perunika (p. 183) stands related to Perun,.
I do not know. DeviVs-bit is from the marks of teeth supposed
to be visible in its root, and due to diabolic agency. A great
many names are taken from beasts, especially those of our native
fable, and fancy has been equally busy on them.

Of flowers and herbs the Sanskrit distinguishes the wholesome
by the adjunct ' friend/ the hurtful by ' foe/ as Ramdpriya, dear

1 The healing power imparted by the shirt of the garment waa very likely
suggested by the Biblical ' touching of the hem,' Matt. 9, 20. 14, 36. Mk 6, 56.
Luke 8, 44.



Digitized by Google



1192



HERBS AND STONES.



to Lakshmi = lotu9, Yamapriya, dear to Yama = ficus indica,
conf. Pott's Etym. for. 2, 424—7. This agrees with OHG. goto-
fargezzan, marrubium album (Graff 4, 279), MLG. goUvorghetene
(Brun's Beitr. p. 48) and the phrase 1 ergaz im Got/ Gramm. 4,
175 (supra p. 21) ; the herb is our andorn (horehound).

Other plants beyond a doubt derive their divine names from
their healing power being first made known to mortals by the
gods. With the Greeks, Atfiena and Artemis appear to have
been active in this line; and I think they are represented
amongst our goddesses by Frigg and Freyja, or whoever took
their place afterwards, St. Mary above all The artemisia was
apparently discovered or revealed by Artemis [Pliny 25, 36, 25],
the proserpinaca by Proserpine 27, 12 [104]. The irapOhiov was
shown by the divine Ilapdevo^, as Pliny relates, 22, 17 [20] :
1 verna carus Pericli Atheniensium principi, cum in arce templum
aedificaret repsissetque super altitudinem fastigii et inde cecidisset,
hac herba dicitur sanatus, monstrata Pericli somnio a Minerva,
quare parthenium vocari coepta est, assignaturque ei deae.' Of
the lappa he says, 24, 18 [116] : 'medetur et suibus, effossa sine
ferro ; quidam adjiciunt et fodientem dicere oportere, Haec est
herba argemon, quam Minerva reperit, suibus remedium qui de
ilia gustaverint ; ' dpyefiiov = albugo in the eye. Hermes pulls
out of the ground for Odysseus the <j>dpp.a/cov mighty against
magic: fia>\v Be fiw KoXeovai deoi, Od. 10, 305 (p. 369). Does
the Iris owe its name to the messenger of the gods, or the white
hue of the lily, or other causes? In christian times an angtl
reveals the angelica in a dream, Aw. 1, 159 (see Suppl.).

The names borrowed from animals may gain much in meaning
by the animals themselves being connected with the service of
gods. Thus there need only a myth underlie such names as
biiren-klaue, wolfs-railch, OHG. wolves-zeisala, AS. wulfes-Uesel,
and AS. braefnes-leac, to bring to light some relation in which
the herb stands to dawn (p. 743-4), to the hero suckled by the she-
wolf, to the cordial conveyed by the god's messenger. We find
a convincing example in the spechts-wurzel, pecker's root, brought
by the sacred bird (p. 673), who probably gave his name to one
of the grand woods of our olden time, Spehtes-hart (Spessart) :
not only does it serve to burst open the plug, but he protects
the peony especially from being plucked (p. 973). The healing



igitized by GoogI



herbs: names.



1193



rrattovta was associated with Ilauov the divine physician, and it
is precisely the wounded Ares that he doctors (II. 5, 900) ; in
which I see a new point of connexion between Ares and Roman
Mars, whose bird the woodpecker was. Athena too was named
IlaitovLa. Now I think it is not without a bearing on this
matter, that our Zio himself has a herb named after him : ON.
Ty-vi&r, Dan. Tys-ved, daphne mezereum (p. 199), which might
have been in OHG. Zio-witu, Ziowes-witu, i.e. Martis arbor, lig-
num, frutex ; but instead of exactly this name, we find a cor-
responding one, which I believe I can explain more correctly now
than at p. 428, note 2. I then thought of Sigelint, but as the
spelling Cigelinta, i.e. Zige-linta, preponderates (Graff 5, 627), as
Zllant (659) seems synonymous, and as beside Zetland we have
in Austria to this day Zillind, Zwilind, Zwilinde meaning the
same daphne, 1 the real old spelling comes to light, Zio-linta,
answering in form and substance to T^vrSr. For linta is not
only lime-tree, but also liber, bast, and we call the plant in-
differently seidel-baum and seidel-bast (for zeilinde-baum, -bast),
and it is commonly applied as a healing drug (Hofer 3, 135). An
AS. Tiwes-wudu, Tiges-wudu, Tiges-lind is readily inferred. Now
whether daphne and pseonia be related or distinct, matters nothing
to their mythical analogy ; Pliny says the peony was also called
pentorobon, irevropofiov, from its bearing four or five peas; its
Boh. name is wlci lyko, i.e. wolf's bast, Fr. garou, i.e. loup-garou,
werewolf. I will now pick out a few remarkable names of plants
from F. Magnusen's Lex. 758-9. The viola Martis, Fr. violette
de Mar 8, is in Iceland called Ti/s-fiola, Tyrs-fiola: this may be
a mere translation of the Latin name, which alludes more to the
month than the god, like our own marz-viole. There is more in
the Norw. Tyri-hialm or Thor-hialm, Thoralm, Thor-hat for
aconitum or monk's-hood, to which answers our eisen-hiitlein
(iron hat), Swed. Dan. storm-hat, apparently from the flower
resembling in shape a helmet or hat ; but the same plant is called
wolfs-kraut, wolfs-wurz, Dan. ulve-urt, Engl, wolfs bane, Dan.
ulve-bane, ulve-dbd, which may be understood of T£r's fight
with the wolf, and moreover likened to the wolfs bast and garou

1 This too in districts that say Er-tag and not Zis-tag for Tuesday (pp. 124.
201) ; so that in the plant's name Zio-worship took a wider range.

i



Digitized by Google



1194



HERBS AND STONES.



above, as several other names waver between daphne and aconi-
tum. And wolfs bast may even suggest the three bands laid on
the Fenris-ulfr, 'laefting' (Dan. lediug, Molb. dial. lex. p. 317),
1 dr6mi ' and ' gleipnir/ S. 33-4-5. There was yet another name
for daphne given on p. 377: Wieland's berry, together with a
Scand. Velandx urt for the medicinal valerian ; names which
carry us back, if not to a god, to one of our greatest heroes of
old, whose father was the wise leech Wate (see Suppl.).

But there is only a small number of herbs named after gods
or heroes, compared with those referable to goddesses and wise
women. Most of these are now given to Mary, who in this
case, as in that of pretty little beetles (p. 694) and brilliant stars
(p. 726), replaces the elder Frouwa. Frauen-schuhli is trefolium
melilotus, whose flower resembles a shoe, in some places MarLen-
pant'offelchen ; was Cypripedium calceolus Veneris formed in
imitation ? Fraua-menteli, bsa (our) fraua-menteli (Tobler 204 b ),
alchemilla vulg., from its leaves being folded mantle-wise. Fraua-
seckeli (-satchel), geum rivale, ibid. Freyju-Jtdr stands for several
kinds of fern (supra p. 303) ; does it independently answer to
herba capillaris, capillw Veneris in Apuleius's Herb. 47, or was
it borrowed from it ? Frauen-tran, Marien-thrdne, orchis mascula
(Staid. 1, 296), reminds of 'helenium e lacrimis Helenae natum/
Pliny 21,10 [33], still more of Freyja's golden tears, ' gratr
Freyju/ Sn. 128. 132 (conf. p. 325), and the flowers and precious
stones that drop when goddesses laugh or weep (p. 1101) ; a
costly wine is called unser Uebfrauen-mUch. How a flower came
to be called Mother-of-God's mirror, is told in the nursery-legend.
Frauen-schlossli, frauenschlussel, primula veris, Staid. 1, 124,
otherwise himmels-schliissel (heaven's key), schliissel-blume ;
because it unlocks the spring, or opens treasure ? it has yet
more names, and is the medicinal betonica, of which more anon.
As these plants are all natives of our meadows, it is not likely
that their names were drawn from Latin, and only came into
vogue in the last few centuries; though in OHGr. glosses we
find no herb compounded with frouwa. It were too daring to
trace tfie oster-blume (6ster-gloie, Ms. 2, 61 a ) back to Ostard,
EcLstre, as the form of name can, like maiblume, be explained
by the season of its blossoming; these maybells were offered
in sacrifice (p. 58), were borne by white-women (p. 963), and to

»



Digitized by Google



herbs: time of culling.



1195



pick them before sunrise is recommended in Sup. I, 1075 (see
Suppl.).

Flowers are a feminine adornment, young maidens twine the
wreath, sage matrons cull the herb. Marner says prettily, Ms.
2, 1 74* : ' ez riuchet (smells) als ein edel krUt uz einer megde hant.'
Why should not the wise women of even our earliest eld have been
skilled in herb- lore ? it is ascribed to witches and old women
still, and apparently it is not without a meaning that from
healing herbs the witches select names for themselves or their
admirer (p. 1063). All witches' herbs may most appropriately
be called fce«cAra-kraut, 6er«/-kraut (speak ill, becall, be-
witch), though the names have also been applied to particular
plants.

The culling and fetching of herbs had to be done at particu-
lar times, and according to long-established forms (see Suppl.) .

Mostly before sunrise, when the day is young: 'herba qua-
cunque a rivis aut fluminibus ante soli* ortum collecta, ita ut
nemo colligentem Meat* Pliny 24, 19 [107], 'praecipiunt ali-
qui effossuris (anagallida), ante soli* ortum, pHusquam quidquam
aliud loqitantur, ter salutare earn, turn sublatam exprimere ; ita
praecipuas esse vires/ 25, 13 [92]. 'aiunt, si quis ante solis
ortum earn (chamelaeam) capiat, dicatque ad albugines oculorum
se capere, adalligata discuti id vitium'24, 14 [82]. 'ethane
(Saraolum herbam) sinistra manu legi a jejuni*' 24, 11 [63].
1 radicem (pistolochiae) ante soils ortum erutam involvunt lana '
20, 4 [14] . The viscus was gathered at new moon, prima luna
24, 4 [6] ; the verbenaca 1 circa Canis ortum, ita ut ne luna aut
sol conspiciat ' 25, 9 [59] . Unseen by man or heavenly body,
silent and fasting, shall the collector approach the sacred herb.
Lilies of the valley are to be culled be/ore sunrise, devil's-bit at
midnight of St. John's eve, Sup. I, 190. 1075.

Pliny 25, 3 [6] tells of a plant called by the Romans herba
Britannica, because brought from the isles between Germany and
Britain (ex oceani insulis extra terras positis 27, 1) : ' Florem
vibones vocant, qui collectus priusquam tonitrua audiantur (is
not that between lightning and thunder ?) et devoratus, securos
a fulminibus in totum reddit. Frisii, qua castra erant, nostris
demonstravere illam ; mirorque nominis causam, nisi forte con-
fines oceano Britanniae velut propinquae dicavere; non enim



Digitized by Google



1196



HERBS AND STONES



inde appellatam earn quoniam ibi plurima nasceretur certum est,
etiamnum Britannia libera.' Here we have a plant held in
esteem by the ancient Germans themselves, and the injunction
to gather it before hearing thnnder (that year ?) sounds quite
Teutonic. It protected from lightning, was therefore sacred to
the Thunder-god, like the house-leek, which is also called
donner-wehr. AS. glosses render the Britannica by hcewen-
hyffele; hrowen is glaucus, the second word may come from hu5
praeda, or h£be portus ; in the latter case it would mean some-
thing like blue sea-flower. Anyhow it was a water-plant,
hydrolapathum it is thought. I would gladly recognise in it
the seeblatt so sacred to the Frisians and Zealanders (p. 654),
whoso flower is said to be white or yellow ; its names nixblume
and mummel call to mind the Indian names for the lotus, Rama-
priya, dear to Kama or Lakshmi, and Srivasa, Sri's house =
Lakshmi's, who came up out of the sea (see Suppl.).

In digging up a herb, the Roman custom was, first to pour
mead and honey round it, as if to propitiate the earth, then to
cut round the root with a sword, looking toward the east (or
west), and the moment it is pulled out to lift it on high without
letting it touch the ground. ' Favis ante et melle terrae ad
piamentum datis, circumscriptam ferro (verbenacam) effodi sinistra
manu et sublime tolli* Pliny 25, 9 [59] . ' et fossuri (iridem),
tribus ante mensibus mulsa aqua circumfusa, hoc voluti placa-
mento terrae blandiuntur, circumscripta mucrone gladii orbe tripliri,
et cum legerjnt earn protinus in coelum attollunt' 21, 7 [19].
' nigrum elleborum melampodion vocant, quo et domos suffiunt
purgantque, spargentes et pecora, cum precatione solemni ; hoc
et religiosius colligitur : primum enim gladio circtnnscribitur,
dein qui succisurus est ortum spectat, et precatur ut liceat sibi
concedentibus Diis facere ; observatque aquilae volatus (fere enim
secantibus interest), et si prope advolav'tt, moriturum illo anno
qui succidat augurium est' 25, 5 [21]. 'cavent effossuri (man-
dragoram) contrarium ventum, et tribus circulis ante gladio dr-
cumscribunt, postea fodiunt ad occasum spectantes ' 25, 13 [94].
In some cases, when the root had been dug out and made use
of, it was put in again, that it might live on : ' banc (sene-
cionem) si ferro circumscriptam effodiat aliquis, tangatque ea
dentem et alternis ter despuat, ac reponat in eundem locum ita



Digitized by Google



herbs: mode of culling



1197



nt vivat herba, aiunt dentem eum postea non dol^urum' 25, 13
[106].

A great point was to guard against cold iron touching the
root (hence gold or redlwt iron was used in cutting), and against
the herb pulled up, or the branch cut off, touching the ground : l
'radicem (pistolochiae) ante solis ortum erutam involvunt lana
coloris quem nativum vocant. quidam auro effodiendam censent,
cavendumque ne terram adtingat' 20, 4 [14]. ' (viscum) collec-
tum e robore sine ferro, si terram non attigit, comitialibus mederi
(putant) ' 24, 4 [6] . ' virgam e myrice def ractam, ut neque
terram neque ferrum attingeret 1 24, 9 [41] . ' cavendum ne avulsa
herba terram tangat' 25, 13. 'herba juxta quam canes urinam
fundunt, evulsa ne ferro attingatur, luxatis celerrime medetur '
24, 19 [111].

In picking or pulling up, the operator used the left hand ; in
certain cases he had to do it unbelted and unshod, and to state
for whom and for what purpose it was done : 1 si quis unum ex
his (pomis Punici mali), solutus vinculo omni cinctus et calceatus
atque etiam anuli, decerpserit duobus digitis, pollice et quarto
sinistrae manus, atque ita lustratis levi tactu oculis, mox in os
additum devoraverit, ne dente contingat, affirmatur nullam ocu-
lorum imbecillitatem passurus eo anno 1 23, 6 [59]. ' praecipitur
ut sinistra manu ad hos usus eruatur (iris rufa), colligentesque
dicant cujus hominis uti que causa eximant' 21,20 [83]. 'par-
thenium . . . magi contra tertianas sinistra manu evelli earn
jubent, dicique cujus causa vellatur, nec respicere ' 21, 30 [104].
' pseudanchusa . . . folium ejus sinistra decerpi jubent magi, et
cujus causa sumatur dici' 22, 20 [24]. 'praecipitur ut qui
colligit (thlaspi) dicat sumere se contra inguina et contra omnes
collectiones et contra vulnera, unaque manu tollat* 27, 13 [113].
' autumnalis urticae radicem alligatam in tertianis, ita ut aegri
nuncupentur cum eruitur ea radix, dicaturque cui et quorum filio
eximatur, liberare morbo tradiderunt' 22, 14 [16]. 'buglosso
inarescente, si quis medullam e caule eximat, dicatque ad quem
liberandum febre id faciat ' 26, 11 [71]. So Columella 6, 5 of
the radicula, quam pastores consiliginem vocant ; ea in Marsis
montibus plurima nascitur, omnique pecori maxime est salutaris :

1 As they would not let witches touch the ground (p. 1074) : the iarSar megin.



Digitized by Google



1198



HERBS AND STONES.



laeva manu effoditur ante solis ortum, sic enim lecta majorem vim
creditor habere.

In our native tradition, now so scant and faded, I can find but
little to match full accounts like these. An important statement
is that of Burcard on the bilisa (hyoscyamus, henbane), 1 quam
virginem nudam minimo digito dextrae manus eruere faciunt, et
radicitus erutam cum ligamine aliquo ad minimum digiium dextri
pedis ligare ' ; the object has been stated p. 593. The nudity of
the person pulling it up answers to the above-mentioned laying
aside of belt and shoes, but the right hand and right foot are at
variance with the Roman preference for left limbs. The whole
ceremony however seems to have been equally known in Gaul,
where the Romans, as will appear by and by, found a herb-
ritual ready organized. An AS. Herbal prescribes thus for sore
eyes, wi$ e&gena sare : 1 cer sunnan upgange o$$e hwene cer heo
fuUice gesigan onginne (begin to sink), ga t& J^asre ylcan wyrte
Proserpinacam, and bewrit hi abutan mid dnum gyldenum hringe,
and cwe5 (say) )>aet |m hi to eagena laeced6me niman wille (wilt
take it for cure of eyes) ; after )>rim dagon ga 89ft ]>a3r-t6 aer
sunnangancge, and genim hi and hoh (take and hang it) onbutan
fees mannes swyran (neck) ; heo frama$ wel/ For celf-adle :
' g an g 071 Bunrescefen, )>onne sunne on setle sie, j?8Br ]?u wite
Elenan standan ; sing J>onne benedicite et pater noster, and sting
]?in seax on )>a wyrte. last stician eft to* ]>onne daag, and niht
furdum sc&VSe on |>;im ilcan ahte, gang ©rest t6 ciricean and |>e
gesena and Gode bebeod. gang fonne swigende, and peak pe
hwoet-hwega egeslices ongean cume, oSSe man, ne cwefc p& him
»nig word to, aer pd cume to J?a3re wyrte, pe p& on aefen sor
gemearcodest ; sing )>onne benedicite and pater noster, adelf pk
wyrt, Icet stician poet seax pseron. gange eft swa )>u ra&ost
maege t6 ciricean, and lege under weofod mid J>am seaxe, laet
licgean oftSsat sunne uppe sie. awaesc siSSan, dd to drence and
bisceopwyrt and Cristes maoles ragu, awyl ]?riwa on meolcum,
geot )>riwa halig waater on ; sing on pater noster and credan etc.
and hine eac ymbwrit mid sweorde on iiii healfa on cruce, and
drince J>ono drenc, siftSan him brS s6na seel.' Here I think a
Latin groundwork, with admixture of christian rites, is self-
evident. Thiers in his Traite des superstitions says : 1 Quelques
uns pour se garantir de malefices ou de charmes vont cueillir de



Digitized by Google



herbs: time and mode, tying on. 1199



grand matin, a jeun, sans avoir lave leurs mains, sans avoir prie
Dieu t sans parler a personne et sans saluer personne en leur
chemin, une certaine plante, et la mettent ensuite sur la personne
maleficiee on ensorcelee. lis portent sur eux une racine de
chicoree, qu'ils ont touchee a genoux avec de Vor et de V argent
le jour de la nativifce" de saint Jean baptiste, un pen avant h
soleil leve, et qu'ils ont ensuite arrach^e de terre avec un ferre-
ment et beaucoup de ceremonies, apres l'avoir exorcizee avec
Vepee de Judas Machabee.' This again seems to be Celtic, and
yet resembles the Roman practices, warlike J udas' patriot sword
doiug duty for the circle-drawing 1 ferrum.' In Superst. I, 581,
the lopping is also done with gold instead of iron. When Renart
finds in the meadow the wished- for plant, and cautiously pulls it
up, it is said : ' ne I'a triblee n'esquachie, envois la menja sanz
tribler, del remanant ala froter trestotes les plaies qu'il ot, et li
cuir maintenant reclot et fu gariz et trestoz sains' 25105 — 11.
The herb was neither to be fretted nor squashed ; conf. Michel's
Trist. 2, 50. In Thurneisser's Erkl. der archidoxen, Berl. 1575,
when it says fol. 76 : ' Verbeen, agrimenia, raodelger Charfrey-
tags graben hilfft dich sehr Das dir die frawen werden holdt,
Doch branch kein eisen, grab's mit goldt'; I think it must be
drawn from Latin sources. Much more significant is what a
song in the Hiitzler book says of the 'herb Hope' 137. 294:
' Daz ist gar ein edel krut, Grab ez s title, nicht ze lut, Schutzen
8%nd dariiber gesetzt, Begrif man dich, du wurdst geletzt An
diner saelden h6hstem pfant ' ('tis a priceless herb, I trow, dig it
deftly, soft and slow : o'er it are set guards to watch thee ; thou
wouldst forfeit, should they catch thee, thy dearest pledge of
happiness). These warders and watchers of the herb are on a
par with that woodpecker that guards the peony : one would like
to know more particulars about them (see Suppl.).

About the tying-on (alligare, usu. adalligare J ) of herbs when
picked or dug up, Pliny imparts the following precepts : 1 herba
adalligata laevo brachio, ita ut aeger quid sit illud ignoret' 24, 19
[107]. ' magi heliotropium quartanis quater, in tertianis ter alli-

1 A curious compound = ad-ad-ligare : they must have ceased to feel the origin
of the assimilation U before they could add a second ad. It is matched, imper-
fectly 'tis true, by our past part, gegliickt (fr. gegeliickt), and perfectly by theO. Fr.
conoueillir=concolligere t con-con-legere, and the Goth, gagamainjan to profane,
gagavairftan to reconcile.



Digitized by Google



1200 HERBS AND STONES.

gari jubent ab ipso aegro, precarique soluturum se nodos libera-
tum, et ita facere non exempta herba' 22, 21 [29]. 'sunt qui
genicula novem vel unius vel e duabus tribusve herbis ad himc
articulorum numerum involvi lana succida nigra jabeant ad
remedia strumae panorumve. jejunum debere esse qui colligat,
ita ire in dornum absentis cui medeatnr, supervenientique ter
dicere jejuno jejunum medicamentum dare, atque ita adalUgare,
triduoque id facere. quod e graminum genere septem internodia
habet, efficacissime capiti intra dolores adalligatur* 24, 19 [118].
* alliget ei septem folia' 26, 11 [71]. ' verbenaca jumentorum
febribus in vino medetur, sed in tertianis a tertio geniculo incisa,
quartanis a quarto/ ibid. 1 Or, instead of being tied, it was put
under the patient's pillow : ' sedum, si involutum panno nigro
ignorant is pulvino subjiciatur* 26, 10 [69]. 'absinthium somnos
allicit olfactum, aut inscio sub capite positum ' 27, 7 [28]. As
a rule, the sufferer was not to know what was tied on or laid
under him ; knots and joints in the herb bore a reference to the
manner of tying and its repetitions. Often it sufficed if the
protecting plant were held in the hand or worn in the girdle :
1 virgam populi in manu tenentibus intertrigo non metuatur* 24,
8 [32] . ' virgam (viticis) qui in manu habeant aut in cinctit,
negantur intertriginem sentire ' 24, 9 [38]. ' intertrigines negat
fieri Cato absinthium Ponticum secum habentibus 1 26, 8 [58] .
Yet if you fall, holding in your hand the nympha3a, you become
epileptic (p. 654).

But in many parts of Germany herbs of power used to be
suspended up in the loft, on the main rafter, or over door and
gate ways, and left there all the year round, till they were re-
placed by fresh ones.

The Romans had a strange custom of laying a sieve in the
road, and using the stalks of grass that grew up through it for
medical purposes : 1 cribro in limite adjecto, herbae intus ex-
stantes decerptae adalligataeque gravidis partus accelerant ' 24,
19 [109]. The sieve was a sacred utensil (p. 1108-12): exstare
is extra stare, prominere. This reminds me of our old Weis-
thumer, which determine the fineness of a tissue by the stalks

1 WrS he&fod-ece (headache) : adelf icepbradan (plantago) htttan isene a?r
snnnan uppange, bind H moran (berries, seed) ymb J>a;t heafod mid vra-toreadC'
t>rwde. soua him bi$ el.



Digitized by Google



herbs: tying on. wonderflower. 1201

piercing through it, 1, 12 : 'item, es sprechint ouch die hofliit,
das si hundert und sibentzig eln huobtuochs gebint dem von
Hiinwil, das selb huobtuoch solli so swach sin, wenn man das
spreit uf ein wasen, das gens gras und bollen durch das tuoch
mugint essen.' And 1, 254: 'the said cloth shall be spread
over turf and be of such substance that geese can eat grass
through it, and not starve.' This has nothing to do with heal-
ing, but the mode of thought is similar.

Having made these general observations, I will now take up
one by one the herbs most renowned for healing. Yet some of
them seem purposely to have no distinct name given them ; among
these is the herb that kept birds away from millet and panic :
' pestem a milio atque panico, sturnorum passerumque agmina,
scio abigiherba cujus nomenignotumest, in quatuor angulis segetis
defossa, mirum dictu, ut omnino nulla avis intret,' Pliny 18, 17
[45]. A poem in Ls. 1, 211— 8 tells of a maiden that was pick-
ing flowers for a garland, and by chance got hold of a herb she
did not know : no sooner was it in her hand than she saw all her
lovers before her, heard their talk, and knew all their thoughts.
At length one of her companions knocked the miraculous plant
out of her hand, it fell into a brook that ran past, and floated
away ; and all the prophetic power was gone. Again, the
nameless blue wonderflower (p. 964), that suddenly opens the
shepherd's eyes who has unconsciously stuck it in his hat, and
discloses the hitherto concealed entrance to the treasure (p. 971),
comes before us the more mysteriously, as it cannot in the least
be identified. 1 The name forget-me-not, which it may be said to
assume to itself, is supposed to express no more than its senti-
ment, and seems not to have been applied to myosotis till a later
time. A herb with an equally imperative name is reported by
Pliny 27, 12 [106]: 'circa Arirainum nota est herba quam
resedam vocant, discutit collectiones inflammationesquo omnes.
qui curant ea, addunt haec verba : " Reseda, morbos reseda t
scisne, scisne quis hie pullos egerit ? radices nec caput nec pedes
habeant ! " haec ter dicunt, totiesque despuunt.' Collectio is a

1 In Polish quarries grows a beautiful blue ttarfiower with a long stalk (conf.
trojziele p. 1216), which the peasantry make war upon, because they think old
women and gipsies use it in bewitching the cows, that they may suck up all the
milk themselves (Pott's Zigeuner p. viii).



Digitized by Google



1202



HERBS AND STONES



gathering, and ' pullos agere ' must refer to this or the inflamma-
tion. What we now call reseda (odorata) is apparently a differ-
ent herb (see Suppl.) .

Of roots, the Alrune stands first in fame. OHG. glosses
already have alrilna, alrun for mandragora (Graff 2, 523. Schm.
3, 97), and I have on fair grounds (p. 404) identified the name of
the personified plant with that of wise-women in our remotest
antiquity. H. Sachs iv. 3, 34 still pictures the Alraun as a god-
dess who meets yon at the crossways. 1 Besides, the root itself
has the shape of a man, and the process of pulling it up is
described as follows : If a hereditary thief that has preserved his
chastity gets hung, and drops water or seed from him, there
grows up under the gallows the broad-leaved yellow-flowered
mandrake. If dug up, she groans and shrieks so dismally, that
the digger would die thereof. He must therefore stop his ears
with cotton or wax, and go before sunrise on a Friday, and take
with him a black dog that has not a white hair on him ; make
three crosses over the mandrake, and dig round her till the root
holds by thin fibres only ; these he must tie with a string to the
dog's tail, hold up a piece of bread before him, and run away.
The dog rushes after the bread, wrenches up the root, and falls
dead, pierced by her agonizing wail. The root is now taken up

1 This personality of the Air mm comes out plainly in a merry tale handed down
by a MS. of the 15th cent. : Dicitur de quadam muliere, quae habuit virum nimis
durum, quae quandam vetulam in sortilegiis famosam consuluit. vetula vero, experta
in talibu8 valde, dixit ' se optima sibi scire et posse (sub-Wenire, si suum vellet con-
silium imitari.' et dum ipsa promitteret • se velle imitan,' vetula adjecit : ' habesne
in horto tuo canapum spissum et longum?' quae ait 'habeo valde optatum.' cui
vetula 1 vade ' inquit * tribus noctibus successive in crepusculo scroti no ad ipsum
hortun tali modo et forma, prima namque nocte accipe unam libram lardi Bpiss-
issimi et optirai quam poteris habere, secunda nocte duas, tertia vero tree, et semper
ponas dextrum pedem ad canapum, ao projiciendo lardum usque ad medium canapi,
vel citra, haec dices verba : " Alrawn du vil gtiet, Mit trawrigem miiet Ruef ich
dich an, Dastu meinen leidigen man Bringst darzue, Das er mir kein leid nimmer
tue." ' Tertia igitur nocte cum mulier haeo verba repUcaret, vetula abscondita in
canapo jacebat. prins autem informaverat praedictam mulierem, quod attentissimc
auscultaret quae sibi tertia nocte dicta Alrawn insinuaret. unde in haec verba tub
voce rauca et valde aliena abscondita in canapo respondebat : " Fraw, du solt haim
gan, Und solt giieten miiet han, Und solt leiden, meiden, sweigen (bear and forbear
and hold thy peace) ; Thuest du das von alien deinen sinnen, So machtu wol ein
giieten man gewinnen." et sic mulier illius vetulae verba imitabatur, et viri amari-
tudo in dulcedinera et mansuetudinem vertebatur. — The same story in Paulli's
Schimpf u. Ernst 1555 cap. 156 ; a similar in a MHG. poem (Altd. wald. 3, 160—3)
and a nursery-tale (KM. no. 128), where the man, not the wife, consults the hollow
tree or Bpindletree in the garden (p. 652). The form of address 1 Alrun, du vil
quote • reminds me of ' si vil guote,' said to fro Salde when she cuts out and clothes,


Digitized by LiOOQle



MANDRAKE, ALRAUN.



1203



(Pliny's in sublime tolli), washed with red wine, wrapt in silk red
and white, laid in a casket, bathed every Friday, and clothed in a
new little white smock every new-moon. When questioned, she
reveals future and secret things touching welfare and increase,
makes rich, removes all enemies, brings blessings upon wedlock,
and every piece of coin put to her overnight is found doubled
in the morning, but she must not be overloaded. When her
owner dies, she goes to the youngest son, provided he puts a
piece of bread and a coin in his father's coffin. If he dies before
his father, the mandrake passes to the eldest son, who must in
like manner with bread and money bury his brother. All these
provisions sound ancient, and may date from a long way back.
Our OHG. glosses have 'alruna' for the mandragora occur-
ring several times in the Vulgate, 1 Gen. 30, 14 seq., where the
Hebrew text reads dudaim ; but the poetized version in MHG.
translates it erd-ephil, Diut. 2, 79. Now the mandragoras (masc,
Gr. tiavSpayopa*;) is thus described in Pliny 25, 13 [94] : 'man-
dragoram alii Circaeum vocant ; duo ejus genera, candidus qui et
mas, niger qui femina existimatur . . . cavent effossuri (album)
contrarium ventum, et tribus circuit's ante gladio circumscribant,
postea fodiunt ad occasum spectantes.' I find more to my pur-
pose this time in two lines of Columella 10, 19 :

quamvis semi-hominis vesano gramine foeta
mandragorae pariat flores, moestamque cicutam.

' Semi-human mandrake ' goes very well with our legend, and
even ' vesanum gramen ' may agree with it more closely than
appears from the words. Hildegard also in Phys. 2, 102 says :
■ mandragora de terra do qua Adam creatus est dilatata est, et
propter similitudinem hominis suggestio diaboli huic plus quam
aliis herbis insidiatur. et ideo, cum de terra effoditur, mox in
salientem fontem per diem et noctem ponatur.' As the French
mandagloire stands for mandragore, I conjectured (p. 402) that the
fee Maglore may have sprung from Mandagloire ; if so, it offers
an exact analogy to our Alruna the wise-woman and alruna the
mandrake, and is not to be despised. I close with an AS. de-
scription in Thorpe's Anal. p. 94, probably of the 10-1 1th cent.,
which confirms the dog's participation in the act of gathering :

1 As a fern. pi. mandragorae ; the LXX has/tqXa navSpayopwv, earth-apples.
VOL III. X



Digitized by Google



1204



HERBS AND STONES.



' (>eos wyrt, \>e man mandragoram nemneS . . . fonne J?u to
hire cymst, bonne ongist bu hi bi J>am (wilt know her by this) )?e
heo on nihte scineS ealswa leoht-faot (as a lamp). bonne ]?u hire
hedfod aerest geaeo (first see her head), bonne bewrit J?u hi wel
hraSe mid iserne, by lass heo be astfleo (lest she flee thee) . hire
masgen (main, might) is swa micel and swa ma3re, J?aot heo un-
claenne man, bonne he td hire cymeS, wel hra'Se forfleon wile.
forSy J>u hi bewrit, swa we aer cwaedon, mid iserne, and swa j>u
scealt onbutan hi delfan, swa bft hire mid bam iserne na aet-hrine
(touch) : ac bft geornlice scealt mid ylpenbsenenon (ivory) staefe
bft eorSan delfan, and bonne bft hire handa and hire Jet geseo,
bonne hundes gewrlS j?u hi (tie her to a dog), nim bonne bone
oSerne ende, and gewrift t6 anes swiran (neck), swa }>aet se hund
hungrig si, wurp (throw) him si$5an mete td foran, swa bast he
hine ahra3can (reach) ne maage, buton he mid him b& wyrte up-
abrede.' She shines by night like a lamp, has head, hands and
feet, must be bewritten with iron lest she escape, is not to be
touched with iron, but dug up with an ivory wand : several things
betray a Latin origin (bewritan circumscribere). It is to be
fastened to the dog's neck instead of his tail ; conf . Belg. mas.
5, 114 [Josephus Wars 7, 6, 3 : root Baaras pulled up by dog].
Pliny ascribes a ' vim somnificam ' to raandragoras.

Saem. 194* speaks of a svcfn-fiorn (sleep-thorn) with which
OSinn pricks Brynhild, and she goes to sleep, as Dorn-roschen
does in the nursery- tale from the prick of a spindle (p. 419). The
thorn-rose has a meaning here, for we still call a mosslike excre-
scence on the wild rosebush or the whitethorn schlaf-apfel and
schlaf-kunz ; so that the very name of our sleeping beauty con-
tains a reference to the myth. We also use the simple kitenz
(Schm. 2, 314), which can hardly be Kunz the dimin. of Konrad,
but is rather conn, with kiienzel, kiienzen (gathering under the
chin). When placed under a sleeper's pillow, he cannot wake
till it be removed 1 (see Suppl.).

This ' sleep-apple ' is supposed to be produced by a wasp sting-
ing the thorn ; equally rootless, the prophetic gall-nut on oaks

1 Stinga svefnjvrn occurs in Fornald. sog. 1, 18-9. 3, 303-6. In Tristan sleep
is caused by a mere kiUselin (cushion), Ulr. 1672-93 ; ' der zoubertere kiisselin,'
Heinr. 4911. In a fairy-tale (Altd. bl. 1, 145) by writing and letters (i.e. runes), or
by feathers off the wild shaggy folk (pp. 433. 486), whom fancy must have pictured as
having wings or feathers.



Digitized by Google



SLEEP-THORN. MISTLETOE.



1205



originates in such a puncture, Sup. I, 968 ; Ital. gallozza, Neap.
gliantra, Pentam. 2, 1: 'tre gliantre mascole.' Growths that
could not be traced to seed and root, as probably that bird* 8 nest
on p. 973, seemed miraculous and endued with magic power:
gall-nuts are hung on the kitchen roofbeam to protect the house.

The mistel (mistletoe) was accounted specially sacred, being
supposed to have fallen from heaven on the boughs of magnificent
trees like the oak and ash. OHG. mistil (not fern, mistila), Graff
2, 890; MHG. mistel, 'jamers mistel/ Martina 161 d . With a
shoot of this plant the god Baldr was shot dead : when Frigg
was exacting an oath from all other plants, this seemed to her too
young : 1 vex viSar teinungr einn fyrir austan Valholl, sa er Mis-
tilteinn kalla'Sr, sa ]>6tti mer ungr at krefja eiSsins,' Su. 64 ; and
the Voluspa sings of it thus, Saom. 6 b :

sto$ umvaxinn vollom heerri
mior ok miok fagur Mistilteinn ;

grown high above the field stood the delicate fair mistle-shoob j
teinn is a branch shot up, Goth, tains, OHG. zein, and we may
safely assume a Goth, mistilatdins, OHG. mistilzein. Now in AS.
we find it mistiltd, which may easily be a corruption of mistiltdn,
and the agreement of this with the Eddie mistilteinn would be
welcome and weighty ; yet * ta ' may be right after all, and is
supported by the Engl, being mistletoe [but also misseldine]. In
Sweden this evergreen parasite is said to be usually a foot or two
feet long, but sometimes to reach the length of three ells (Goijer's
Hiifd. 1, 330). F. Magn. lex. 512 says, in Vestergotland it is
called vespelt, holy spelt, triticum sacrum. A plant associated
with the death of one of their greatest and best-beloved gods
must have been supremely sacred to all of Teutonic blood j and
yet this opinion of its holiness was shared by Celtic nations.
Pliny 16, 44 [95] assures us of the Celtic belief : 'Non est oinit-
tenda in ea re et Galliarum admiratio. Nihil habent druidae (ita
suos appellant magos) visco, et arbore in qua gignatur (si modo
sit robur), sacratius. Jam per se roborum eligunt lunos, nec ulla
sacra sine ea fronde conficiunt, et inde appellati quoque interpre-
tatione Graeca possint druidae videri. Eniravero quidquid adnas-
catur illis, e coelo missum putant, signumque esse electee ab ipso
deo arboris. . Est autcm id rarum admodum inventu, et repertum



Digitized by Google



1206



HERBS AND STONES.



magna religione petitur, et ante omnia sexta luna (quae principia
mensium annorumque his facit) et seculi post tricesimum annum,
quia jam virium abunde habeat nec sit sui dimidia. Omnia sanan-
tem appellantes suo vocabulo, sacrifices rite sub arbore praeparatis,
duos admovent candidi coloris tauros, quorum cornua tunc primum
vinciantur. 1 Sacerdos Candida veste cultus arborem scandit, falce
aurea demetit, candido id excipitur sago. Turn deinde victimas im-
niolant, precantes ut suum donum deus prosperum faciat bis quibus
dederit. Foecunditatem eo poto dari cuicunque animalium sterili
arbitrantur, contra venena ( omnia esse remedio. Tanta gentium
in rebus frivolis plerumque religio est.' This elegant description
is preceded by other statements, of which I will select one here
and there : ' Visci tria genera. Nam que in abiete ac larice stelin
dicit Euboea nasci, hyphear Arcadia, viscum autem in quercu,
robore, pruno silvestri, terebintho, nec aliis arboribus adnasci,
plerique. Copiosissimum in quercu, quod dryos hyphear . . .
Adjiciunt discrimen, visco in his quae folia amittant et ipsi decidere,
contra inhaerere nato in aeterna fronde. 1 Omnino autem satum
nullo modo nascitur, nec nisi per alvum avium reddiium, maxime
palumbis ac turdis : haec est natura, ut nisi maturatum in ventre
avium non proveniat. Altitudo ejus non excedit cubitalem, semper
frutectosi ac viridis. Mas fertilis, femina sterilis ; aliquando non
fert.' — With us too a thrush is called mutter, Schm. 2, 645 (MHG.
mistelaere ?), Engl, mistlebird ; and in some other of our myths
the conveyance of the seed by birds enhances the holiness of the
virgin plant (p. 969) : there is no human hand at work, and the
finger of God is manifest. Viscum is the Fr. gni, and to this day
the veneration for the plant is preserved in the New-year's gratu-
lation aguilannevf (p. 755). In Wales they hang mistletoe over
the doors at Christmas, and call it (says Davies) pren awyr, merry
tree, pren uchelvar, tree of the high summit, pren puraur, tree
of pure gold ; the second name recalls the ' vollum hserri ' of
the Edda. But the usual names given for mistletoe are Wei.
olhiach, Bret, ollyiach, Ir. uikiceach, Gael, uileice, i.e. all-healing

1 Steers never yoked as yet, steeds never harnessed, BA. 547 : a sacred use
demands that everything be new.

* Virg. Aen. 6, 205 : Quale solet silvis brumali frigore viscum

fronde virere nova, quod non sua seminat arbos,
et croceo fetu teretes circumdare t r uncos ;
talis erat species auri frondentis opaca
ilice, sic leni crepitabat bractea vento.



Digitized by Google



MISTLETOE. VALERIAN.



1207



[Pliny's omnia sanans], from 'ol, uile/ universal (p. 1213). A
Breton lay (Barzas breiz 1, 58. 100) makes Merlin at early morn
go fetch the high branch on the oak (warhuel, huelvar ann der-
wen) . Our old herbals divide mistletoes into those of the oak,
hazel and peartree (eichen-mistel, heselin-m., birnbaumin-m.), and
none of them must be let touch the ground ; some, set in silver,
they hang round children's necks. In Prussian Samland it is
called wispe (which looks like viscum, gui, but mistel itself is
often confounded with mispel = medlar) ; it is common on birch,
cherry and lime trees, on the hazel it is rare and wonderful. It
grows in a straight line out of the trunk, and between its smooth
evergreen willow-like leaves it bears berries silvery-white, like
peas or small nuts. Where the hazel has a wispe, there is sure
to be a treasure hidden (Reusch no. 10). Among Slavs I find
the names Boh. melj, gmelj, omeUi, Russ. om61a, Pol. iemiel ;
Lith. amalai, Lett, ahmals ; but no legends (see Suppl.).

To viscum may be added two other druidical herbs. Pliny
24-, 11 [62-3]: 'Selago legitur sine ferro, dextra manu per
tunicam, qua sinistra exuitur velut a fur ante, Candida veste vestito
pureque lotis nadis pedibus, sacro facto priusquam legatur pane
vinoque; fertur in mappa nova: hanc contra omnem perniciem
habendam prodidere druidae Gallorum. — Iidem Samolum herbam
nominavere nascentem in humidis, et hanc sinistra manu legi a
jejunis contra morbos suum boumque, nec respicere legentem,
nec alibi quam in canali deponere, ibique conterere poturis.'
The mode of gathering selago is peculiar : it is to be picked with
the right hand, not bare, but covered with the tunic (conf. p. 971),
then to be drawn out stealthily with the left. In Davies's Br.
myth. 280 it is said to be the herb the Welsh call gras Duw
(gratia Dei). Villemarquo thinks it is the aour geoten (aurea
herba) of Breton songs 1, 58. 96, which you must pull up in the
meadows before sunrise, barefoot and bareheaded ; it shines far
off like gold. It is rarely to be found, and only by holy persons.
Some take it for our barlapp (lycopodium). Samolus is said to
be anemone pulsatilla; Davies p. 274 gives its Welsh name as
gwhjdd.

Our baldrian is a corruption of Valeriana, and has nothing to
do with Baldr, after whom a very different herb, the anthemis
cotula, was named Baldrs bra (brow), Sw. Baldersbra, abbrev.



Digitized by Google



1208 HERBS AND STONES.

Barbro. But the valerian has a mythical name too, Velands-urt,
Wayland's wort (p. 377), and its healing virtues are in high
repute. The Servians call it odolian (from odolieti to overpower) ,
Bob. odolen; and among the Servian ' Vilinen piesme* (songs
taught by the vila herself) is a saw (Vuk, new ed. 1, M9) : ' Da
zna zhenska glava, Shto zV odolian trava, Svagda bi ga brala, U
pas ushivala, I za se nosila * ; if woman but knew what is herb
odolian, she would always get it, in her girdle sew it, and about
her wear it. The vila warns us not to neglect this precious herb
(see Suppl.).

Henbane (bihen-kraut) , OHG. pilisa, belisa (hyos-cyamos),
see pp. 593. 1198, and Suppl.

Sowthistle (eberwurz, boarwort), OHG. epurwurz, the carlina
acaulis, Carls-distel ; growing on hills, close to the ground with-
out a stalk, with silver- white unfading leaves. During a pestilence,
Charles the Great had gone to sleep laden with care, when an
angel appeared to him in a dream, and bade him shoot an arrow
in the air : whatever herb it lighted upon was sovereign against
the plague. Charles in the morning shot the arrow, and its
point stuck in a sowthistle : they used it for medicine, and the
plague disappeared. He that carries this plant about him, let
him run ever so long, will never tire ; and he can take all the
strength out of a companion that walks with him, hence they
used to tie some to their horses in a race ; when the same was
done unperceived to one of a married couple, the other was sure
to waste away and die. Sowthistle was also nailed inside the
swine-trough, that the pigs might eat over it, whence its name
is supposed to have come (W. Menzel's Literaturbl. 1844. pp. 9.
1 0) . The name ' eberwurz ' probably rests on other grounds,
but ' carlina ' seems to be formed on the legend. King Charles
often had things told him by angels in dreams, and bad dreams
come of fighting with boars ; the herb may have healed the gash
inflicted by the tusk of a boar (see Suppl.).

Betonica. Pliny 25, 46 : 1 Vettones in Hispania earn quae
Vettonica dicitur in Gallia, in Italia autem serratula, a Graecis
cestros aut psycho-morphon [-trophon?], ante cunctas laudatis-
sima. Exit anguloso caule, cubitorum duum, a radice spargens
folia fere lapathi, serrata, semine purpureo . . . tantum gloriae
habet, ut domus in qua sata sit tuta existimetur a piaculis omnibus



Digitized by Google



SOWTHISTLE. BETONY. MADELGER. FERN. 1*209



. . . Morsibus imponitur vcttonica, cm vis tanta perhibetur, ut
inclnsae circulo ejus serpentes ipsae sese interimant flagellando.'
Fr. hetoine, MHG. batouie: 'altiu wip grabent patoni? MsH. 3,
193 b . 'sd gent eteliche mit bcBsen batanien umb/ Berth. 58.
'ettlich kundent patoniken graben,' Superst. Q> L 41. 'die ler
ich batonien graben,' Aw. 2, 56. An Italian proverb recom-
mends the purchase of betony at any price : ' venda la tonica, e
compra la bettonica.* A description in Martina 27* (Diut. 2, 129),
' diu gclwe batenie hoi/ seems to contradict the aforesaid purple
(of the seed only ?). In Switzerland baddnikli is our fluhblume,
cowslip, and herdsmen bring it home for their sweethearts off the
Alp, Staid. 1, 124. 386. Apparently several kinds are to be
distinguished : Pol. bukwica, Boh. brkwice, is by turns betonica,
plantago and primula. The Anglo-Saxons called betonica biscop-
wyri, from which its sacredness may be inferred (see Suppl.).

Madalger stands in OHG. glosses for basilicum, in herbals for
Benecio as well. The proverb ran, ' Modelgcer ist aller wurzel
ein eer.' In the Westerrich, when a disease breaks out among
swine, they chop some of this root in with the pigs' wash,
muttering a short prayer: it keeps the schelm from attacking
them. As Heime's father in our heroic legend is called Madelger
(p. 387), likewise a mermaid's son who puts on a cloak of dark-
ness (Morolt 40- 1 ) ; a mythic significance in the plant's name
becomes credible (see Suppl.).

In the same way I connect Mangold, lapathum, beet, with that
ancient name of the giant-maiden who could grind gold (p. 531).

OHG./araw filix, MHG. varm, varn, AS. fearn, Engl. fern.
Pliny 27, 9 [55] tells nothing mythical of the filix. Hildegard's
Phys. 2, 91 : 'in loco illo ubi crescit, diabolus illusiones suas
raro exercet ; et domura et locum in quo est, diabolus evitat et
abhorret, et fulgura et tonitrua et grando ibi raro cadunt.' A
Herbal says : 'farnkraut is hard to destroy, without ye stub it
up on the day of John's beheading, then doth fam perish. It
seems to bear neither flower nor seed ; he that will gather fern-
seed must be bold and able to daunt the devil. He shall go after
it on St John's night before daybreak, light a fire, and spread
cloths or broad leaves under the same, so may he take and keep
of the seed.' Many fasten fresh fern over the house-door, then
all goes well as far as the whip on the waggon reaches (about five



Digitized by Google



1210



HERBS AND STONES.



paces), Sap. I, 988. In Redeker's Westf. sagen no. 46 we find
some details : Fernseed makes one invisible, but is difficult to get
at : it ripens only between 1 2 and 1 on Midsummer night, and
then falls off directly, and is gone. A man, who on that night
happened to be looking for a lost foal, passed through a field
where fernseed was ripening, and some fell in his shoes (like the
flax-pods, p. 962). Coming home in the morning, he walked
into the house, and sat down : he thought it strange that his
wife and family took no notice of him. ' Well/ says he, ' I have
not found the foal.' All those in the room looked startled : they
heard the man's voice, but nothing of him could they see. The
wife began calling him by name, so he came and stood in the
middle of the room, and said, ' What are you shouting for, when
here I stand before you ? ' The terror was now greater than
before ; till the man, feeling something hurt his feet, as if shingle
had got in his shoes, pulled them off and shook them out ; and
there he stood visible to every eye. This is the wiinsclitl-sainen
des varmen (p. 974). Conrad of Wiirzburg in a song, MsH.
3, 453* :

Het ich sdmen von dem varn,
den wiirfe ich dar den scheiden,

daz si 'n versliinden, e min dienest von ir solde scheiden.

'scheiden ' are large fish, shad, siluri, and often used punningly
(Schm. 3, 324. Hofer 3, 65). Had I seed of the fern, says the
lover, I would fling it to yon shadfish to devour, ere my service
should fall away from her ; apparently the seed might have made
his fortune elsewhere, but he gives it up to keep faith with her :
there is no reference to invisibility. In Thiers the fougere (filix)
' cueillie la veille de la St Jean justement a midi ' is said to bring
luck in play to him that wears it.

In the Thuringer-wald fern is called irr-Jcraut (stray herb),
and by some attcr-Jcreutich (adder-herb) : if you step over it
without seeing it, it so bothers and bewilders you, that you no
longer know your whereabouts even in the most familiar parts of
the forest. To prevent or correct your straying, you must sit
down and put your shoes on the wrong feet, or if a woman, untie
your apron and turn it wrong side out; immediately you know
your way again (Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 364. Bechstein's Franken



Digitized by Google



FERN. MUGWORT.



1211



pp. 209. 286.) No doubt the puzzle-seed had got into the shoe
or cincture, and fell out when these were taken off. It is said
also, if you have adder-herb about you, you will be pursued by
adders till you have thrown it away. In some parts they call it
Walburgis-kraut. Its Slavic name is Russ. pdporot, Pol. paproc,
O. Boh. papntt, now papradj, kapradj, Sloven, praprut, praprot ;
Lith. papartis, Lett, papardi. Woycicki 1, 94 also says it
blossoms exactly at midnight of St John's eve, and it is a hard
matter to get hold of the flower (kwiat paproci), for the picking
is attended by storm and thunder; but whoever gets possession
of it becomes rich, and can prophesy (see Suppi.).

OHG. pipoz, artemisia (Graff 3, 22, but misplaced and mis-
spelt), MHGr. biboz (rhy. gr6z), Ls. 2, 526; its corruption into
our meaningless beifuss, Nethl. bivoet, is as early as Gl. Jun. 406
bifuz. The word seems pure German, formed from p6zan cudere,
like anapoz incus, anvil, MHG. anebdz, our amboss; and we
ought to pronounce and spell it beiboss. The meaning must
be something like that of beischlag (by-blow), which in the
Logau district means a bastard. In OS. it would be btbot,
which resembles its Lett, name bihbotes. Our LG. huh, bucke
seems an abbrev. dimin. of endearment (but-ke) ; 1 Dan. bynke,
but Sw. gr&bo, gray nest. Whoso hath beifuss in the house, him
the devil may not harm ; hangs the root over the door, the house
is safe from all things evil and uncanny. On St John's day
they gird themselves with beifuss, then throw it in the 6re, while
spells and rhymes are said (p. 618) ; hence the names Johannis-
giirlel, sonnenwend-giirtel, yiirtel-kraut, Fr. herbe do S. Jean.
They dig the root up solemnly, twine it into wreaths, hang it
about them, and each flings it into the flame along with any
griefs he may chance to have about him. He that has beifuss on
him wearies not on his way (Megenberg 385, 16) : this is imitated
from Pliny 26, 89 : ' artemisiam alligatam qui habet viator
negatur lassitudinem sentire ; 1 also the 'Eppnyeiai iraXaial (ed.
Sillig p. 212) : aprefiialav ttjv (Bot&vwv et Tt? iv 68a>, Xv€t

top /cdpaTov. The AS. name is mttcgwyrt, Engl, mugwort,
muggon : ' wrb" miclum gouge ofer land, j^ylaes he teorige, mucg-
wyrt nime him on hand, oSSe do on his sco jjylaes he mSdige; and

' Or is it related to Finn, puyo, Esth. puio, puiyo t



Digitized by Google



1212



HERBS AND STONES



|>onne he niinan wille ser sunnan upgange, cwe$e J>as word serest :
tollam te, artemisia, ne lassu9 sim in via. gesegna hie, fonne fti
upteo.' R. Chambers p. 34 gives some Scotch stories of its
healing power. A girl in Galloway was near dying of consump-
tion, and all had despaired of her recovery, when a mermaid, who
often gave the people good counsel, sang :

Wad ye let the bounie may die i* your hand,
And the mugwort flowering in the land !

They immediately plucked the herb, gave her the juice of it, and
she was restored to health. Another maiden had died of the
same disease, and her body was being carried past the port of
Glasgow, when the mermaid raised her head above the water,
and in slow accents cried :

If they wad drink nettles in March,

And eat muggons in May,
Sae mony braw maidens

Wad na gang to the clay.

Why should not the Goths already have possessed a bibauts too ?
That they had significant names of their own for herbs and
shrubs, is plain from Ulphilas's translations of the Greek term
by a native one : /8aVo?, rubus, becomes aihvatundi, Mk 12, 26.
Luke 6, 44. 20, 37, which apparently contains aihvus equus,
tundi fomes (tinder, OHG. zuntara) ; avfcdfiivos bdinabagms, Luke
1 7, 6, i.e. bone-tree, and to this day we call privet (hartriegel,
OHG. hartrugil, harttrugil ? Graff 5,501) bonewood. The rea-
sons of the names aro lost to us now (see Suppl.).

Hederich is not an old German word, being formed from the
Latin hedera, only instead of ivy it means ground-ivy, Linne's
glechoma hederacea, a weed with small blue flowers. Its native
name is gunde-rebe, gundel-rebe, donner-rebe, gunder-mann, OHG.
gunder-reba, 'acer' (Graff 2, 354), which cannot mean maple, for
it is always classed among herbs. It was reckoned sanative,
and a safeguard against sorcery; when cows are first driven
out to pasture, they are milked through a wreath of gundermann,
and whoever wears this on his head can tell who are witches,
Sup. I, 462-3. Qund points to the ancient valkyr (p. 422) ; don-
ner to the flower's blue colour, and to the Thunder-god. The
Lettons too have named it pehrkoiies from the god Pehrkon.



Digitized by Google



GROUND-IVY. DEVIl/S-BIT. GOOD HENRY. 1213



The Boh. ohnica (from ohen, fire) stands for the yellow hederich
(hedge- mustard ? ) that overspreads whole fields : if you call out
' hederich 9 to peasant women weeding it, they scold you (see
Suppl.).

One kind of scabiosa is named succisa, or morsus diaboli, Teu-
fels-biss or -abbiss, Engl, devil's bit, Dan. didvels bid, Boh. cert-
kus, certuw kus, Russ. diavolskoye ukushenie [and cherto-gr£z,
chertov ogr^zok] ; but also Russ. chertov palets, devil's thumb,
Pol. czartowe zebro, devil's rib. The root is stumpy at the end,
as if bitten off. Oribasius says, the devil was doing such mis-
chief with this herb, that the Mother of God took pity, and
deprived him of the power; he out of spite bit the end of the root
off, and it grows so to this day. The man that has it about him,
neither devil nor hag has power to hurt. Some say the devil bit
it off because he grudged men the use of its healing power. If
dug up at midnight of St John's eve, the roots are yet unbitten,
and chase the devil away. Thrown under the table, it makes the
guests fall out and fight (see Suppl.).

Some herbs are called by men's names. Bertram, though
found even in OHG. as Perhtram (Graff 3, 349), MHG. Bei-cht-
ram, Ls. 2, 526, is merely pyrethrum altered to give it a German
sound. What seems more remarkable is ' herba boni Henrici '
(chenopodium), or simply bonus Ilenricus, gut Heinrich; stolz
Heinrich, proud H. (atriplex) ; roth Heinrich, red H., Superst. I,
1002. I account for it by the old beliefs in elves and kobolds, for
whom Heinz or Heinrich was a favourite name (pp. 503-4), which
was afterwards transferred to devils and witches, and to such
demonic beings was ascribed the healing virtue of the herb.
Even the legend of Poor Henry, whose origin has never been
explored, may have to do with a herb that cured leprosy ; and
the ' herba boni Henrici ' is said to have been used as a remedy
for that very disease.

When a universal power to heal all sicknesses was attributed
to a herb, the Greeks called it to Trdvaices, rj iravd/ceia (as the
Celts named the mistletoe olhiach, uileiceach), which got person-
ified itself into a daughter of Asklepios, Ilavd/ceia. In our lan-
guage we find no plant named all-heil, all-heila, but there is a
selp-Iieila (euphrasia), Graff 4, 864, and the herbs he il- a Her- welt
(Achillea, millefolium), heil-aller-schaden (supercilium Veneris), as



Digitized by Google



1214



HERBS AND STONES.



well as aller-mann-harnisch and neun-manns-hraft, 9 man power.
The significance of the number nine shews itself no less in gar-
lands being made of nine sorts of flowers. Heil-houbito, heal-
head, Graff 4, 759, is hermodactylus, whatever that may be, and
another name for it is hunt-touch, dog-leek 2, 143 (see Suppl.).

Two herbs commonly coupled together by alliteration are
doste and dordnt (origanum, antirrhinum). OHG. dosto (Graff 5,
232) is our real native word for what we now call wilde majoran,
thymian (marjoram, thyme), or wolgemut (well of mood), Boh.
dobrd-mysl. For dordnt we have sometimes ordnt ; some think
it is not antirrhinum, but marrubium, OHG. Got-fargezzan.
Both herbs are shunned by the little- wights and nixes ; hence
the speeches put in their mouths : ' If ye hadn't dordnt and
dosten here, I'd help ye the sooner to sip that beer ! 1 ■ Up with
your skirts, ye merrimen all, Lest into dost and dardnd ye fall ! '
' See that ye bump not against durdnt, Or we shaVt get back to
our fatherland/ DS. no. 65. Jul. Schmidt p. 132. Redeker
no. 45 (see Suppl.).

Along with doste, hart-heu (hypericum, St John's wort), other-
wise called hart-hun (p. 1029n.), will often scare spirits away:
1 Marjoram, John's wort, heather white, Put the fiend in a proper
fright.' Hypericum perforatum, fuga daemonum, devil's flight
(see Suppl.).

Widertdn (adiantum), formed with the past part, of tuon, to
do, afterwards corrupted into widtrthon, xoidertod : the genuine
form is retained by G. Frank (Schm. 4, 34). The Herbal says :
Therewith be many pranks played, this we let be as foolery and
devilry. 'Tis called maidenhair also, and is of fair golden hue.
The old wives have many a fancy touching herbs, and say the red
steinbrechlin (saxifraga) with small lentil leaves is indeed abthon,
but the naked maidenhair is iciderthon, and with these two they
can both ' abthon ' and ' widerthon ' as it please them. Does
this mean, remove and restore virility ? in that case abet an and
widertdn would be opposites, like 'Bet on' and 'take off' on p.
1074. Frisch 1, 5 b has abthon trichomanes, polytrichon, and 2,
446 b widerthon lunaria, thora salutifera (see Suppl.).

Some herbs, plantago and proserpinaca, take their names from
growing on the wayside (proserpere) and being exposed to the
tread (plantae) of passengers : OHG. wegarih (Graff 1, 670), our



Digitized by Google



DOSTE. WAYBREAD. LEEK



1215



wegerich ; OHG. wegapreita, our wegebreit, AS. wegbrcede, Engl.
waybrede [broad, not ' bread'], Dan. veibred ; OHG. wegaspreiti,
-spreading (Graff 6, 395). Again, OHG. wegatrcta, umbitreta
(Graff 5, 552), our wegetritt ; OHG. wegawarta, our wegewarte
(ward, watch, wait), a name also given to cichorium, succory.
There are some myths about it : the herb was once a maiden that
on the wayside awaited her lover (p. 828), like Siguue in Tit.
117-8. Paracelsus observes (Opp. 1016. 2, 304), that the flowers
of the wegwarte turn to the sun, and their strength is greatest
in sunshine, but after seven years the root changes into the form
of a bird (see Suppl.).

Lauch, OHG. louh, AS. leac (leek), ON. laukr, is a general
designation of juicy herbs; some species appear to have been
sacred : ' allium (gar-leek) caepasque inter deos in jurejurando
habet Aegyptus/ Pliny 19, 6 [32]. When Helgi was born, and
his father Sigmundr returned from the battle, it is said in
Sasm. 150':

sialfr geek visi or vigrymo
ungom foera Urlauk grami.

In Vols, saga cap. 8 : 1 Sigmundr var )?a kominn fra orrostu, ok
gekk meff einum lauk imot syni sinum, ok hermeS gefr hann
honum Helga nafn.' The itr-laukr is allium praestaus, allium
victoriale : it is not clear whether the king bore it as home-
returning victor, or whether it was usual to wear it in giving
names. Antiquity sheds no light on either custom. 1 When the
drinking-cup was blessed, a leek was thrown into it, Sfflm. 195 b
(see Suppl.).

The sorbus or service-tree is in ON. reynir, Sw. rbnn, Dan.
ronne (rowan ?) : it is a holy shrub, for Thdrr in the river clutched
it to save himself, hence it is said : ' reynir er biorg Thorn/ sorbus
auxilium Thori est, Sn. 114. In Sweden they still believe that a
staff of this ronn defends you from sorcery, and on board ship the
common man likes to have something made of ronn-wood, as a
protection against storms and watersprites ; flogronn is of use in
occult science, Afzel. 1, 19 (see Suppl.).

In Servian, samdokaz and okolochep are herbs which, put in a
love-potion, compel the lover to come to his mistress. Ustuk is

1 The WeLh associate their national leek with victory.— Toakb.



Digitized by Google



1216 HERBS AND STONES.

both a herb and the charm repeated by a sorceress to make a
disease depart (ustuknuti), Vuk sub vv.

The Pol. trojziele (three-herb) is a marvellous plant with blue
leaves and rod flowers : it inspires love, makes you forget, and
transports you whither you please 1 (see Suppl.).

In the poem of Elegast 763 seq. there occurs a nameless herb,
which one need only put in the mouth to understand what the
cocks crow and the dogs bark. Villemarque* says, whoever acci-
dentally steps on the golden herb (p. 1207), falls asleep directly,
and understands the speech of dogs, wolves and birds. In another
case the knowledge of birds' language comes of eating a white
snake (p. 982), in the Edda by eating of the dragon's heart. A
fairytale makes some one be three years learning what it is that
the dogs bark, the birds sing, and the frogs croak 2 (see Suppl.).

2. Stones.

Stones are far less mythical than herbs, though among them
also the noble are distinguished from the base. Stones neither
grow so livingly, nor are they so accessible, as plants : whilst any
shepherd or traveller can approach the flower in field or wood,
precious stones are not produced on the surface of our soil, they
are wrung from the bowels of the earth, and imported from dis-
tant lands. There was a meaning therefore in calling herb-lore
heathen, and stone-lore Jewish (p. 1190) : Jewish and Moorish
merchants fetched the gem from the far East. The miraculous
and medicinal power of precious stones was known early in the
Mid. Ages, but never was naturalized amongst us, hence also the

1 Volkslieder der Polen, coll. by W. P., Leipzig 1833, p. 90.

3 AS. herb-names, when once critically edited from the MSS., promise rich
gleanings for mythology, of which I have given several specimens. I will here add
a few obscare names : dweoryes dwo$tU, dwosle, dwysle (pulegium, pennyroyal),
was quoted p. 448, and if conn, with ON. * dustl,' levis opera, perh. quisquiha?, and
1 dustla,' everrere, it is dwarf's sweepings ; collan-crog is achillea or nymphaea, and
as 4 collen-ferhS ' in the poems is proud-hearted, so proud crocus (OHO. kruogo) or
crock, pitcher, whichever we take crdg to mean ; <elf-f>one, OHO. alb-dono, our alp-
ranke (bittersweet?) ; u>ulfe$ comb, chamaelea ; foxes glofa, buglossa, OHG. hrindes-
zunga, ox-tongue [or, digitalis?] ; hind-heUffe, paeonia, Engl, hind-hele, appar.
' cervam celans, defendens,' conf. 4 helefte, heohvS ' (it is spelt both ways) with
heolofi-helm p. 463, and heah-heolotfe quoted by Lye ; cneota-holen, now ruscus,
now victoriale, i.e. herba victorialis, idaea daphne, Engl. kneehoUy, kneeholm ;
hwdtend, iris illyrica, suggestive of 'hwAtunga,' omina, auguria; geormen-Udf,
eomien-Udf, georman-lea/a, hoc-Uafa (Haupt's Zeitschr. 9, 408), malva, would in
OHG. be i'rman-loup (p. 351-2). The OHG. names in Graff 1, 1050-1. 3, 863—72
are less interesting, and less perfectly preserved (see SuppL).



Digitized by Google



stones: orphan.



1217



very few Teutonic names for them, or legends about them : a
fact which goes to confirm the home character of our plant-
myths. The widely circulated works of Marbod, Evax, Albertus
Magnus and others on precious stones have left as little of last-
ing legend among the people as Walahfried or Macer Floridus,
who in the dry learned fashion of physicians treat of herbs.
Even Pliny's account in his 36th book seems to have had no
effect at all on our superstitions. 1

Yet a few time-honoured myths there are. The Edda names
a holy iarkna-steinn, Sasm. 137 b . 139\ 213 a . 238 d , which in the
Cauldron-raid was thrown into the hot water, and which the
cunning smith Volundr could manufacture out of children's eyes.
The AS. eorcansian glosses both 'margarita' and 'topazion';
in Cod. Exon. 73, 27. 238, 12. 478, 7 it has the general sense
of precious-stone (eorcnan-stan is appar. a corruption). A cor-
responding Goth, airknastdins, OHG. erchanstein may safely bo
assumed, as ( airknis' actually means genuine, holy, and 'erchan'
survives in similar compounds (Graff 1, 468). But it seems to
be the oval milk-white opal, otherwise called orphdnus, pupiUus,
MHG. weise (orphan), and so precious that it graced the crown
royal of Germany. Albertus M. says : ' Orphanus est lapis qui
in corona Bomani imperatoris est, neque unquam alibi visus est,
propter quod etiam orphanus vocatur. Est autem colore vinosus,
subtilem habens vinositatem, et hoc est sicut si candidum nivis
candens seu micans penetraverit in rubeum clarum vinosum, et
sit superatum ab ipso. Est autem lapis perlucidus, et traditur
quod aliquando fulsit in nocte, sed nunc tempore nostro non
micat in tenebris. Fertur autem quod honorem servat regalem/
If the OHG. weiso had already had the sense of the stone, it
would hardly fail to appear in the glosses. We find it in full
play in the MHG. poets, ever since the tale was told of how in
distant land Duke Ernst with his sword cut it out of the living
rock, and presented it as a gift to the king (11. 3604 — 23 and 5543
of the Lay, and in Odo's Latin poem 6, 357). 'Philippe setzen
weisen uf ! 9 Walth. 9, 15. 1 schouwe wem der weise ob sime nacke
ste, der stein ist aller fiirsten leitesterne/ Walth. 19, 3 ; couf.

1 Look at the lifeless inventories in Parz. 791 and Fragm. 45°. More inter-
esting is a poem by Strieker (in Hahn 44—52) ; and Eraclixu was deep in stone-lore,
Massm. pp. 468—73.



Digitized by Google



1218 HERBS AND STONES.



Helbl. 2,881. 'der kiinec als6 den weisen hat/ Ms. 1, 15*. ' wie
si durch den berc har wieder kamen, da sie der kr6ne weisen inne
namen/ Ms. 2, 138 s . 'den weisen ie vil h6he wac (prized) der
keiser und daz riche, dur daz (because) nie sin geliche wart unter
manigem steine/ Troj. 20. ' ieh stich im abe den weisen* Otto
bart. 314; see also passages in Heinr. von Krolewiz V. U., coll.
in Lisch p. 208. Albert and Conrad account for the name, by
the stone having no equal, and standing like an orphan cut off
from kin ; so the gloss on Sspgl 3, 60. The Spanish crown once
had a magnificent pearl, which was likewise named huerfana or
sola, and perished at the burning of the palace in 1734. A
diamond mounted by itself is in French solitaire. But a deeper,
a mythical meaning becomes apparent, which Haupt in his
Zeitschr. 7, 278 disputes. Pupillus means first a little one, a boy
under age, a ward, and then acquires the sense of orphan. Pu-
pilla and tcoprj signify a girl and the pupil of the eye, in which a
child's image is supposed to be seen (p. 1080). Now as Volundr
fashions the iarknasteinn of the eyes of slain children, the stone
might be called either pupilla or pupillus, and so agree with our
'orphanus/ thus erchanstein comes to be 'weise.' Of Thiassi's
eyes were made shining stars, all stars are gems of the sky ; from
this the transition to the sparkling stone was easy enough.
Heinr. von Krolewiz, describing the sky as a house, again brings
the eyes into connexion with the orphan, 11. 1194. 1203-16 (see
Suppl.).

The pearl, already in dreams a prognostic of the tear, is made
in the myth to spring out of Venus's tear, as FreyjVs tears turned
into drops o f gold (p. 1 1 94) 1 ; and Wainamoinen's tears fall into the
sea as pearls, Kalew. rune 22. The pearl then is either metal or
stone. Our ancestors regarded it as a stone found in the sea,
hence eorcanstan too may have meant pearl, and even the Latin
name unio approaches that notion of the incomparable orphan :
1 in tantum ut nulli duo reperiantur indiscreti, unde nomen
unionum Romanae imposuere deliciae/ Pliny 9, 35 [56] . ' ideo

1 Not only does Freyja's tear turn into gold, but a Greek myth makes /fXejcrpw
arise from the tears of Phaethon's sisters, daughters of the Sun, be that substance
gold or amber, succinum. For amber, Tacitus and Pliny already know a German
word gUsum, Gramm. 1, 68 ; an ON. name is ra/r, Sn. 156, Sw. raf, Dan. rav ; AS.
glosses have eolhsand (in Mone 1106 eolcfang) ; conf. WerlaufTs learned treatise on
amber (bernstein), Schlesw. 1840 (see Suppl.).



Digitized by Google



PEARL



1219



uniones dictos quia nunquam duo simul reperiantur/ Isid. or. 16,
10. Pliny goes on : ' nam id (nomem unionum) apud Graecos
non est, ne apud barbaros quidem inventores ejns alind quam
margaritae.' If margarita, fiapyapirrpi was the word commonly
used by barbarian pearl-fishers, the Greeks and Romans may have
this time borrowed a word from Teutonic races, in whose lan-
guage the OHG. marigreoz, MHG. mergriez, OS. merigriota, AS.
meregreot, meregrot is perfectly intelligible, meaning grit or pebble
of the sea. It is true we now find the Goth, markreitus, 1 Tim.
2, 9, imitated from fiapyaphry;, and that with consonant-change ;
and to correspond to this the OHG. should have been marchriz.
Either OHG., OS. and AS. all strove to accommodate the foreign
word to our idiom (which usually happens in one dialect, not
in three at once), or the Goth had no f marigriuts 9 in his own
language, or did not choose to write it, and so imitated the
outlandish term, which is now stowed away in our female name
Gret-chen. The OHG. perala, berala, AS. pearl, is appar. from
beryllus, and again transfer the notion of gemmula to the
growth in the shellfish. We might also put by the side of mar-
garita the Skr. marakata, though that signifies, and is directly
allied to, <rfidpay8o<;, /j,dpay$os (emerald).

As erchanstein sprang out of the human eye, and the pearl out
of the oyster, the medieval fancy seems to have been excited
by some other precious stones which grew in or out of animals.
What Marbod cap. 24 tells of the lyncurius may be read at
greater length in Rudlieb 3, 101 — 127 : these brilliant lynx-stones
likewise befit the finger- ring of the queen, the crown of the king.
Some legends speak of stones of power engendered in the head
of the cock, the adder, the toad. Inside the body of a castrated
cock of three years grows the alectorius, Marbod cap. 3 : ' Invic-
tura reddit lapis hie quemcunque gerentem, Extinguitque sitim
patientis in ore receptu9.' The MHG. poem fixes the capon's ago
at seven, Albertus at nine years. But a poem in the Vienna
Cod. 428 no. 136 (Halm's Strieker p. 48) names the snake-stone
as the right one to bestow victory :

ich hcere von den steinen sagen,
die natem und kroteri tragen (adders and toads bear),
daz grdze tugend dar an lige (great virtue therein lies),
swer si habe, der gesige (who has them, conquers) ;

VOL. III. y



Digitized by Google



1220



HERBS AND STONES.



mohten daz sigesteine wesen (if these be victory-stones),
sd solt eiu wurin vil wol genesen,
der's in sinein libe triiege,
daz in nieman ersliiege

(the reptile itself ought to live long, and never get killed) ; and
the cock-stone as that which allays thirst :

man sagt von hanensteinen,
swer ir in inunt nem* einen,
daz er guot viir den durst iin si.

The sacred snake, the adder, who wears crowns of gold (p. 686,
and jewels (Gesta Rom. ed. Keller pp. 68. 152), seems to have
a better right to the stone of victory than the cock. Albertus
mentions a stone borax, which the toad wears on its head, but be
says nothing about its procuring victory : ' borax lapis est, qui
ita dicitur a bufone, quod in capite ipsum portat,' Otnit, Mone
557-8. In Ettm. p. 91 the toad is characterized as Hebrew :

ez ist uz dem garten ein Abrahemsche krot (conf. p. 1241),
swenne diu gewehset, sie briuget einen stein
daz diu sunne uf erden niht bezzers uberschein.

The Dresden poem says more explicitly, that the stone grows on
him, and is of all stones the highest. The Pentameron 4, 1
says, the preta de lo gallo grows in the cock's head, and is a
wishing -stone, by which you can obtain anything. The Oriental
fable of the three lessons taught by the captive bird (Reinh.
eclxxxi. Ls. 2, 655) alludes to such a stone growing in the heart
or crop of a lark or nightingale. The daughter of SigurSr grikr
steals the stone of victory out of his pocket while he sleeps, and
gives it to Dietleib (Vilk. s. cap. 96-7) ; such a one had king
Nidung too (cap. 25), but neither passage specifies the kind of
stone. Vintler (Sup. G, 1. 89) does not describe his sigelstein,
but we find elsewhere that it could artificially, and in secret, be
blown like glass, cast like metal; Seifr. Helbl. 4, 124 says of
conspirators : ' ze samen si do sazen, sam (as if) sie einen sigstein
bliesen* ; and Mich. Behaim 22, 11 : 'gar taugenlichen vor dem
rat zusamen giengen fru und spat, pis sy gussen ain sigelstain.*
Acc. to Hagen's Coiner chron. 1003 the stone wherewith to con-
quer means the diamond. When the poets tell of fingerrings



Digitized by Google



THCNDER-STONE. 1221

that lend victory, that make invisible (e.g. Troj. 9198), their
power always cornea of the stone set in them. Marbod cap. 27
on gagathrometu : 1 Quern qui gestarit dux pugnaturus in hostem,
Hostem depulsum terraque marique fugabit' (see Suppl.).

The ceraunius (tcepavvia?) that falls from heaveu is mentioned
by Marbod cap. 28 : 1 Qui caste gerit hunc, a fulmine non ferietur,
Nec domus aut villae quibus affuerit lapis ille.' What ho adds :
' Crystallo similem Germania mittere fertur, Coeruleo tamen in-
fectum rutiloque colore' is derived from Pliny 37, 9, 51: 'est
inter Candidas et quae ceraunia vocatur, fulgorem siderum rapiens,
ipsa crystallina, splendoris coerulei, in Germania nascens,' though
the received text has Carmania. There can bo no question about
the thunderstone being German (p. 179); and Miolnir, like the
hein (p. 903 n.) that Obinu hurled, or that which lodged in Thdr's
head (p. 375), is sure to have been hallowed above all stones.
Miolnir sounds remarkably like the Slavic name3 for light-
ning, molniya, muruja; this last the Servian songs personify
into Munya, and represent as sister to Thunder (Grom), and
bride of the Moon (Miesets, masc, Vuk 1, 151-4 new ed.), which
jumps with our personiBcation of Hammer (p. 181. 999). So
much the more is Molniya identical with Miolnir. The Romans
too must have regarded the thunderbolt, silex, as a ' Jovis lapis* :
Lapidem silicem tenebant juraturi per Jovem, haec verba dicentes,
' Si sciens fallo, turn me Dispiter, salva urbe arceque, bonis ejiciat,
ut ego hunc lapidem ! ' Those about to take an oath fetched out
of the temple of Juppiter Feretrius a staff and 'lapidem silicem
quo foedus ferirent,' exactly as covenants were hallowed by Th6r's
hammer. Acc. to Livy 1, 24, when a swine was sacrificed, it was
struck with this stone : ' Tu illo die, Jupiter, populum Romanum
sic ferito, ut ego hunc porcum hie hodie feriam, tantoque magis
ferito, quanto magis potes pollesque': id ubi dixit, porcum saxo
silice percussit. This is like our malediction, ' Hammer strike
thee ! ' The Finns in like manner called the thunderbolt Ukon-
kivi, stone of Ukko the progenitor; the Indians Jura, hiraha,
Indra's thunderstone (Pott's Etym. for. 2, 421) or vnjra, which
means at once thunderbolt and diamond. As this makes it par-
take the nature of the brightest of stones, our fathers saw iu it
the hard flint, the Romans the silex; myth and superstition alike
accord to it the noblest powers : ' malleum aut silicem aerium,



Digitized by Google



1222



HERBS AND STONES



ubi puerpera decumbit, obvolvunt candido linteo contra infesta-
tionem fearum, albarum feminarum, strygum, lamiarum/ Gisb.
Voetii sel. dispat. theol., Ultraj. 1651. 3, 121 (see Suppl.).

As there is supposed to be a philosopher's stone (lapis sapien-
tum), that imparts wisdom, or the art of making gold and pro-
longing life (oskasteinn, wishing-stone, p. 144), Scandinavia also
had its legend of the ttf-zteinn. In Kormakssaga cap. 12, p.
116-8 Bersi wears one on his neck, which brings him succour
in swimming (see Suppl.).

Only large stones, such as mountains and rocks, are named
after gods, heroes or giants, who dwell upon them, or have
hurled them ; rarely particular species of stone, at all events no
healing ones. A certain slate indeed was called giant's bread,
jyvrikling (p. 546), a tufa nackebrbd (p. 489), a coal-stone Stir-
tarbrandr (p. 809).



Digitized by Google



CHAPTER XXXVIII.



SPELLS AND CHARMS.

A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations use it both for blessing and cursing. 1
Bat these, to be effective, must be choice, well knit, rhythmic
words (verba concepta), must have lilt and tune; hence all that
is strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician,
is allied to the forms of poetry.

Expressions for 'saying, singing' pass into the sense of
' conjuring 9 : aoihr) (p. 899) becomes €7raoi8tj, Od. 19, 457, eV^Sij,
our ' sprechen, singen 9 become besprechen, begin gen, schworen
(Goth, svaran m respondere) begchwdren (Goth, bisvaran 6p*i(eiv) ;
so jurare conjurare, cantare incantare. The OHG. galstar, AS.
gahlor, gealdor, ON. galdr (incantatio) have sprung out of galan
= canere ; the AS. gpell, strictly dictum, fabula, Goth, spill, was
tortured into meaning magic spell [and charm, Fr. eharme is
from carmen].

Opposed to blessing is cursing, to the wholesome the hurtful.
For the former the Goth still used his native word Jriufieins
evXoyia, from biubjan evXoyeiv; the OHG. gegan dicatio, dedicatio,
benedictio, comes from Lat. signum, the AS. segen meant merely
signum in the sense of flag ; MHG. \egen, like our own, stands
for magic as well. Ka/coXoyelv is in Ulph. ubil-qi]?an maledicere,
but flekan simply plangere, while the OHG. fluochon (MHG.
vluochen, our fluchen) is already maledicere, imprecari, and fluoh
maledictio (masc, quite distinct from fem. fluoh, rupes). OS.
farflocan maledicere, harm-quidi maledictum. Another word is
OHG. farhucizan, MHG. verxvdzen 2 detestari, condemnare, appar.

• Pliny 28, 2 [3—5] examines the force of 4 verba et ineantamenta carminum ' in
striking examples.

4 Var hin vertc&zen (begone, with a curse to you), vil gar verteilter snd ! 1 Ms.
1, 23*. 4 nu var von mir verwazen ' and 4 eweclich verlorn ! ' Ls. 3, 77. 4 var von
mir ventdzen ! ' MsH. 3, 441 b .

1223



Digitized by Google



1224 SPELLS AND CHARMS.

allied to AS. 'hwatung divinatio/ Poenit. Ecgb. 2,23. 4,19.
AS. wergan (misspelt wirgan, wyrgan) maledicere, detestari,
strictly damnare, Goth, vargjan, OS. waragian. AS. cursian,
Engl, curse. The ON. been precatio, AS. ben (p. 31) both border
on imprecatio (see Suppl.).

Cursing, ' becrying, becalling/ may indeed be done aloud, but
as a rule both blessing and cursing require soft murmured
■whispered speech. OHG. huispalon sibilare, Graff 4, 1239, AS.
hwistlian, as whistling and hissing are imputed to the serpent
who fascinates ; MHG. wispeln : ' wispeln wilde vogel zemt,
hunde ez letzet und lemt/ Renn. 22370 ; the asp will hear no
vrispclwort, Ms. 2, 202 b ; ' aller wiirmel (insects') wispel unde
murine!,' Mart. 74 c , for murmeln is the same thing too, OHG.
murmulon, murmuron, our mummeln, mompeln, to mumble. Paul.
Diac. 1, 13 in describing manumissio per sagittam, adds: 'im-
murmur antes, ob rei firmitatem, quaedam patria verba/ a Lango-
bardic hallowing spell. 1 Similar expressions are OHG. mutilon,
Graff 2, 707, and our protzeln, pretzeln, propeh, signifying first
the sound of water simmering, and then very appropriately the
muttering of a spell : 'protzeln and wispeln over the sick man'
is to mutter a charm or blessing; in some parts prebeln, Nethl.
preevelen; Franke's Weltb. 134 a has pretzeln (see Suppl.).

But the most legitimate and oldest word of all is the Goth,
runa, commonly the equivalent for p.v<rrripLov J sometimes for
f3ov\i], <rvfiflou\iov. I believe it meant in the first place what is
spoken softly and solemnly, then secondly a mystery : avfifiovXiov
is secret counsel. From secret speech to secret writing is but a
step, as the ON. mal means both speech and sign. For ypa<f>ij t
ypdjifia Ulph. always putfe m6l, not runa, because none of the
passages happen to speak of secret writing ; one might wager
that runa was the familiar term for this, as the early Franks had
runa = litera. OHG. runa, AS. run, character magicus, mys-
terium, Caadm. 211, 12. 250, 6. 262, 9, this last with an obvious
reference to f b6cstafas' in 262, 7. ON. run litera, but runa
linea, which coexistence of u and u assures us of a strong verb
' riuna, raun, runum/ whence also raun (tentamen, experiment),
reyna (tentare), perh. reynir (service or ronn tree, p. 1215). The

1 Ter nories carmen mapico demurmurat ore, Ov. Met. 14, 57.



Digitized by LiOOQlc



RUNES. 1225

OHG. runen susurrare, runazan murmuraro, MHG. runen, our
raunen, AS. runian, Eugl. round, keep the original meaning of
secret whispering, and OHG. 6r-runo is a confidant, one who
rounds things in your ear. The ON. transitive r^na is secretum
scrutari, literas scrutari, and supplies the link to raun above. In
Ben. 378 sanfte runen stands opposed to public singing. Finn.
rttno is a song (p. 901). And now a term that has often come
before us becomes perfectly clear, and what is more, proves a good
fit all round : the wise-woman of the ancient Germans is called
Aliruna, because she is alja-runa, and speaking secret words not
understood of the common folk, has skill at once in writing and
in magic ; hers is the Gothic runa, hers the AS. rnncrgaft. Ali
can only mean 1 other (than common), strange, not vulgar and
profane/ and thus heightens the meaning of runa. And this
name of the heathen priestesses could easily be transferred to the
holy herb (p. 1202) which perhaps pertained to their ritual.

The olden time divided runes into many classes, and if the full
import of their names were intelligible to us, we might take in
at one view all that was effected by magic spells. They were
painted, scratched or carved, commonly on stone or wood, 'run-
stones, runstaves'; reeds Berved the same purpose (p. 1083-4).
The OHG. hahalntna, isruna, lagoruna are named after the
letters 'hahal, ts, lago'; clo/runa and stofruna remain doubtful,
the latter appar. the mere tip (stupf, apex). Helliruna means
necromancy, death-rune, and plainly refers to Halja, Hella; I
connect with it our hollen-zwang, control over hell, by which is
understood the mightiest of magic spells, such as Doctor Faust
possessed. Holzruna is to be taken not of a thing, but of a
person, the wood-wife, lamia (p. 433), not without some allusion
to her moaning and muttering. The OHG. women's names
Kundrun, Hiltirun, Sigirun, Fridurun, Paturun, are properly
those of valkyrs, but also traceable to a non-personal kundruna,
liiltiruna, .sigiruna, friduruna, paturuna ; and it is worth noti-
cing, that the personal names lack the final -a, and are consigned
to a different declension. From the MHG. knierunen (to croon
over one's knee), MS. 2, 137*, may be inferred a subst. knierune.
The AS. beadorun, Beow. 996 is litera belli =bellum, rixa; while
helrune 324 and burgrune (p. 404 n.) are a personal furia, parca,
death's messenger ; a gloss in Lye puts it for pythonissa. In



Digitized by Google



1226



SPELLS AND CHARMS.



Seem. 194-5 Sigrdrifa, i.e. Brynhildr, herself a valkyr, enumerates
to SigurS the runes which it was most needful for her to know :
the goblet she hands him is ' fullr lioffa ok liknstafa, g65ra
galdra ok gamanruna,' full of lays and leech-staves, good spells
and runes of bliss. She goes on to name sigrunar, olrunar,
hiargrunar, brimrunar, mdlriinar, hugrunar, runes of victory,
of ale, of the rock, the sea, speech and thought. I am only
doubtful as to olrun, because the proper name Olrun is evidently
the Aliruna of Tacitus ; we can scarcely derive all the alirunes
from alus, 6lr, ale, and I would rather hazard a guess, either that
Olrun stands for Elrun, Eli run, having got confounded with
olrun, or that the u of the second syllable converted the a of the
first into o [quite the rule in declension and conjugation, not
in composition]. In Seam. 165 b sakrunar contentiones. Danish
folksongs often speak of ramme tuner t powerful runes 1, 235.
280. 2, 33. 3, 335. 4, 47 (see Suppl.).

OSinn passed for the inventor of all runes (p. 181-2), and in
him is lodged the greatest command of words. Yngl. saga cap.
7 : ' j*at kunni hann enn at gera meS ordum einum (do by words
alone), at slockva eld ok kyrra sia, ok snua vindum. OSinn vissi
of allt iarbT6, hvar folgit var (earth-fee, where it was hid), ok
hann kunni J>au lio$, er upplaukz fyrir honum (unlocked itself to
him) iorSin ok biorg ok steinar ok haugarnir, ok batt (bound)
hann me$ ordum einum j?a er fyrir biuggu (dwelt), ok gekk
(went) inn ok tok )>ar slikt er hann vildi.' Afzelius in Sagoh. 1,
4 mentions, too briefly and indistinctly, a strange Swedish folk-
tale of one Kettil Runske of Kettilsas in Alsheda, who stole
Odin's rune-sticks (runekaflar), and with them cast a spell on his
hounds and bulls, nay at last on the merwoman that would have
come to Odin's aid. By this Odin seems to be meant a shepherd
or giant representing the former god; the surname runske
evidently has to do with the acquisition and possession of the
staves.

Songs and runes then can do very great things. They are able
to kill and bring to life, as well as prevent from dying ; to heal
or make sick, bind up wounds, stanch blood, alleviate pain, and
lull to sleep ; quench fire, allay the sea-storm, bring rain and
hail ; to burst bonds, undo chains and bolts, open mountains or
close them up, and unlock treasures ; to forward or delay a birth ;



Digitized by



RUNES. CURSES.



1227



to make weapons strong or soft, dull the edge of a sword ; loop
up knots, loose the bark off a tree (p. 1085), spoil a crop (fruges
excantare); call up evil spirits and lay them, to bind thieves.
These wonders lie in the very nature of poesy (p. 907-8). The
Runatal, Saem. 28—30, specifies eighteen effects of runes (see
Suppl.).

Curses, imprecations have a peculiar force of their own. Our
MEG. poets have ' tiefe fluochen/ deeply, Ms. 2, 188* ; ' swinde
fluochen/ vehemently, Helbl. 2, 518 and zom-vluoch, wrath-curse
1, 656. Full of meaning is the phrase : ' ich brach des vluoches
herten kiesel,' I brake yon curse's stubborn flint, MsH. 2, 339 b ,
its action is hard as pebbles, and not easy to break. Walther
says 73, 29 :

Zwtme herzeliche fliieche kan ich ouch,
die fluochent nach dem willen min.
hiure miiezen's beide esel und der gowk
gehoeren, e" si enbizzen sin.
we in (woe to them) denne, den vil armen !

(two round curses ken I eke, hitting whomso I bespeak ; them
both ass and gowk shall hear, ere they baited be this year, etc.) .
Curses received on an empty stomach are the more effectual. It
is the vulgar opinion in Ireland that a curse once uttered must
alight on something : it will float in the air seven years, and may
descend any moment on the party it was aimed at ; if his guardian
angel but forsake him, it takes forthwith the shape of some mis-
fortune, sickness or temptation, and strikes his devoted head.
So in the Pentam. 2, 7 a curse takes wing, and mounts to
heaven : ' mrsero le' mardettiune dessa vecchia Vascelle, che
sayliettero subeto 9 n cielo.' When a horse has been cursed, his
hair is thought to be luminous: f a cavallo iastemmiato luce lo
pilo/ ibid.

Specimens of the most vigorous cursing might be picked out
of our old poetry ; one in the Edda, Siem. 144*,

nio rostom er |m skyhlir neSar vera,
ok vaxi j>er a baSmi barr !

may remind us of the phrases culled from our common people's
talk, pp. 181-2. 952n. In a minnesong, Ben. 82: 'der nider
schar, daz die tor kilchen laegen ! ' the low set, may they lie out-



Digitized by LiOOQle



1228



SPELLS AND CHAEMS.



side of church (in unconsecrated ground), 1 'derbluomen schin sol
iemer sin von ir gewalt gescheiden/ put out of their reach. The
, y runes on a tombstone will occasionally end with a curse against
f l ** L * him that shall roll away or remove the stone : 'at rySi sa verSi
(may he torn to rust) sa stain bansi velti ! ' So Latin deeds of
the Mid. Ages wind up with imprecations on the violator, but
scriptural ones pronounced by the church.

Here is a string of curses from a MHG. poem: 'God from
thee thy wife release ! Fish, fowl, worm, beast and man Storm
the stronghold of thy peace! Where'er thou go, Be grace thy
foe ! All good women's greeting shun thee ! Thy seed, thy
crop be cankered too, The curse that dried Gilboa's dew Rest
upon thee ! 9 MsH. 3, 52 (see Suppl.).

Though as a rule sowing is to be accompanied by prayer and
blessing, there are some plants that thrive better wider cursing :
' Nihil ocimo (basil) foecundius, cum maledictis ac probris seren-
dwn praecipiunt, ut laetius proveniat, sato pavitur terra. Et
cuminum qui serunt, precantur ne exeat/ Pliny 19, 7 [36].*
' Napos serere nudum volunt, precantem sibi et vicinis serere se/
18, 13 [35].

To adjure solemnly is in OHG. munigon inti manon (hortari et
monere), AS. mynegian and manian : ' sis bimunigot thuruh then
himilisgon Got, bisuoran thuruh thes forahta (fear of Him), ther
alia worolt worahta! ' 0. iv. 19, 47. 'ih bimuniun din* begins
the formula in Spell VII. Even in MHG. : 'des wart vil manec
wilder geist von ir gemuniet und gemant/ Troj. 10519 (see Suppl.).

EeUiruna, necromantia, shews itself in the lays sung after the
heathen fashion on graves and barrows, to make the dead speak
or send something out. The Indiculus superst. distinguishes
between ' sacrilegium ad sepulcra mortuorum ' and 'sacrilegium
super defunctos, id est dadsisas.' Dad is for dod, ded (conf.
nedfyr, nodfyr, p. 603-4) ; the OS. sisas I take to be the OHG.
sisuwd neniae, of which the sing, would be sisu, siso : sisesang is

1 A surname Outkirk must have meant the Excommunicato! : Radolphus de
Solodoro cognomine vor chilchun, Hartmannus dictns vor kilchon (a.d. 1260).
Solothurner wochenbl. 1827, pp. 128. 160.

9 FiBchart's Garg. 244 b : * diss fnrmans gebett treibt schif and wagen, em
hatrptmansfluch etzt durch neun barnisch. ich kont dannooh wol basilien,
quendel und kressen setzen, dann dieselben vom fluchen gedeien. darumb wards
jenes mannes entschnldigung vor dem richter, warumb er sein weib gereuft hette,
nemblich darumb weil er hat raukn setzen miissen ' ; his excuse for thrashing his
wife was, he had to plant some rue.



Digitized by LiOOQle



HELLIRUNA. BURSTING LOCKS.



1229



carmen lugubre, Diut. 2, 283 b . Graff 6, 281, and an OS. form of
confession has 'ik gibdrda (heard) hetlunnussia endi unhr6nia
(unclean) sespilon,' perh. for sese-spilon, dirge-spells ; the same
obscure root appears in proper names Sisebutus, Sisenandus, etc.,
etc., Gramm. 2, 476. Hetlunnussia must mean imprecations,
conf. OS. hatol dims, Hel. 110, Sand OHG. hazzal malitiosus,
61. Hrab. 957*. Neniae are carmina funebria, hymns in honour
of the dead ; Britferthi vita Dunstani (b. 925) cap. 1 (Acta sanct.
19 May) says of that saint : 'avitae gentilitatis vanissima didicisse
carmina, et historiarum frivolas colere incantationum nenias.' In
the same way Greg. Tur. mirac. 2, 1 : r ad vicum in quo fanatici
erroris naeniae colebantnr.' An AS. byrgensang translates epi-
taphium, and Mone's Glosses 948-4 give licsang, licleoff epicedium,
byriensang, bergehleoft, byrgleoft carmen super tumulum. Hros-
witha's Proterius says of an adjuration : ' supra gentilis tumulum
sub tempore noctis stans, herebi domino suplex.' The ON.
expression is val-galdr qve$a, to say corpse-incantation, Sfflm.
94* : by it OSinn compelled the vala, on whom snow and rain and
dew had fallen (p. 314), to rise from her barrow and answer him.
Gr6a's son and Hervor utter formulas almost identical : ' vaki )>u
Gr6a! vaki J?u g6$ kona! vek ek Jnk dauSra dura/ Ssem. 97*;
'vaki fu Angant^r ! vekr j>ic Hervor einka d6ttir ykkar Svafu
(of thee and Svafa)/ Fornald. sog. 1, 435 ; after a gruesome con-
versation with her father, the sword she craves is thrown out of
the barrow. In the same way, at the son's adjuration, a sword is
handed out of the tomb in the folksong of Orm (Sv. fornsanger 2,
446-7. Danske viser 1, 59. 60-6-7), and in a Faroe song of
Virgar, i.e. Wudga, Witege (Lyngbye p. 369). Wolfdietrich
constrains the dead tongue of his buried father to utter seven
words, Cod. Dresd. 313 (see Suppl.).

As the spoken spell bursts open the tomb, so do locks and bars
give way before it. Ferabras 2759 :

Venc a Tus de la cambra, si la trobat tancada,
et a dit son conjur : tota s'es desfermada.

Though the following passage in Meier Helmbrecht 1205 mentions
only the act of approaching, the cattle-stealer must, as ho drew
near, have uttered some unloosing spell :

Min geselle Wolves-druzzel (-throttle, -throat)



Digitized by Google



1230



SPELLS AND CHARMS.



uf tuot er ane sliizzel (opens without key)
alliu b\6z und isenhalt (bolts and iron staples)
in einem jar ban ich gezalt (counted)
hundert Ssenhalte gr6z,

daz ie daz sl6z dannen schoz (aye the bolt shot out of them,

als er von verre gie dar zuo (from far came towards them) ;

ros, ohsen und manic kuo,

die ungezalt sint beliben,

die er uz dem hove hat getriben,

daz ie daz sloz von siner stat (from its place)

schoz, 8wann er dar zuo trat (when he stept thereto).

fiven now some thieves and sharpers have the reputation of being
able to ' bespeak ' their chains and locks, and make them burst.

Gods and daemons could of their mere might raise wind and
storm, magicians did the same by means of song. Saxo Gram,
p. 71 has a certain Oddo, ' vir magicae doctus, ita ut absque
carina altum pererrans hostilia saepe navigia concitatis carmine
2>rocellis everteret.' These tempestarii have been dealt with,
p. 638. Again : 'carminibus in nimbos solvere coelum/ ibid. 17.
But song could turn away storm and hail, as well as draw it on :
1 cum averti carmine grandines credant plerique, cujus verba
iuserere non equidem serio ausim/ Pliny 17, 28 [47].

As the whole of sorcery sank into the hands of old wives, and
the faith of bygone times was called kerlinga villa, Seem. 169,
alter wibe troutne, Turl. Wh. 1, 82*, ypadtSeis fivOoi, 1 Tim. 4. 7,
in Gothic ' us-al|?anaizd spilla ' ; the healing formulas handed
down from the past fared no better. Already in the 12th cent,
the Miracula S. Matthiae (by a Benedictine of Treves) expresses
itself thus, cap. 34 : ' cujus dolore mater affecta medicinam et
anilia adhibuit carmina* Pez. thes. anec. 2, 3 p. 234 (see Suppl.).

These superstitious formulas are a gain to the history of our
mythology, they yield information about deities and practices of
heathenism, which but for them would be utterly lost. Even
books by churchmen find room for them, because their use in
certain cases, diseases of cattle for instance, was still considered
lawful and beneficial. A comprehensive collection of them would
be sure to lead to discoveries, but the time is hardly ripe for it
yet, as they lie scattered, and have to be slowly gathered from



Digitized by Google



STORM-RAISING. BOND-SPELL.



1231



the mouth of the people and out of witch-trials. 1 Here let a few-
striking examples place beyond a doubt, not only their value, but
their obstinate diffusion through nearly the whole of Europe.

In the Merseburg MS. the first poem is a bond-spell, to be
sung while tying or unloosing bands, and this time relating to
the release of a prisoner :

Eiris sazun idisi, sazun hera duoder,
suma hapt heptidun, suma heri lezidun,
8uma club6dun umbi cuoniowidi :
' insprincg haptbandum, invar vigandum ! 9

i.e. Olim sedebant nymphae, sedebant hue illuc (AS. Jrider,
thither), aliae vincula vinciebant, aliae exercitum morabantur,
aliae carpebant redimicula : ' exsili e vinculis, elabere hostibus ! '
Wackernagel was the first to penetrate the sense of the last line,
by which the last but one is also made clear: the plucking
(clawing) at the bonds slackens their hold, and the captive then
can slip them off. Of 'hapt heptian ' I have spoken p. 401 ; the
binding and unbinding is alluded to in our minnesongs. Beda 4,
22 tells of a man who could not be kept bound : ' nec tamen vinciri
potuit, nam mox ut abiere qui vinxerant, eadem ejus sunt vincula
soluta . . . Interea comes, qui eum tenebat, mirari et interro-
gare coepit, quare ligari non posset, an forte literas solutorias, de
qualibus fabulae ferunt, apud se haberet, propter quas ligari non
posset? At ille respondit, nihil se talium artium nosse.' He
was sold to a third man : ' sed nec ab illo ullatenus potuit alligari.'
Beda's explanation of the marvel is, that his friends, thinking him
dead, had had masses said for the deliverance of his soul. The
AS. version goes a step farther, which seems worthy of notice :
'and hine acsade, hwa^Ser he J?a dlysendlican rune cuSe, and ba
stdnas mid him dwritene hasfde, be swylcum men le&s spell
secgaS.' What were these stones written over with runes, which

the translator had in his mind ? We have to suppose three

sets of women, each plying a separate task (see Suppl.).

The second Merseburg formula is for healing a lamed horse :

Fhol ende Wodan vuorun zi holza,

dd wart demo Balderes volon sin vuoz birenkit (wrenched) ;

1 Horst borrowed for his Zanbcrbibl. a parchm. MS. of the 15th cent, full of
spoils, from which he has extracted nothing, and which is missing at Treves ever
8 nice.



Digitized by Google



l'Zd'2 SPELLS AND CHABMS.

d6 biguolen Sinthgunf, Sunnd era suister,
do biguolen Fruwd, Folia era suister,
do biguolen Wudan, s6 he wola conda,
s6se ben-renki, s6se bluot-rcnki,

scse lidi-renki

b&n zi b£na, bluot zi bluoda,
lid zi giliden, s6se gelimida sin.

Here is sung an adventure that befell the two gods (p. 224), and
how W6dan healed the sprained foot of Balder's foal by besing-
ing it (bigalan). And now the repetition of the song cures other
latne horses too. What the rest of the gods cannot do, Wodan
can, just as the Yugi. saga 7 says of him : 1 OSinn kunni at gera
me$ ordum (words alone) einum at slockva eld ok kyrra sia, ok
snua vindum hverja lerS er hann vilchV He is the greatest magi-
cian or wonder-man of all.

Now observe in what shapes the same spell shews itself survi-
ving in the popular superstitions of today. In Norway :
Jesus reed t-ig til hede,

da reed ban bonder sit fole-been (hia foal's leg asunder).

Jesus Btigede af, og lagte det:

Jesus lagde marv i marv,

been i been, kjod i kjdd,

Jesus lagde derpaa et blad (thereon a leaf),

at det skulde blive i samme siad.

In Sweden, for a horse's ailment fl&g (our anflug, fit) :

Oden star pa berget (stands on the hill),
ban sporjer (speers, asks) efier sin fole,
floget bar hau ! Ail.

spotta (spit ) i din hand, och i haus mnn (bis mouth),
han skall fa bot (get boot) i samma stund (hour).

Whilst another begins thus :

Fiygge fragade fra :
huru skall man bota (heal)
den flaget lar (sheep) P

The two Swedish stanzas, evidently incomplete, are given by F.
Magnusen in the Dagen 1842 no. 119, from Mimer, Ups. 1839. p.
277. That similar snatches of song still live in the Netherlands,
I am informed in a letter from Halbertsma : ' Een mijner boeren
gaf my voorleden jaar een rijin, dat de toverdokters prevelden,
terwijl zij don verrukten voet van een pard (foot of a horse) mes



Digitized by Google



DISLOCATION-SPELL.



1233



de hand van boven naar beneden stroken, en alzo genazen.' I
wish he had sent me the rhyme itself.

What sounds more significant is a Scotch tradition I take out
of Chambers's Fireside stories, Edinb. 1842. p. 37 : ' When a
person has received a sprain, it is customary to apply to an
individual practised in casting the wresting thread. This is a
thread spun from black wool, on which are cast nine knots, and
tied round a sprained leg or arm. During the time the operator
is putting the thread round the affected limb, he says, but in such
a tone of voice as not to be heard by (lie bystanders, nor even by
the person operated upon :

The Lord rade, set joint to joint,

and the foal slade ; bone to bone,

he lighted, and sinew to sinew.

and he righted, Heal in the Holy Ghost's name! '

Here the spell serves for sprains even in the human body, though
it set out with the sliding of the foal ; and to the whispered
words is added a ligature of woollen thread in nine knots.

How exact the agreement, in these perfectly independent ver-
sions, of their ' ben zi b«ma, been i been, bone to bone/ their ' lid
zi giliden, kjbd i kjod, sinew to sinew ' ! Those who cannot
believe in the faithful preservation of what is entrusted to popular
memory, have here an example extending from the 10th cent,
to the 19th over Germany, Scotland and Scandinavia. It is
certain that the same or similar words have been superstitiously
repeated countless times in all the countries of Teutonic tongue.
The Cod. Vatic. 4395 has on fol. 83* the following charm : ' Gott
wurden iiii nagel (God had 4 nails) in sein hend und fuez ge-
slagen, da von er iiii wunden enphie, do er an dem heiligen chreuz
hieng (1. hie), die funft wunden im Longinus stach, er west
nicht waz er an ihm rach ... an dem dritten tag gepot (bade)
Got dem lichnam, der in der erden lag, fleisch zu fleisch, pluet
zu pluet, adern zu adern, pain zu pain, gelider zu gelidern, yslichs
(each) an sein stat. bei Demselbigen gepeut ich dir (bid I thee)
fleisch zu fleisch/ etc.

But what is more, a great deal farther back, among the very
oldest Romans, there lingered dislocation-spells full of unintellig-
ible words. The one partially quoted p. 224-5 from Cato may
as well be inserted in full, as it throws light on the nature of our



Digitized by Google



1234



SPELLS AND CHARMS



German charms. ' Luxum si quod est, hac cantione sanum fiet.
Harundinem prende tibi viridem pedes IV aut V* longam.
Medium diffinde, et duo homines teneant ad coxendices. Incipe
cantare "in alio. s. f. motas vaetas daries dardaries astataries
Dissunapiter," usque dum coeant. Ferrum insuper jactato. Ubi
coierint et altera alteram tetigerit, id manu prende, et dextra
sinistra praecide. Ad luxum aut ad fracturam alliga, sanum fiet,
et tamen quotidie cantato " in alio 8. f. vel luxato. Vel hoc
modo, huat hanat huat ista pista sista, domiabo damnaustra, et
luxato. Vel hoc modo, huat haut ista sis tar sis ardannabon
dunnaustra." 1 It is of this invocation that Pliny says at the end
of book 17: ' Carminis verba inserere non equidem serio ausim,
quanquam a Catone prodita, contra luxata membra, jungenda
arundinum fissurae.' The words do seem nonsense to us now,
and may also bo corrupt; but why should not they belong
originally to the Sabine or some neighbouring language of
ancient Italy, that we know very little of? The rhymes ista
pista sista and the alliteration ' domiabo damnaustra ' (the .
' dannabon dunnaustra 1 that follows is the same over again, and
ought to have an ' ista pista sista ' before it too) remind us of
the rhyming spell in Virgil's Eel. 8 : ' Liraus ut hie dureseit et
haec ut cera liquescit Uno eodemque igni, sic nostro Daphnis
amore.' Dissunapiter is the god invoked, like the Phol and
Wodan of our spells. Marcellus Empiricus, a physician of the
4th cent., has in his De Medicamentis a charm for pain of the
heart : ' In lamella stannea scribes et ad coll um suspendes haec,
antea vero etiam cane, Corcu ne mergito, cave corcu no mergito
cantorem, utos, utos, utos, praeparavi tibi vinum lene, libidinem,
discede a nonita, in nomine Dei Jacob, in nomine Dei Sebaoth ! '
(see Suppl.)

In the Cod. Vindob. theol. 259 Latin and German spells are
intermixed. • (De eo quo)d spurihalz dicimus. 1 si in dextero pede
contigerit, in sinistra aure sanguis minuatur; si in sinistro
pede, in dextera aure minuatur sanguis. Ad vermes occidendos.
Feruina (?) Dei gracia plena, tu habes triginta quinque indices et
triginta quinque medicinas. quando Dominus ascendit ad coelos
ascendit, memorare quod dixit. Ad apes conformandos. voa

1 MHO. spurhalz, Diut. 2, 140 ; conf. diu spurgalze, MsH. 3, 278 b (springhalt?).



Digitized by Google



HORSE-DOCTORING. SHErHERD'S PRAYER.



1235



estis ancille Domini (conf. pp. 579. 755), adjuro vos per nomen
Domini, ne fugiatis a filiis hominum. Ad pullos de nido. crescite
et multiplicamini et vivite et implete terrain. Contra sagittam
diaboli. palamiasit. palamiasit. calamia insiti per omne corpus
meum. per ista tria nomina, per Patrem et Filium et Filium
sanctum, aius aius aius, sanctus sanctus sanctus. in Dei nomine
cardia cardiani de necessu (recessu ?) propter ilium malannum
(p. 1160), quod do in inns papa ad imperatorem transmisit, quod
omnis homo super se portare debet, amen, tribus vicibus. De
hoc quod spurihalz dicunt. primum pater noster.

vise fl6*t aftar themo watare, verbrustun sina vetherun,
tho giheiida ina use Druhtin ; the selvo Druhtin
thie gehele that hors thera spurihelti !

Contra vermes :

gangut, nesso mid nigun nessiklinon, ut fana themo marge an that
ben, fan themo b6ne an that fl£sg, ut fan themo fle^sge an thia hud,
ut fan thera . . . strala ! Druhtin werthe s6. 1

The nesso and his nine young ones are the worms to be cast
out. ' Petrus, Michahel et Stephanus ambulabant per viam, sic
dixit Michahel : Stephani equus infusus, signet ilium Deus, signet

ilium Christus, et erbam comedat et aquam bibat.' Two of

these charms are about lame horses again, and one about a sick
horse (Ducango sub. v. infusio, infusus equus). Also the tran-
sitions from marrow to bone (or sinews), to flesh and hide,
resemble phrases in the sprain-spells (see Suppl.).

The oldest and most beautiful charms of all nations pass into
prayers, which were repeated during sacrifice; the simplest are
found in pastoral life. What a fresh innocence breathes in those
prayers to the Thunder-god (p. 176) ! When the Cheremisses
keep their grand feast of Shurem, and bring quiet offerings of
peace, at which no female creature must be seen (conf. p. 1152n.),
they speak a prayer, out of which I pick a few sentences : ' Who

1 A Cod. Tegerns. 524, 2 at Munich has a more complete version in OHG. :
uz, neiso mit niun nsttinclinon, ttz fonna marga in ded adra, vonna den
in daz fleisk, fonna demu fleiske in daz fel, fonna demo velle in diz tulli. ter
pater noster.' 8o nesso has it in OHG. too. Tulli, like strala, is an implement,
conf. MHG. tulle, Nib. 897, 3 and Haupt on Engelh. 1916. [Strala is arrow ;
tulle the hole in the arrow-shaft for inserting the head. The disease charmed into
your arrow, will pass on to your enemy (?)— Tbaks.]

VOL. 111. Z


Digitized by Google



1236



SFELLS AND CHARMS



to God hath sacrificed, to him God give health and wealth, bestow-
ing on the babes that shall be born store of money, bread, bees
and cattle. May he cause the bees to swarm this year and make
plenty of honey. When spring draws* nigh, 0 God, let the three
kinds of cattle set out on their three ways, defend them from deep
mire, from bears, wolves and thieves. As the hops are thick and
springy, so bless us with good hap and sound mind ! As the
light burneth bright, so live we our life! as the wax daily
addeth to itself, 1 so be our increase!' (from Aleks. Fuks 'O
Chuvashakh i Cheremisakh/ Kazan 1840, in Erman's Archiv
1841, 2nd no.).

' Dapem pro bubus piro florente facito. Dapem hoc modo fieri
oportet. Jovi dapali culignam vini quantum vis polluceto. Eo
die feriae bubus et bubulcis, et qui dapem facient. Cum
pollucere oportebit, sic facias: Jupiter dapalis, quod tibi fieri
oportet, in domo familia mea culignam vini dapi, ejus rei ergo
macte hac illace dape pollucenda esto ! macte vino inferio esto !
Vesiae, si voles, dato. Daps Jovi assaria pecuina, urna vini Jovi
caste. Profanato sine contagione, postea dape facta serito
milium, panicum, alium, lentim* (Cato de re rust. 182).

Along with this, take (from Cod. Exon. 5214) an AS. hot, i.e.
puoza (bettering) of barren land blasted by magic. ' Her is seo
bot, hu bu meaht J>ine ceceras betan, gif hi nellaS wel weaxan, o$5e
|>8Br hwilc ungedele Jnng onged6n bi$, on dr£ oiSSe on lyblace.

1 Genim bonne (take then) on niht, cer hit dagige, feower tyrf
on feower healfa j>ses landes, and gemearca hu hi aer st6don.
nim bonne ele and hunig and beorman, and aalces feos meolc (each
cattle's milk) ]>e on baam lande si, and aslces treowcynnes (tree-
kiud) dsel, |>e on ba3m lande si geweaxen, butan heardan bedman,
aud aelcre namcuSre wyrte dffil, butan glappan anon; and do
bonne halig waster baeron, and dr£pe bonne briwa (thrice) on bone
staSol fara turfa, and cwefte bonne bas word : Crescite, weaxe,
et multiplicamini, and gemaonigfealde, et replete, and gefylle,
terram, fas eorSan, in nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus sancti

1 Quidquid tangebam crescebat tanquam favus, Petron. cap. 43. 79 ; alluding to
the steady growth of the honeycomb iu the hive. When the Servian badniak burns
at Yule, the invited polaznik steps up to the log, and strikes it with a shovel,
making the sparks fly, and saying : ' As many sheep, as many goats, as many swine,
as many oxen, as many god-sends and blessings, at here jiy »park* I ' Vuk's Monte-
negro p. 106.



Digitized by Google



BLESSING THE CORNFIELD. 1237

bonedicti, and Pater noster swa oft swa \>set o$er. And bere
si$$an )?a turf td cyrcean, aud messepreost asinge feower messan
ofer J?am turfon, and wende man poet grene to fiam weofode (altar),
and si$5an gebringe man j?a turf, peer hi cer wceron, cer sunnan
setlgange, and hrobbe him geworht of cwicbedme feower Cristes
maelo, and awrito on aslcon ende Mattheus and Marcus, Lucas
and Johannes, lege )>8et Cristes mael on ]?one pyt neoSeweardne,
cwe$e )>onne : Crux Mattheus, crux Marcus, crux Lucas, crux!
Johannes, nim fonne j>a turf and sette J>aer ufon on, and cwe$e>
nigon sifton (9 times) \>fcs word : Crescite, and swa oft Pater
noster. and wende )?e )>onne eastweard, and onlut (bow) nigon
srSon e&dmodlice (humbly), and cweft J?onne }>as word :

Eastweard ic stande, arena (favours) ic me bidde,

bidde ic f one maeran Dryhten, b. i. j>. miclan Dryhten,

bidde ic J>one haligan heofonrices Weard.

eorffan ic bidde and upheofon,

and ]?a softan sancta Marian,

and heofenes meaht and heahreced,

]>&t ic m6te pis gealdor mid gife Dryhtnes

toSuni ont^nan jmrh trumme ge)>anc,

aweccan jnls waBStmas (fruits) us to woruldnytte (our U8e),

gefyllan ]?as foldan (fields) mid fseste geleafan,

wlitigian J?as wangturf, swa se witega cwasfl,

ps&t se (he) haefde are (honour) on eorSrice se ]>e (who) a3lmyssan

daelde ddmlice Dryhtnes J?ances (for the sake).

Wende )?e )>onne ]?riwa sun-ganges. dstrecce pe fonne on andlang,
and arim \>&r tetanias, and cwe$ j?onne, Sanctus sanctus sanctus,
o3 ende. sing fonne Benedicite dpenedon (outstretched) carmon,
and Magnificat and Pater noster III, and bebeod hit Criste and
sancta Marian and faere halgan r6de t6 lofe and t6 weorSinga
(to the praise and glory of Christ, etc.), and ]>am to are (to the
benefit of him) [>e Jwt land age, and eallon J>Am J>e him under-
|>eodde (subject) sint. ponne (when) \>sat eall si gedon, )>onue
nime man uncu& seed sat celmesmannum, and sello him twa swyle
swylce man cot him nime, and gegaderie ealle his sulhgeteogo
(plough-tackle) to giedere. borige \>onne on )>am beame stor
and finol and gehalgode sdpan and gehdlgod seult. nim |>oiine



Digitized by Google



1238



SPELLS AND CHARMS



brat saed, sete on baos sulhes bodig. cweS bonne :
Erce, eorSan modor, 1

geunne be se alwealda ece Dryhten (God grant thee)

aecera weaxendra and wriSendra,

eacniendra and elniendra ;

sceaf taece 2 se scira (reaper) waestma,

and )>a3re bradan bere wasstma (barley's frnit),

and bare hwitan hwa3te waestma,

and ealra eorban w test ma.

geunne him ece Dryhten

and his halige be on heofonum sint,

baet his yr$ si gefrrSod (spared) wr$ ealra feonda gehwaene,
and heo si geborgen (protected) wrS ealra bealwa gehwylc,
b&ra lyblaca geond land sawen.

nu bidde ic bone Wealdend, se be ba3 weoruld gesceop,
bast ne si nan td baes cwidol wif, ne t6 baes craeftig man,
bast awendan ne maoge word bus gecweSene.

bonne man |n\ sulhforiT drife and ba forman furh onsceote (cleaves
the first furrow), cwe$ bonne :

hal wes bu folde, fira modor !

beo bu growende on Godes faeSme (bosom, lap),

fodre gefylled firum t6 ny tte (for use to men) !

nim bonne celces cynnes melo, and dbace man inneweardre handa
bradne hldf, and gecned hire mid meolce and mid halig wrotere,
and teege wider pa forman furh. ewe 5 bonne :

ful aeeer fddres fira-cynne (for mankind)
beorht blowende, bu gebletsod weor3
bass haligan naman, be fas heofon gesce6p
and bas eorban be we on lifia^S.

se God be bas grundas geweorhte geunne us growende gife,
beat us coma gehwylc cume to ny tte !

cwe-5 bonne briwa Crescite in nomine Patris benedicti amen, and
Pater noster briwa.

This notable document, notwithstanding that christian cere-

1 The explanation of this line attempted on p. 253 remains a bold gness.
Another AS. gealdor, against adder's bite, begins: 1 aerce aercre srnezn nadre
ceround bel amem intern,' etc.

3 MS. sceafitahen. I take it as ' manipulum capiat.'



Digitized by Google



BLESSING THE CORNFIELD. PLOUGH-CAKE. 1239

monies have crept into it, seems to reach far back to the early
times of heathen sacrifices and husbandry. As the daps was
spread and the winebowl emptied to Jove, after which the millet,
panic, leek and lentils might be sown, so ploughing is here
preceded by sacrificial rites. Sods are cut out from the four cor-
ners of the field, oil, honey and barm, milk of each sort of cattle,
some of every kind of tree (except hard wood, i.e. oak and beech,
RA. 506), and of all name-known herbs (save burs) are laid on
the sods, and holy water sprinkled ; then the ' four turfs 1 are
carried into church, the green side being turned to the altar,
four masses are said over them, and before sunset they are
taken back to their places in the field. And now the spells
are spoken; unknown seed is bought of beggar- men (conf. p.
1138), and placed on the plough, another spell is recited, and
the first furrow ploughed with a • Hail Earth, mother of men/
etc. Then meal of every kind is taken, a large loaf kneaded
with milk is baked and laid under the first furrow, and one more
spell is spoken. We know the Romans offered meal-cakes and
fruit in their corn-fields; but it seems to me that our own
ordinances (weisthiimer) have unconsciously preserved vestiges
of the heathen rite : ' when the plower cometh to an end of the
furrow, there shall he find a pot of honey, and at the other end a
pot of milk, wherewith to refresh him lest he faint' (Weisth. 2,
547, ' melts ' here must be for ' milch/ it cannot be meal or malt).
Further : ' at the plowing shall be brought a loaf so great that
one may stick it on the axle of the plow-wheel, and therewith
plow a furrow ; if the loaf do break when the furrow is done,
and the plower have not another wheel ready to put in its place,
then shall he smart (pay a fine) ; if the bread break ere the fur-
row be finished, let him fare homeunfined' (2, 356). Sometimes
the regulation runs thus : ' if the plower break a wheel, he shall
for penance provide a loaf as large round as the plow-wheel, and
baleen of every grain that the plow doth win ; he shall so softly
drive the plow, that & finch can feed her young on the wheel' (2,
179. 180), or, as expressed in 2, 547, 'that, if a grain of oat fall
into the wheel, the fowls of the air shall pick it up/ In 2, 120
merely the size of the loaf is determined by that of the plow-
wheel ; but at 2, 128 it says again: 'of the grain that the farm
beareth and the mill breaketh, shall be baken a cake as great as



Digitized by Google



1240 SPELLS AND CHARMS.

the plow-wheel, and the plower therewith plow : if the wheel
break ere he come to the end, he is finable, if it break not, yet
is he finable notwithstanding.' The ' cake of all grain tfuit the
mill grinds' occurs again at 2, 147; and the 1 rye-loaf to be put
in place of a plow-wheel that comes off ' at 2, 262. 412. 587.
What is the drift of these curious regulations ? Was ever
ploughman fed on milk and honey ? were loaves and cakes ever
stack on the axle to cut the first farrow ? They are surely the
ancient sacrificial loaves, which with milk and honey poured over
them were laid in the furrow (ad piamentum, p. 1196), and dis-
tributed to the ploughmen, which even the birds were allowed to
peck at ; their being made of all sorts of grain, so as to embrace
the entire produce of the field, as the br&de hlfif in the AS. spell
is baked of each kind of meal, goes far to decide.

Verelius in his Notes to the Hervararsaga p. 139 tells us, that
the Swedish peasants, after baking the jula-galt (Yule-boar p. 51),
dry it, and keep it till spring ; then they grate a part of it in
with the seed-corn and give it to the plough- horses, and another
part to the men that hold the plough tail : * Verrem fictum siccant,
et ad veris tempus, cum semina sulcis sunt credenda, servant.
Turn partem ejus comminutam in vas vel in corbem, ex quo
semina sunt dispergenda, immittunt, hordeoque permixtam eqnis
aratoribus, alteram servis stivam tenentibus comedendam re-
lin quant, spe forte uberioris messis percipiendae.' Here then
is another sacrificial cake, which was mixt with the seed, and
tasted by the ploughing men and animals ; who knows but that
burning the devil, and dividing and scattering his ashes over the
cornfields, a deed the witches were accused of (p. 1073), may
have arisen out of their baking a sacrificial cake in the shape of
an idol ? A cake was also baked at the Bealtine, and distributed
among the multitude, p. 613.

The culture of flax is sure not to have been deficient in
speeches and ceremonies of blessing : to this day the girls sing
all kinds of songs over this work. In some places, at sowing
time, the mistress of the house used to get on the table and
dance, then jump off backwards : the higher she made this leap,
the higher the flax would grow (conf. Sup. I, 519). Lasicz p. 50
says of the Samogits : g Tertio post ilgas die deum Waizganthos
colunt virgines, ut ejus beneficio tam lini quam cannabis habeant



Digitized by LiOOQle



BLESSING THE FLAX. WOLF, FOX.



1241



copiam. Ubi altissima illarum, impleto placentulis quas sikies
vocant sina, et stans pede uno in sedili manaque sinistra sursuin
elata libram prolixum tiliae vel ulmo detractum, dextera vero
craterera cerevisiae haec loquens tenet: Waizganthe, prodnc
nobis tarn altam linum quam ego nunc alta sum, neve nos nudos
incedere perinittas ! Post haec craterem exhaurit, impletumque
rursus deo in terram effundit, et placentas e sinu ejicit, a deastris,
si qui sint Waizgantho, comedendas. Si haec peragens firma
perstet, bonnm lini proventum anno sequenti faturnm in animum
inducit ; si lapsa pede altero nitatur, dnbitat de futura copia,
fidemqoe effectus sequitur.' In the Wetterau, at the sowing of
this plant, the dame has to jump up on the fireplace, and cry :
'Heads as big as mine, leaves like my apron, and stalks like my
legs ! ' and then the plant will turn out well (see Suppl.).

How the Romans kept the wolf out of their fields, we are in-
formed by Pliny 28, 20 [81] : 'Lupos in agrura non accedere, si
capti unius pedibus infractis cultroque adacto paulatira sanguis
circa fines agri spargatur, atque ipse defodiatur in eo loco ex quo
coeperit trahi ; aut si vomeremj quo primus sulcus eo anno in
agro ductus sit, excussum aratro, /oc>« larium quo familia con-
venit absumat ; ac lupum nulli animali nociturum in eo agro,
quamdiu id fiat.'

A herdsman* s charm from a MS. of the 15th cent, shews
marks of a far remoter origin : ' ich treip heutaus in unser lieben
Frauen haus, in Abrahams garten (conf. p. 1220), der lieber herr
sant Mertein, der sol heut meines (vihes) pflegen und warten,
und der lieber herr sant Wolfgang ) der lieb herr sant Peter, der
hat den himelischen slussel, die versperrent dem wolf und der
vohin irn drussel, dass si weder plut lassen noch bein 6chroten.
Des helf mir der man, der chain ubel nie hat getan (i.e. Christ,
conf. 'sinless man/ p. 24, and the contrast p. 988), und die
heiligen Vwunden behiiten mein vieh vor alien holzhunden.V
Pater et V Ave Maria.' 1

Here the rhymes peep out fitfully. The tvoud-hounds are

1 Today my herd I drove Into Our Lady's grove, Into Abraham's garden ; Be
pood Bt. Martin This day my cattle's warden, May good St. Wolfgang, good St.
Peter (whose key can heav'n unlock). Throat of wolf and vixen block, Blood from
shedding, bone from crunching 1 Help me the holy one, Who ill hath never done,
And his V holy wounds Keep my herd from all wood-hounds !



Digitized by LiOOQle



1242



SPELLS AND CHAEMS.



Wuotan's forest-hounds (p. 147), the AS. ' holtes gehl&San/
silvae latroncs, El. 223, the holzinge (Reinh. p. lv) ; and that the
fox named with the wolf should be vohe fern., is in harmony with
Goth, fauhd, OHG. foh&. The Wolfgang who is to fend the
flock, is so named either because he gangs against the wolf, or
because the wolf met the hero at a lucky moment, p. 1140n.

As I have not met with a German bee-spell, I will give a Latin
one in Baluze's Capitul. 2, 663 taken from a St Gall MS. : ' Ad
revocandum examen apum dispersum : adjuro te, mater aviorum,
per Deum regem coelorum, et per ilium redemptorem Filium
Dei te adjuro, ut non te in altum levare nec longe volare, sed
quam plus cito potes ad arborem venire (velis) ; ibi te alloces
cum omni tuo genere vel cum socia tua, ibi habeo bona vasa
parata, ut vos ibi in Dei nomine laboretis, etc.' Maler aviorum
(for apum) is the AS. beomodor (p. 697) ; the steadily waxing
comb (p. 1236n.) was beobredd, Cod. Exon. 425, 20,MHG. hiebrot
(Gramm. 3, 463), but also rdz and wdbe (from weaving, working,
p. 697) ; the hive biehar (vas, Goth, kasi), the fly-hole OHG.
flougar (Graff 3, 163). Our forefathers had at their service
many more terms in apiculture than we, and prettier (see Suppl.)

As runes were written on bast (limrunar a berki rista ok a
baSrai viSar, Sa3m. 1 95* ; cortex carminibus adnotatus, Saxo
Gram. 44), the olden time may have had some runes for detaching
the bast from the wood. Incantations have power to release the
babe from ante-natal durance, the hard rind from the bast.
Among shepherd lads in almost every part of Germany are pre-
served rhymes, in singing which they keep time by tapping a
piece of willow on their knee with a knife-handle, till they can
slip it off unbroken to make a whistle of The simplest though
not oldest version is : ' Fabian, Sebastian, lat mi de widen-flbt
afganl' (Voss on Idyl 6, 179) or in Ditmarsen : 'Fabian,
Sebastian, lat don saft ut holt gan ! ' It is believed that on the
day of these two saints (Jan. 20) the sap enters the willow.
In some places both the names are wanting, but the spell is spun
out longer : ' sa sa pipe (prob. for sap-pipe), up'm molen-dike
(mill-dam) dar sit en man, de heet Johan, do hardre rode stoveln
(3 red shoes) an, de ene horde (belonged) mi to, de anner horde
di to, do drudde hordo'in papen to, do kam de ole hesse (old
witch) mit en blanken meste (knife), sneet den kiiken den kop



Digitized by GoogLi



BEE-SPELL. WHISTLE-MAKING. STITCH. 1243



af, sineet'en in busch, plumps sii de busch, i« de sapipe noch
nicht good?' Halbertsma says in the Overyssel Almanack for
1836 : ' de twijg riip en gesneden zijnde, slaan (beat) de kinderen
met bet hecht (haft) van een mesje op een der groene rijsjes, tot
dat de bast loslaat, dien zij er dan heel aftrekken (pulled off
whole) en als een pijp gebruiken om op te fluiten of er erwten
door te blazen. Zoo lang het kind met zijn mesje op den bast
tikte, plag het (he used) oudtijds de volgende regelen te zingen :
Lange lange pipe, wenneer bistou ripe ? Te Meye, te Meye, as
de veugeltjes eyer lekt. 'T ketjen op den dyk zat, sute melk
met brokken (crumbs) at. Doe kwam de voele hesse al met de
scharpe messe, wold et ketjen et oor (ear) afsnien; it ketjen
ging ant lopen to hope, to hope ! de voele hesse ging lopen.
Heel of, half of, houwe dijn don kop af, so dood as een piere,
kump siin levendage net weer hiere/ Firmenich gives the form
as used in the Neumark, p. 121 : ' sipp sapp seepe, moak mi 'ne
Hots! — Wovon denn ?— Von meioroan (marjoram), von thymegoan,
det se balle (soon) mag afgoahn.' And in Prieguitz, p. 131 :
' sibbe sibbe sibbe sdubken, loat mi det kteine fieutken goot afgoahn,

goot afgoahn, bes up (up to) den letzten knoakenl' We can

see how Sebastian got in, from f sap«pipe, sibbe sabbe,' perhaps
also ' bast.' In the Bohmerwald the willow or alder twig is thus
conjured (Jos. Hank p. 168) : ' pfofferl gei owa, sist schloga do owa ;
lei's rintl o drahdo eiz, heargotl pfeia ! 1 little pipe, come off, else
I knock thee off ; dear little rind, do draw thee now, my lord god
pipe! Woycicki kl. 1, 92. 151 tells us, that to get a marvellous
pipe (fuyarka) that can make everybody dance, one must find
in the forest's gloom the green willow that never heard the rush
of water nor the crow of cock : 9 co by nigdy nie styszaia szuma
wody, ni piania koguta.' This detail, expressly picked up among
the peasantry on the Pruth and Dniester, strangely coincides
with Pliny's statement 16, 37 [71] : 'ex qua (sambuco) magis
canoram buccinam tubamque credit pastor ibi caesa, ubi gallorum
cantum frutex Me non exaudiat.' Of peeling the willow there
is nothing said (see Suppl.).

An old AS. spell for feerstice, sudden stitch in the side, was
communicated to me by Price from the Harley MS. no. 585 fol.
186. First, three herbs are to be boiled in butter, feverfew
(febrifugia = febrem fugans, Capit. de villis, Pertz 3, 186), red



Digitized by LiOOQle



1244



SPELLS AND CHARMS



nettle that grows through a fence (conf. p. 1200, through a sieve),
and waybread, OHG. wegabreita, plantago : 'Wr5 fserstice fefer-
fuge, and seo redde netele be Jmrh a3rn 1 inwyrS, and wegbrcede,
wylle in buteran.

Hlfide wffron h!, la hlude, \>k hi ofer bone hhew ridon,
wreron Anmftde, ba hi ofer land ridon.
scyld bu be, nu b(l bisne nffi genesan mfito.

at, lytel Bpere, gif her inne sie 1
8t6d (I stood) under linde, under leohtum vide,
t aer l-fi mihtigan tri/hyra mregen beraBddon (mustered),
and hi gylUade gdras (whizzing lances) sendon.
ic him oCerne eft wille sendan (I'll send them back another)
fleogende flan forane t6 geanes.

at, lytel spere, gif hit her inne Bie !
saet 8mi«, sl6h seax lytel (hammered little knife)
Iserna wund swifte.

(it, lytel spere, gif her inne sie !
Bex smitfas saton, wajlspera worhton,
Gtspere, nies (was not) innapere.
gif her inne aie Isernes d«l (any iron),
hagtesmn geweorc (witch's work), hit sceal gemyltan (melt),
gif hi waere on fell scoten, oftSe wcere on fl<esc scoten,

ofifc"e waore on bl6d scoten

o*5e wmre on li* Bcoten, metre ne b1 bin llf atased,
gif hit waere eta getcot, o$$e hit wsjre ylfa getcot,
o$$e hit waere hagtettan getcot, nu ic wille }>i n helpan :
bis be to bote eta getcotet, bis be t'> bote ylfa getcotet,
bis be to bote htegUttan getcotet. ic bin wille helpan.

fleo boor on fyrgen (flee to the desert) .... 1
heafde hal westu, helpe bin Drjhten !
nim bonne b*t seax, ad& on waetan.'

A few gaps give trouble. The whole is based on the assump-
tion that the stitch is caused by the shots of spirits. Loud over
land and rock have ridden mighty women, haagtessan (p. 1040),
and have sent whizzing darts, afterwards more narrowly defined
as 'esa, ylfa and hsegtessan gescot/ shot of ases (p. 25), of elves
(p. 443) and of witches (though the gen. sing, is used, not pi.
hajgtessena) . The exorcist, in relating the transaction, calls to
the patient to shield himself, that he may get over the attack, 2
and every now and then puts in the refrain ' Out, little spear,
if herein thou be ! ' He goes on to tell how he stood under

1 • Should be httrn, conf. h«rnfl&ta, Cod. Exon. 182, 9.*— Suppl.

3 ' bisne ntS geneean.' In AS. this verb takes the Arc. , not the Gen. as in
OHO : ba siecce genaes, Beow. 8950. ni5a gehwane genesen hsefde 4789. fela io
guSraosa gonads 4848. se b& gfl«e genajs, Caedm. 121, 33.



Digitized by Google



STITCH IN THE SIDE. ELF-BURN. 1245

shelter when those women let fly their darts, and means to send
them a counter-shot, a knife, whose smiting by a smith is re-
ported, as also that of war-spears by six smiths. Every bit of
the witches' iron shall melt, wherever it may have been shot,
into skin, flesh, blood or limb ; help is nigh. Lastly : fleo thou
(enchantress) to the wilderness ! be thou (patient) well in thy
head, Lord help thee ! At the conclusion of the spell the knife
(that forged by the smith ?) is to be dipt in water. Apparently
after • scoten ' there ought to be ' o"55e weere on ban scoten ' ;
and perhaps after ' fyrgen ' some such words as 1 seo |>one flan
scedt (or, sende) ' (see Suppl.).

For other spells hitherto unprinted I have to thank Mr.
Kemble. ' Cwift ymbe, nim eorffan, oferweorp raid J?inre swtSran
handa under ]>inum swiftran f6t, and cwet :

fo ic under fi&t, funde ic hit.

hwa3t, eor<Te mag wiff ealra wihta gehivylce,

and wi5 andan, and wi$ aeminde,

and wrS ]?a micelan mannes tungan.

and wr3 on forweorp ofer greot )>onne his wirman, and cwe$ :

sitte ge, etc.' (here come the verses given at p. 431).

For the water-elf sickness : 1 gif mon br5 on water alf-ddle,
J>onne beo$ him ]>a hand-naeglas wonne, and )>k eagan tearige,
and wile locian nrSer. do him )>is t& laBcedome: eoforj>rote,
cassuc, eowberge, elehtre, eolone, mersc-meal wan-crop, fenminte,
dile, lilie, attorl&Se, polleie, marrubie, docce, ellen, felterre,
werm6d, strawbergean leaf, consolde. ofgeot mid ealaft, d6 halig
waeter to, sing fis gealdor ofer j?riwa :

ic benne awrdS betest beado-wraeSa,

swa benne ne burnon ne burston,

ne fundian ne feologan ne hoppettan,

ne wund waxian, ne dolh diopian,

ac him self healde halewsege,

ne ace J>e )>on ma, ]>e eorffan on eare ace (age ?) .

sing )>is manegum sftSum. eorffe )>e onbere mid eallum hire (i.e.
Earth's) mihtum and mageniim. J?as gealdor mon maag singan
on wunde.'

The earth, caught up in the right hand from under the right



Digitized by Google



1246



SPELLS AND CHARMS.



foot, heals and shelters ; ' might and main* belong to the earth.
ttdlewccge answers to our heilawac, p. 585.

About the elvish mare and nightmare, what was said on p. 464-5
is by no means all : they ride not only men but horses, whose
manes in the morning are found dripping with sweat and tangled,
conf. Svantevit's horse p. 662. Cannegieter in Epistola de ara
ad Noviomagum reperta p. 25 says: ' Abigunt eas nympha*
(matres deas, mairas) hodio rustici osse capitis equini tectis injecto,
cujusmodi ossa per has terras in rusticorum villis crebra est
animadvertere (conf. p. 660). Nocte autem ad concubia equi-
tare creduntur, et equos fatigare ad longinqua itinera. Illud
namque datum deabus illis magisque, si rusticorum fabuiis cre-
dimus, ut mamntes loca peregrina adeant, in equis matwntibus,
qui tamen viae labores sudore testantur. Naper confabulatus
mecum villicus aegerrime ferebat equos suos proxima nocte
exagitatos, defluente per corpora sudore; causam cum quaere-
rem, respondit i rat us, mairam nocturnam equitasse.' To this
maira nocturna, be it akin to matrona (p. 417) or even to uoTpa,
one might be tempted to trace our nachtmar, nightmare r had we
not a better derivation at hand. To the OHG. marah (equus),
AS. mear, ON. marr, seems to correspond the AS. fem. meare
(surely a better spelling than msere), ON. mara. True, the
OHG. meriha means only equa, not ephialtes, and we now dis-
tinguish mtihre from mahr ; on the other hand, in ON. it is to
the fem. mara that the demonic sense attaches, and so early as in
the Yngl. saga cap. 16 king Vanlandi is trodden to death in his
sleep by a mara : ' mara tra$ hann ' ; when his people rush to
his aid, ' traft hun f6tleggina/ and at last * kafdi hun hofuSit, sv&
at ]>ar do" hann.' The image then seems to waver between the
ridden beast and the riding trampling one, just as the devil
sometimes rides men, sometimes as a horse takes them on his
back. Like the mara f we saw p. 278 that the Stempe treads.
Wolf (nos. 249 — 254) gives some good mare-stories from the
Netherlands ; I lay special stress on a spell-song he has against
the sprite, p. 689 :

0 maer, gy lelyk dier (ye loathly beast),
komt toch dezen nacht niet w6er (again) !
alle waters zult gy waeyen (shall ye wade),



Digitized by Google



NIGHTMARE. BLOOD-STANCHING.



1247



alle boomen zult gy blaeyen (disleaf),

alle spieren gerst (spikes of barley) zult gy tellen,

komb my toch dezen nacht niet kwellen !

With this take a Henneberg spell in Haupt's Zeitschr. 3, 300 :

Das wallala alle berge durchtra (-trab, trot),
alle wasser durchbat (-bade, bathe),
alle bletlich ablat,

onnerdesse word* 8 tak (until it be day) !

Both refer to the spirit's nightly jaunt, it trots over all the hills,
wades (or bathes) through the waters, strips the trees, counts the
corn-stalks, until the break of day ; then on the maerentakken
(mistletoes ?) the mare is said to rest. The name ■ wallala 1 may
come from wallen, wadeln, or be a cry of wail (Gramm. 3, 293),
for the night-spirits (Sup. I, 878) appear as wailing- mothers

(p. 432-3, and Schm. 4, 54). A third spell I take from

Schreiber's Tagb. 1839. p. 321 : ' Drude's-head, I forbid thee my
house and yard, I forbid thee my bedstead, that not over me
thou trostest (trottest ? tread est ?) ; trost to some other house,
till over all hills and waters thou climbest, and all the hedge-
sticks ehlest (zehlest, tellest ?) ! Then comes dear day into my
house again.' Drute is the same thing as mahre, as drutenzopf
(plica) is also called marenzopf, alpzopf, and druteufuss maeren-
voet. I think the most important point is, that the sprite is shy
of daylight, and the dawn scares it away (p. 466 n.) ; the Alvis-
mal closes exactly like these spells: 1 nu sctnn sunna i sali* ;
conf. ' dagr er nu/ Saom. 145 b . I hope the spell may yet turn
up in other places, and in a purer form.

Healing-spells are fond of beginning with something in the
narrative way, somo transaction from which the remedy derives
its force ; and it is here especially that we find heathen beings
left high and dry. When a spell opens with ' Sprach jungfrau
Hille, blut stand stille I ' who can fail at once to recognise the
old valkyr Hilda, her that can make blood flow and stanch it
again? And even when the opening words are 'Mary fared
afield' or 'Christ he crossed the land'; when a charm against
finger-worm says ' Ood the Father afield did ride, stoutly the hoe

1 iraoiSg alfia kcXcuvov textQop, Od. 19, 457.



Digitized by LiOOQle



1243



SPELLS AND CHARMS.



he plied, stubbed up the worms outright, one was black, another'
white, the third worm it was red; here lie the worms all dead';
it is clear that such formulas could not have originated in.
christian times, but might well survive among the people, who
had merely to insert new sacred names. The heathen incident^
that would account for the obscure or senseless words, is mostly*
hidden from us. On p. 1232-3 'Jesus' and 'the Lord' have taken
the place of Wuotan. ' Christus in petra sedebat, et virgam,
manu tenebat/ Mone's Anz. 7, 609; or again, 'Job went over)
land, had his staff in hand.' When ' Jesus and Peter wandering
go from country to country to and fro/ it is evidently the same
widely diffused notion as at p. 337 ; but it is not always so easy
to hit upon the heathen names that lie at the bottom. A
favourite way is to start with thi ee personages : as the idisi fall
into three sets (p. 1231), so the three Marys look out (p. 416),
like three norns or three fays. 'Three brothers went afield'
(Keisersb. ameis 50*; ' three blessed bp./ Spell XXXI.). ' Three
vinjins come down from heaven to earth, the one Blut-giilpe, the
next Blut-slulpe, the third Blut-stehe-still,' Mark, forsch. 1, 262 ;
the last is the maid Hilda named alone in the other spell. I will
only add from Roth, de nominibus vet. Gennanorum medic,
Helmst. 1735. p. 139 : ' Juvat subnectere incantationis formulam,
qua in Marchia Brandenb. atque adjacentibns regionibus in
ophthalmia curanda uti solent anus decrepitae, insanos ritus
deperientes, quam quidem factis variis gesticulationibus ac digitis
ante dolentes oculos ter decussatim motis, rauco sumrramine
semel atque iterum emutire consuescunt, ita autem habent:
Ibant aliquando tres puellae in via virente, prima noverat reme-
dium aliquod contra suffusionem oculorum, altera noverat reme-
dium aliquod contra albuginem, et tertia profecto contra inflam-
mationem, eaeque sanabant una ratione omnia, in nomine Patris,
Filii et Spiritus sancti, Amen' (see Suppl.).

Against particular diseases the remedies are pitted as though
in mortal strife: 'de ros un de wied, de stan in strid, de ros
verswann, de wied gewann ' ; or, ' de fiecht (scrofula) un de wied,
de krakeelten sik, de wied de gewiinn, un de fiecht verswiinn/
Meckl. jahrb. 5, 102-3; or again, 'de flockasch (flugasche) un de
flechte, de flogen woi over dat wilde meer ; de flockasch de kara
wedder, de flechte nimmermehr/ Sup. I, 811 (see Suppl.).



Digitized by Google



BLOOD-STANCHING. FORMS OF SPELL. 1249

Spells for the wishing-rod, when it is to strike treasure or a
vein of metal, see p. 975. A formula used in looking for a clay-
pit, in whose earth are to be wrapt up the written slips of paper
which shall clear up a doubtful matter, in Haupt's Zeitschr. 3,
190.

In addresses to animals whose encounter is prophetic, whose
ways aro mysterious, we may fairly recognise antique spells,
though their language has undergone a great deal of distortion ;
such are the rhymes to the swan, p. 429, the stork 672, cuckoo
676, Martin's bird 1130, Mary's chafer 695, and others, whose
essential identity among the most various brauches of our race
is an interesting feature.

In Scandinavia, where the reign of heathenism lasted longest,
ought to be found the greatest number of such spells, either in
writing or in the mouths of the people ; and from them we could
gather most distinctly the connexion, both of the words and
of their import, with heathen notions. The spell by which Grua
was about to disengage the stone from Thor's head, p. 375, is
not preserved in the Edda, but spells quite similar may have
been still muttered over men and beasts in recent times. Much
to be desired is the speedy publication of a collection set on foot
by L. F. Raaf in Sweden, and containing over 2000 articles,
of which a preliminary notice appeared in the monthly Mimer
(Ups. 1838 — 40) pp. 271 — 7. Among these spells now reduced
to writing, isolated runes can here and there be recognised even
yet, and in some cases their use is enjoined ; thus, on the mode
of compelling a thief to restoro stolen goods on pain of losing his
eye, we find the following prescription : Go at sunset on Sunday
evening to a place that lies high, bearing a bucketful of water,
cut the rune S, and charge the thief within a certain time to
bring back what he has stolen, or lose his right eye. The rune
S apparently refers to Sunday and sunset, perhaps to syn (sight,
eye) ; does it also in connexion with the water-vessel point to the
word sa (situla) ? Most likely the water was poured out, and
ran down the hill (see Suppl.).

finis.



Digitized by Google



INDEX.



Roman figures refer to the Author's Preface.



Aaskereia 946.

abant, a>fen, aptan (evening) 748.
abcut, abgott (false god) 14. 106.
Abel 1LLL

Abent-rot 232 n. 239. 748.
abls (hell) 805.

Abraham, abraherasoh 1220. \'2l\.
abrenuntiatio 161. 203. 1005 n.
Abundia 286. 889. 1056.
abvssus (hell) «05. Imt2.
Adam 565. 575.
Ado u is 949 n.
Adriani moles 1183 n.
.Egel, Eigill 376. 380-2.
«lf-adl (elf-bum) 1155. U UL
Aeolus 631-4. 640.
aer-dtpg (dawn) 747.
Aesculapius Ilia. 121:}.
.Esir (gods) 815. fiQg.
iEthel-stan 119. 394.
Affen-berg 681.
age, generation 792-3.
Agemund 511. 913 n.
a-genggun (lamiae) 500 n.
ager-uld (field wool) 871.
ages of the world, four 575.
a -get roc (trickery) 464.
a-gui-lan-neuf 765. 1206.
A • • :•. us, Ahriman 984 n. 1011.
Ahuro-mazdao, Ormuzd 984 n.
aibr (gift) 40.
aiyit (aegis) 238.

"Ai«oi Kwi-n (Pluto's helmet) 463.
Ala a. aiza, eh re? 414.
Ajo 362.

aKivdKTfi (sword) 204.
Akka xxxi.

alah, alhs (temple) 66-7. 106.
alba (elf, etc.) 462. 1073.
Alb-donar 186.
alb-dono, eelf-)>one, alp-ranke (bitter-
sweet ?) 448. 1216,
Albe-rlch, .Elf-ric 453.
alb-leich (elf-lay) 470. 107.
alb-schoss (elf-shot) 187. 460.
Albunea 496 n.
Alcis 66. 71. 366.
alder, erle 653 [Erl-kdnig] .
alectorius (caponstone) 1219.

VOL. m. 1



Alf-heimr 444.
Al-fo«r 22.
alfr, elf 442.
Alf-rikr 488.

Aliruna xi. 95. 404. 1225.

'AWowpteaWos 207 «.

alo-waldo, al-wealda (almighty) 21.

alp, elf 442. 463.

Alp-drftd, JBlf-toj* 423.

Alp-ris 465.

alp-ruthe, elf-rod 183-7.
Alps 444.

alpt, telfet (swan) 429. 444 ».
alptar-hamr (swan-garb) 427.
Alraun, Alrune 518ft. 1202 ri.
alraun (mandrake) 1202-4.
Al-sviSr 656.
Altanus 162 n.
Al-)>iofr 465.
altissimus 21.
altvil (scrat) 479 w.
al-vitr (all-witting) 425.
Alx xi. 66. 366.
Amala 372.
Amaltheia 872.
Amazons 418.
amber 121Sm.
ambro (obor?) 527 m.
ambrosia, amrita 317.
Amphion 908.

Ana s6tt (second childhood) 1153.

Anar, Onar 735.

Andlangr 808 it.

and-skotti (foe, fiend) '.»*'.».

Andvari 488. 692. 978-9.

anel (granny) 641. 1009.

anemos and aetos 634.

Angandeo 196 n.

an gang (what meets us) 1119.

Angan-tvr (OSinn) 196 n.

angel xliii. 420 n. 449 ft. 575. 875-6.

angels' eyes 146 n.

Angr-booa 246.

animal sacrifices 46.

Anningat (moon) 703. 716.

ans, as, 6s (god) 24*5. 384.

Ans-pirin 25 n. 668.

ant-heiz (vowed offering) 37-8.

Antichrist 810-1. 980-1.

A A



<



1252 INDEX.



Antilois 449 n. 4G5.

anti-tago (end-day) 815 n.

Antony's fire U6JL

Aphrodite (Venus) 307. 313 n. 902 m.

Apollo 79 n. 111. 115 n. 149. 161m. 821.

620 m. 812. 901-7. 1006. 114ft. 1182.
appearing, disappearing 825-7. 336-8.
aptra-ganga (ghost) 915.
aquilo and aqaila 634.
Arakho 707.

aran-scart (crop-lifting) 475.
"A/wof Kwfj, Tvr-hialm 199. 1193.
Ares (Mars) 111. 197. 201-3-4. 321. 843.
U9 3.

An an -rod (silver ring, galaxy) 357 n.
412 n.

Arktos (Ursa major) 151. 725.
arm-hoop, looking thro' the 23JL 337.
Artemis (Diana) 270. U4JL. 1148. 1186.
UflSL

artemisia (mugwort) 1211-2.
Arthur xlvi. 668. 072. <LLL 961.
Ar-vakr 656.
arweggers (dwarfs) 454 n.
arzat, ersetre (physician) 1151.
as, os (god) 24-5.
As-bi6rn (uses' bear) 25.
As-bru (rainbow) 732.
As-garSr 817.
As-ketill 63.

as-megin (divine might) 24-5. 188.
Asa-grim (Thdrr) 150.
Asa-heimr 530.
Asa-thdrr 166. 187. 243 n.
Aschanes 572.

aschen-brodel (cinderella) 388.

Ases, the (gods) 24-5.

Ashkenaz 572 m.

ash-tree 571-2. 651. 796.

Aski-burg 350. 365.

Askr 560. 571-2.

Asprian 387. 547. 556.

asses sacrificed 49 n.

astrology 721-2.

asylum 85 m.

asynja (goddess) 250 m.

at-bairan (offer, sacrifice) 38.

Athena (Minerva) 265. 326-7. 337-8.

637-8. n4ft. ilia,
abn (year) 754.
atisks (corn) 1115.
Atlas 570.
Atli 169.

atonement-boar 51. 213.
AtropoB 414-5.
atzmann (wax figure) 1091.
Aucholf 762.
Auflumla 659. 665.
aue, ouwa, ea, -ey 225.
aught, naught 440 n.
Aurinia 95. 403-4.
Aurora 749.



Austheia 697.

Austri, Vestri, NorSri, SuSri 461.

austr-vegr (east-ways) 187-8.

Avar 292-4-7. 526.

u v ur:i (image) 105 m. 115-6. 383.

avatara 336-8.

Ave, Ver (frau Ave) 675.

Aventiure 310. 911.

Avernus 806.

aversiers (devil) 98JL

aviliuddn (bless) 33.

Aylesbury, Aylesford 376.

Azdingi 342.

baba. babka (granny) 478 m. 641. 784.
Babehild 424.

babes unchristened 271. &1B, 220. lOJji m.

Babil6ne 385 n. 25J* 534.

Bacchus, Dionysus 260. 306.

badi (bed, altar) 68 m.

badniak (yule-log) 628.

Baduhenna 71 m.

Badu-hilt, Beado-hild 377.

Ba?ld»g 165. 221-9. 367. 744.

Bak-rauf (elf, witch) 1079.

Balaam's ass 392.

Bald-ander 207 m.

Balderschwang 222.

Baldr 164. 220. 318. 320. 647. 823.

baldrian (valerian) 1207-8.

Baldrs-berg 222.

Baldrs-bra, Bar-bro (anthemis cot alii

222. 1191- 1207-R.
Baldrs-brond 226.
Baldrs-hagi 225.
Baltero 99iL

balvonas, bolvan (image) 105 m.

band (deity) 26.

banning 951.

ban-shi 444 m.

baptizo, chrismo 3n.

bard 200.

bare head, elbow, knee 31-3. 652.
Barguest 612 m.

bark 653 ; 'twixt wood and b. 1 < >■'>'."> n.
1085.

barlebaen, barli-bak, -break (devil) 100 J.

barn-building 252n.

Barthel (goblin) 515 n.

barzdukkai, bcrstuhki (dwarf) 448 m-

fiaanalpb), fascino 1100.

Baugi 903.

Bavo's pillar 394.

Bayard 392. 656.

Beal xxix. 228. 613-4.

bealdor (prince) 220.

beal-tine (May fire) 612-4.

bear, king of beasts 667.

bear-skin 1010. IDiS,

bear's loaf 783.

Beaw, Beow 165. 369.

Bechte 278. 281.



Google



INDEX.



1253



bedd, weoh-bed (altar) 68 n.

bee 696. 205 n. 1136.

Beelzebub 998-9.

beetles 183. 691-5.

Befana 282.

beh (pitch, hell) 804-5.

Bel. Belenus 222. 613.

belder (fatted ox) 50 n.

belewitte (homesprite) 473.

Beli 530.

Bellona 208. 435.

Bellovesus 614.

bell-ringing 5. 459. 95Q. 1085.

Belus, Baal 571. 613.

Benz (devil) 10<U.

beo-m6dor (queen-bee) 697. 1212.

Beo wulf 369. 673. 697.

Berche 277.

Berecynthia 255 n.

berg-bui, -rind, -risi (giant) 533.

Bergelmir 529. 559. 563. 577.

berg-smed (dwarf) 458 n. 471 n.

berg-tagen (-taken) 466. 952 3.

Berhta 222. 272-282. 416. 429. 430 n.

791. 932. 947. 9J8.1162.
Berhtolt 279. 932.
Berleih at Augsburg 293-5.
Bernhart 873. 936.
bertram 1213.

beschaffen, beschert (destined) 862.
beta-bar, -bus (temple) 85-6.
betan, boten (heal) lOJifL 1151.
betony 1208-9.

Betphania (Twelfth-day ?) 281. 586.

Bhavani 255.

bianac (blessing) 133 n.

Biarki, Biarco 337. 887 n. 939.

bi-bAz, beifuss (mugwort) 1211-2.

bidental (struck by lightning) 185.

bid j an (pray) 30.

Bielbogh 222-8. 985 n.

BiMiSi, Bif-lindi (Oflinn) 149. 882.

Bif-rbst (rainbow i 235. 732.

Bil 374. 473 n. (man in moon) 717.

Bildaberta 277.

bildukkas (homesprite) 508.

Bilei 453.

Billich 374. 888.

Billing 373-4. 454.

bilmer-schnitt (crop-lifting) 475.

bilse, bilisa (henbane) 593. 1198. 1208.

bilsen-schnitt (crop-lifting) 476.

Bilskirnir 336.

bilwiz (spectre, witch) 472.

binsen-schneider (crop-lifter) 476.

Bibrn 668.

Bifirt 272 n. 1142.

birds 669-683.

bird's nest 871. 1205.

birds of omen 1 128-11 Li 0.

birth 874-5.

Biterolf 369.



biudan (offer, sacrifice) 38.

biuds (table, altar) 38. 68 n. 701.

bjiira (conveyance) 1090.

black art 1037 n.

black cow, black ox 665 n.

black goddesses 313 n.

Bla-kulla 1052.

Blanche-fleur 429 n.

Blaserle 461 n.

Blaster 548. 630.

blate-fuoz (blade-foot) 451.

Blicero (death) 849.

BltS, BliSur 1149.

Blocksberg 1051.

blood-tree 649.

bldtan (sacrifice) 34.

bl6t-lundr (sacrificial grove) 76.

bl6t-ma$r (sacrificer) 93.

blot-risi (giant) 557.

blue fire 178.

bluote-kirl (priest) 87.

Blut-stulpe 1218,

boar-badge 214.

boar-vow, boar's head, 215.

bock-Bchnitt (crop-lifting) 476-7. 995.

bocks-horn (Easter fire) 616 n.

Bo*n 902-4.

Bodrok 7n.

Bddvar-tyr (OSinn) 196.

bean, ben (boon, prayer) 31. 121L

boeuf gras 50 n.

b6gh (god) 13 n.

boghatyr (hero) 843 n.

Bogudes 293-5.

B61-K>rn (born «= burs) 559.

BSlverkr (0«inn) 367. 9Q3x

bom-heckel (wood pecker) 973.

bona dea 283.

bona socia 89 n. 283-8. 500.

bonae mulieres, b. res 1059.

bond (gods) 26.

bonfire 629.

bon homme, bonne femme 89. 526.
1067_n.

boni hoi nines (heretics) 89. 1067 H.

bonne dame 430 n.

bootzi, b«>gk (bogie, Swiss) 507.

Boreas 631-6.

Bbrr 349. 630. 559.

bo-trii (goblin's tree) 509. 653.

Bous 368.

bowing 31-2.

Brag 512n.

Braga-full (-bumper) 60. 235.
Braga-rcfSur (-speeches) 236-7.
Bragi 235. 339. 902.

Brahma xxxiii. xxxix. 562 n. 570-1.
678-9.

bramberend (devil) 1003.
Brana 532.

Brand, Brond 165. 222.
brego (prince) 285-6.



1254



INDEX.



Brego-wine viu. 93. 235. 'ML
BreiSa-blik 222. 795.
Breide xxviii. 374.
Bretannia 832-3.
Brezeliando 411-2.
Bridget 611.
brievara (fate) 406 n.
Brimir (sea-god) 561.
brim-wylf (water-demon) 496.
brising (Midsum. fire) 622.
Brisinga-men 306. 622. 870.
britannica (water-plant) 1105-6.
Brittia 832-3.
Brocken 1051.
Brdga (terror) 208.
brood-penny 871.
broomstick- riding 1083.
Brosinga-mene 307.
brownies 445.
Brun-hild xlviii. 423. 931L
Bruni 330.
Brun-matin 748.
Brunn-akr 236.

brunnen-hold (fonntain-sprite) 268 ;i.
Bryn-hildr 96 n. 145 n. 403. 423-5 n. 427.

651. 820 n. 980. LLilL LhlL
Buddha 129 n. 570. 716.
Budhuvaras 129 n.
built-in alive 1141-4.
bu-limns 1150.
bulwechs (spectre) 472.
burg-runa (fates) 404 »i.
Buri 349. 559.
Burlenberg 982.
Burn-acker 236.
Burr 219. 349.
Burri 348-9.
bush-grandmother 484.
butte, butze, butz-igel (bogie) 506-7.

1QA4.
butterfly 828. 1028.
Bybylus, Babilos 697.

caduceus (Mercury's staff) 976.
Cffidmon 9Q6.
Cain 525 n. 719.

calendas, calendeau (yule, yule-log) 627.

Calypso xxviii.

cambio (changeling) 468.

Cambra 265 n.

camp-flori (paradise) 822.

caraway-bread 484-5.

Carl xlvi. Hi. 435 n. 938* 9J3, 12(K

carles -waen (Ursa major) 151. 724.

carlina (sowthistle) 120iL

Carl-quintes 938.

Carl-stein xlvi.

Casere 165. 367.

Castor 119. 366. 783.

cat 305. 669.

caterpillar 1029 w. 1073 n.
census (votive offering) 684.



ceraunius (thunder-stone) 122L

Cerberus 814 n.

Ceres 254. 309. 9JL

Ceridwen's chair (rainbow) 733.

chair of God 136. 733.

changeling 468.

chaos 558.

charadrius 853 n.

Charis 143. 436.

Charles, tee Carl.

charm, cannino 1Q35,

Charon 831. 840-5.

Charos 845-6.

chela (arm hoop) 939.

chelidonisma (swallow song) 763.

Che nisei 204.

chervioburgus (witches' porter) 1045-6.

childbirth 115JL 1175-7.

child's caul 874.

Chimken 503-4.

chirihha, cyrice (kirk) 86.

Chiron 1148.

Chlungere (tanglcr) 274.

Chochilaichus, Hygelac vii.

choirs, nine 795 n.

chrene-crud (pura herba) 642-3.

chrismation 3n.

Christ xl. 182. 1217-8.

Christopher 529 n. 540-2.

Chrodo 206?i. 248-9.

Cinderel 388.

Cisa, Zisa 298.

Claus, Clobes 505. 515.

Clotho 414-5.

cloud 332-3 ; cloud-ship 638-9.
cluricaun (homesprite) 508. 513 n.
Cnivida 372.

coboldus (homesprite) 501.

cock, the red (fire) 601. 670.

cock-crowing 670. 952 note 3 .

cock's bones 1 15 n.

coibhi, coifi (priest) 92 n. 642 n.

complices, consentes (gods) 26.

concubinae 929.

Constantino 85 n.

Copia 889.

cornucopia 869. 870.

corn-wife (fieldsprite) 477.

corpse-bird, -dove 828. Ill 1.

cotinc (man of God) 88.

cow, black 665 n., miraculous 871.

Crescentia 1061. 1Lj2.

crossbUl 183 ft.

cross-roads 1074. 1113-5.

Ctitel (planet Venus) 130n.

cuckoo 675-682. 1125. n.

cuckoo-spittle (woodsave) 682.

cudgel jump out 870.

Cura 879 n.

cursing 1222.

cwis ( hell i 807.

Cybele's bath 254-5.



Digitized by Google



INDEX.



1255



cyclop 516 n. 527. 547.
cyclopean walls 534.
Cypripedium (lady's slipper)

dad-sisas (adjuring the dead) 1221.

Disdains 378.

D&g-hrefn (dawn) 743.

dag-red, dags-brun (dawn) 747.

daemones (spirits) 439.

Dagr (day) 735-7.

Dainn 453.

Dank-rat 267 n.

Danpr, Danr 266 n. 368 n.

Daphne 827.

dase (goblin, witch?) HULL
Datanus 137 n.
daumling (thumbling) 450-1.
Davy, Old 28JL 1004.
day and dies 735 n.
day -choosing 1138-9.
daylight, dwarfs sby of 466 n.
days of the week 122-130.
dead, feeding the 913 n.
Death 842. 888. UfiL

carried out 766-8.

, dance of 848. 851.

, Gossip xvi. 853.

Deeius (dice) 887.
decumanus ductus 600.
dehait, souhait 951 n.
Dehkla 416 n. 877.

dehsel-rite (witch's ride) 1018-9. 1070.
Dellingr 735.
Deluge 576-581. 983.
Demar-hilt 422 n.

Demeter (Ceres) xxxix. 22. 212. 250-4.

310. 331. 1059 n.
deofol-gild (idolatry) 82 n. 102. 100JL
Depeghoz 554. 102tL
Derk 214. 268.
Deucalion 673-6-7. 580.
deus, Btot 194. 339.
devil Q8_L
devil's bit Vl Y-\ .

bride 1009. 1029. 1073 n.

carl, child (demoniac) lilliL

cat (caterpillar) 10'29. 1073 /1.

dike 1022-3.

hand 241.

— mill 1Q2L

mother, grandmother K>Q7-'».

devin (divine, diviner) 471.
dew-draggle 387. 786.
dew-striker, -skimmer 1073.
Dhor, Dor 812.
DhruS 423.

Diana llOn. 195. 283-5-6. 233, 1)49.

1055-7. lifiL2.
Diana, the black 313 n.
diar (gods) 195 n.
dice 150. 887. 1007.
diena (day) 195.



Diespiter 195.
Dieterle 717 n.

Dietrich (Theoderic) 373. 531.

Dietrich-bern 213-4. 373. iUiiL

Dietrich's haus 1182L

dievas, dievaitis (god) 168. 194.

dille-stein (Ud of hell) 806.

ding (thing, sprite) 442. 1073.

Dionysus (Bacchus) 306.

Dios curi (Castor and Pollux) 120. 343.

391. 463. 560 n. 916 n.
Dirp, Drip, Trip 958 n.
dis (wise-woman) 97. 402.
Disbargum 198.
Disen-dach (Tuesday) 125.
Dissunapiter 22 n. 225. 1221*
dives (rich) 194.
Divyaratna 872.
Dobra-srichia (fortune) 877 n.
Dobro-pan (planet Mercury) 130 n. 150.
diick-alfar (dark elves) 443-4.
dodola (rain-maker) 593-4.
d6gor, duegr (half -day) 757.
dogs named after gods In.
dog's saddle (cankerworm) lOJZln.
Dold 581. 983.
dolgr (spectre) 910.
domes-dag, tuomis-tac 815 n.
Don 150n.

Donanadel 490 n. 10'2'.).
Donar ( = Th6rr) xviii. 122-3. 166. 812.
douner (thunder) 1 1 n. 15 n.
donner-aas (cat) 304.

bart, -beseu, -kraut 183. 11 8 1 .

-gueg (beetle) 183.

Donners-berg 170. 186. 95JL
Donner-schwee, Doners-we 185.
donner-ziege (snipe) 181.
dorant (snapdragon ?) 1214.
Dorn-roschen (sleeping beauty) xvi. 1-01.
dorper (giant) 535. 566 n.
DorruSr 426.

doste (wdd marjoram) 1029 n. l'JU.

dove 148. 848. 1135 n.

dragon 9J78, l ML 9J8. 1019.

dragonfly 1029.

draugr (spectre) 915.

Draupnir 561. 871.

dream (dream, bliss) 795. 901. 1145.

dream -interpretation 1143-7.

Drebkulls 817.

Drei-eich 75.

Drffa 631. 641. 888. 890.

dros, drost (giant) 521-2 n. H'o:<.

drottinn, dryhten, truhtin (lord) 22.

drugi tlung (spectre) 464 n.

druid. drv lQSJin. 1205 6.

drut (goblin) 423. 464. 1041-5.

druten-zopf (plica Polon.) 464. 1247.

dryad (tree-nymph) 480. 653.

Dualism Hi. 984.

duck's foot 450-1 n.



1256



INDEX.



duende (goblin) 500.
duesse, divesso (fay) 410 n.
duga (help) 34.
duga, raduga (rainbow) 733.
dumbr (stupid) 528. 543.
diimeke, duming (dwarf) 726.
durihil stein (thirl stone) HOG.
Durinn 561.
dure (giant) 521.
durva (turf) 642.

dusius, duz, duzik (incubus) 481.
dutten (lubbers) 544.
Dvapara 887.
dverg-mal (echo) 452.
dvergr (dwarf) 443-7.
dverg-slagr (palsy) 1157.
dvergs-nat (cobweb) 471.
dwarfs 447-472.
dwolma (chaos) 558 n.
Dwyvan 581.
Dyaus 193.
dyrka (worship) 31.

Dziewanna, Dziewica 478 n. 933 n. 116JL
Dzuma 1186.

ea, auo, ouwe 225. 600.
eagle 633-4 ; — 's shadow 1133.
ear, ringing in the 1117.
Ear, Eor 202.
Earendel 375.

Earth 250-6 ; cutting out earth 1003.

earth-chicken 691.

earth-fire 603.

earth-mannikin 450 n. 454.

earthquake 816.

earth-worm 540. 561.

eist, looking to the 34.

Easter cakes, eggs, games 780-1.

fires 43. 615-7.

Eastre 289-291. 616.
eblis (devil) 574.

ebur-J>rung (Orion) 359. 727. 949

(Hyades?)730.
echo 452.
Ecke 238. 636.
Eckhart 934-6.
Ecki-sax 238.
eclipses 705-7.
Eersel 154.

ege (awe), egesa, eges-grime 237-8.

egg origin 560 » .

eggrund (hell) 806 n.

egg-shells 469.

Egi-dora, Eider 239.

Egi-helm 238.

Eigil 374 6. 380. 424.

Eikbyrnir 818.

Eileithyia 1176.

Eim, Lake 559.

Eindrifli 381.

einheri (hero in heaven) 817.
Eir 1143. llfiL



Eisen, Frau 265. 297 n.
Eisen-berta 277. 477.
Eisen-hiitel 505 n. 508.
Eis-here 557.

El (tempest, a witch) 108'J.
Elbe B. 444 n.
elbe (elf) 442. 1073.
Elbe-gast, Ele-gast 465.
Elben-drdtsch 443. 461. 23_L
Elbe-rich xlvi. 453.
eld-borg (fire) 628-9.
elder, ellen, ell-horn 651-2.
electrum 1218 n.

elf-, tee self-, alb-, alf-, alp-, elle-.
elf-bore (knot-hole) 461.
elf-licht (will o* wisp) 917.
elf-queen 934 n.
elf-shot 180-7. 460.
elf-trad (-tree) 653.
elf-worship 448.
Elias 173-4. 811.
El iu Knir 802.
Elivagar 558.

elle-folk, -koner, -kong, -skudt, -vild

443. 460 n. 461.940a.
Elmo's fire 900.
Elohim 576-7.
elves 442.
elysium 821-2.
Em-bach 599 n. 674.
Embla 560. 572.
enchant, canto 1035.
endil-meri (ocean) 601.
E ndymion 952 n.
eniautos, etos (year) 754-5.
Enoch 174. 811.
enpanez, diables 998.
ent (giant), entisk 524. 534.
entsehen (evil eye) 461. 10JUL 1029.
Enyo 208. 435.
Enze-mann, Enzen-berc 524.
EowSen 161n. 812.
eofor-cumbol (boar's figure) 214.
Eor 201-2.

core nan - s t a n (orphan us, opal ?) 1217.

eoten (giant) 519.

ephialtes (nightmare) 1155.

epiphania 281.

epur-helm (boar helmet) 215.

Era, Ere (honour) 414 n. 891-5.

Erce 253. 1238.

Erc-tac (Tuesday) 124.

Erculus 161n. 212.

vro (honour, worship) 29 tt. 760 n.

Erebus 575.

Eres-berg 198-9. 20L

Eres-burg 116 n. 199. 201.

Erichthonius 378. 726.

Erik, Old 1004.

Eriks-gata (-road) 235. 360-1.

Eris 208. 435.

Eri-tAC, Er-tag (Tuesday) 124. 201-2.



Digitized by LiOOQle



INDEX.



1257



Ermen-rich 872. Hffl.

Erming-strete 356.

Ero (Sansk. ira, earth) 250.

6sa gescot (gods' shot) 25. 1211,

Escio 349.

Eskja 572.

Essel 520 n.

eteninne (giantess) 519.

Eticho 372-3. 394.

Etzel 169.

Eugel 471.

eumenides 10.%.

Euring 358-9.

Europa 338. 343. 666.

Eve 574-5.

evil eye 1099.

Ewald 454.

e-warto (priest, judge) 89.
exercitus antiquus 941. feralis 950.
eyes, quivering of the 1117.
Ey-limi 229 n.

fflpcce (fetch, fye? ) 461 n.
Fafnir 371-2. 688. 978.
Fairguneis xxii. 172. 256.
fairguni (mountain) 172. 644.
fairhvus (world) 793-5. 826 R.
fairy-rings 187 n. 470.
Falada 659.
Falant (devil) 922.
Faina 897-8.
Famars Hi. 198.
familiaris 514 n.
fanatici 83-5.

fani-golt (fen gold) 531. Q7A

fantasma 482. 498-9.

fanum (temple) 81-5.

Far-bauti 246.

farfadet (ignis fatuus) 917.

farhuazan, verwazen (curse) 951. 1223.

Farma-tfr (OSinn) 196.

Fasat 232 n.

Fasolt 232 n. 239. 527. 636. 748. Q4JL

Faste, Frau 782. 93JL

fata, fada, fee 405-6 n. 410-3.

fatahsm 861.

father 22. 168-9.

faunus 481-2. 673.

fa&ra-tani (portent) 1105. n.

Faxi 656-7.

fays, fees 410-3. 551 n.

feig, fey (marked to die) 856. 861.

Felicia 869. 9fiL

femurc (devil) 1003.

Fe Murgan 412 n. 820 n.

fengari (luminary) 701 n.

Fenja 531. 864.

Fenrir, Fenris-ulfr 244-6. 667. 814.
fern-seed 1209-1211.
Feruina isa*

fetch, fye (double, wraith) 877 n.
feuer-mann (ignis fatuus) 916n.



feverfew 1243-4.

fiaSr-hamr (wing-coat) 329.

Fialar the cock 670.

Fialar the dwarf 453. 468 n. 902,

Fichte, Frau (pine) 653. 1171.

fiefs proclaimed and bid for 787 n.

field-spinster 10HH. 1099. 1124.

Fifel-dor (K. Eider) 239.

fimbul 816. 825 n.

Finn 219. 380. 454. 548-9. 1025.

Fiolnir 348. 696.

Fiorgyn 172. 256.

fir-tree 653.

fire, perpetual 611.

tire-beetle, fur-boter 183.

firgin bucca, firgen-gst (wild goat) 181.

fitohers-vogel 468 n.

fiur-sehen (pyro-mantia) 1111. ■

flag of victory 1112.

Fleder-wisch (devil) 1063.

flehen (soothe, implore) 30.

flihtare (guardian angel) 875.

Flore 429 n.

Flosi 831.

flower-offerings 57-8.
fly (devil) 998-9.
foal's tooth, fuli-zant 658 n.
Folc-wald 165. 219.
Fold, Fuld (devil) 992 n.
FOlk-vangr 305.

Folia (copia) 224. 288. 308. 889. 1232.

follet (folhs) 508. 9JjL

fol-m&ni (full moon) 709.

folter (torture) 1076.

Folz 227.

Fdnn 631. 641.

footprint, cutting out the 1093.
ford«Sa (witch) 1032.
forget-me-not 912. 12D1.
forn (sacrifice) 40-1.
Fornax 256. 629.

Forneotes-folme (a plant) 240. 532. 119_L

Forniotr 240. 529 631-6.

fors (waterfall) 592.

Forsoti 229-232.

forst (hurst, grove) 68.

Fortuna 863-6-9. 877.

Fortunatus 869.

Fosete, Fosetes-land 84. 229-231. 600.
fosse-grim (watersprite) 232 n. 493. 592.
Frank (dog's name) 7 n.
fraua-ctiueli (ladycow) 303. 694-5.
frauen milch (a choice wine) 1191.
frauen-schlussel (cowslip) 1194.
frauja, frea, frOho (lord) 22 209.
Frea ( = Frigg) 128. 184. 301.
Frea (AS. for FreyT) 209.
Frea-ldf 165. 219. 313 n.
Frea-wine viii. 93. 165. 211. 367.
Frecken-horst, Fr©oing-hyr8t 304.
Freke, Fru 304.
Freki 147. 668.



Digitized by Google



1258



INDEX.



Frene, Fru 306 n.

frea (cat, bear) 669.

Frey-faxi 213. 655-6.

Freyja (sister of Freyr)liv.212. 299. 417.

547. 838. 1054. 110L
Freyju-har (capillus Veneris) 303.

nm-4.

Freyju-hcena (ladybird) 695.

Freyr 97. 114. 161-2. 530. 656-7. 790.

m

Freys-vinr 93. 211.
Frey-vrSr 188.

Fricea (-Frigg, OSin's wife) xv. 301.
947-9.

Fricco (-Frevr) 113. 161.

FrlK (mild) 1149.

frffi-hof (asylum, sanctuary) 85 n.

Friday 123-8. 301-2.

Fri«u-wulf 165. 219.

Friedrich Red beard (Barbarossa) 955-9.

friend of God viii. 93.

Frigg (OSin's wife) xx. 270. 300. 647 n.

860 v. 873-4. 9JSAL 1232.
Frigge-rock (Orion's belt) 270. 302. 726.
Friggjar-gras (berba conjugalis) 302-4.
frt-muro (devil) 1003.
frisoing (pig, lamb) 50-1.
Fr6 ( = Freyr) 209. 478. 637.
Fro (-Freyr) 209. 211 ; Frd-bldt 348.
Fro-berge (Frey's sword?) 216 n.
Frooa-mioll (gold) xliv.
Fr6Si xliv. 347-8. 368. 531. 864. 871.
Froger 367-8.
Fr6-helm 215.
Fr6ho (-Freyr) xix. 210.
Frdja ( = Freyja) 302.
fromm (pius) 88.
Fr6-muot (mirth) 891.
FrO-win, Frea-wine (F.'s friend) 211.
Frua (-Freyja) xx. 224. 299. 1232.
Fruike, Fru 304 n.
Fru ma (gain) 889.
Froote ( — Fr0"5i) xliii.
Fuld (devil) 29J n.
Fulla (copia) 288. 308. 871. 889.
fulla-fahjan (worship) 38.
fnlliM (full moon) 709.
funken-tag (Shrove Tuesday) 628.
Fuoge, Fro (fitness) 311 n.
furious host 918-950.
f utter-mannchen (homesprite) 510 n.

513 n.

fylgja (guardian spirit) 874-877.

gade-bas8e (May king) 776. 785.
gade-ild (May fire) 622.
gade-lam (May queen) 776.
Gaia 250-4. 575.

galadrot, caladrio (a bird) 853 n. ll&L
Galar453. 468 n. 202,
galdr (magic spell) 1 03 5.
galiug (false god, idol) 15.



gallicena (prophetess) 425 n.
gallows-mannlkin 513 n.
Gallus 671.

gamban-teinn (wishing-rod ?) 976.
Gambara 362.

gand-rei$ (witch's jaunt) 1ILQ2.
Ganges 600.
Gaug-lati 843.

Gang-leri, -ra$r (OSinn) 163 n. 325.

Ganna 95-6. 403.

gap ginnfinga (chaos) 558.

Gargantua 542. 554.

Garmr (hell-hound) 814.

g&rsecg (sea) 601.

Garuda 633-4.

Gauchs-berg 680.

Gauden, Fru xx. 925-7.

Gaue, Fru xx. 252.

Gauta-ttr (OSinn) 196.

Gautr 164. 368.

Gauts 23. 354 n. 367-8. 372. 888.

gavafrH (peace) 17 n.

Geat 164-5. 372.

Geban 239. 600.

Gefjon 239. 311. 530. 861 n.

Gefn (Freyja) 311.

Gefuoge (fitness) 311 n.

gehenna (hell) 800.

Geilat 739.

Geir-uibrSr 217.

Geir-roSr 529. 531.

geist, ghost, gust 439. 461.

Gelder 220.

gelmir (boisterous?) 563.
gelstar (sacrifice) 38-9.
gemein-woche (public week) 43. 298.
geneaen (set well) 1244.
Geofon 239. 600. 565 n.
George's shirt 1092.
geormen-leaf (mallow) 1216.
gepanta (a ship) 877 rt.
GerSr 212. 309. 530.
Geri 147. 668.
Ger-n&t 371.
Gersimi 886.

Gertrude xxxviii. 60. 270 n. 305. 423 n.
838.

Gertrude's fowl (woodpecker) 673.

gespenst (spectre) 914.

Gestr (OSinn) 326.

getroc, getwas (spectre) 464. 915.

Gevis 354 n.

Giallar-horn 234.

Gibicho 137. 370. 888.

gid (song) QOO-fi.

giess-vogel (rainfowl) 674.

giezen (cast, mould) 23. 105 rt. 142.

gifr (giantess) 526.

gigant (giant) 525.

gildan (sacrifice) 38-9.

Giltine (plague) 11*5.

Gimill (new heaven) 823.



d by Google



INDEX.



1259



g i n nan (yawn, gape) 320. 403. 558 n. 748. |
ginnunga-gap (chaos) 558. 562.
gin-regin (gods) 320.
Gibll (river of bell) 802-3.
girregar (ignis fatuoa) 9_LL
Gisla-hari 371.
Oiuki 370.

GlaSs-heimr (site of Valhbll) 820.
Glasis-landr (-grove) 76.
glass-castle, -house 820 n.
glass-mountain 820 ». 836 «.
Glaucus 696.

gleo, gleo-man, gleo-cneft 901.
Gler 658.

Glia-born (-burn) 93JL

Glitnir (Baldr's haU) 229.

Gloggen-sahs, Mount 444.

gluck-henne (Pleiades) 728.

gliicka-haube (child's caul) 874.

Gna 884. 896-7.

gnid-eld (need-fire) 607.

go, go about, walk (hauut) 915.

goat 184-5. 225. 1Q21L

goat-hallowing 52. 996.

gobelin ( homes prite) 502.

God, goS, gu5, got 13.

God and me, welcome to 1 6.

God's joy 17, industry 17 n., anger 18,
hatred 19, goodness 20, power 20-1,
fatherhood 22, chair 136. 733, eve
146 judgment 1108.

goddess 250.

Gode, Fru 253. 92J n.

god -forgotten (horehound) 1122.

goft-gil (blasphemy) liii. 7 A. 20.

god-gubbe (Thor) 167.

goSi (priest) 88. 93.

Go$-mundr 823 n. 393.

GoSormr, ' Dana got* ' 161.

gods 99 ; not immortal 316-320.

gods' images 63-4. 105-119.

gods' language 331-4.

gods' vehicles 107. 327-9.

God-wulf 165. 219.

gofar, gaffer (Thor) 167.

G6i 253.

gold-burg (palace) 820.
Goldemar 453. 466. 509. 11 '.'0.
gold-ferch (-hog) 51. 213.
golden dame 130 n.
gold-horned cows 55. 665.
gold -sole (palace) 820.
Gondul 420-1.
Gontzol 725-6.
good-fellow (goblin) 500.
good man (priest) 89.
good people, good neighbours 456.
good-woman 89 ft. 429. 430 n. 1059.
goose 1098.

goose-foot 281. 429. 450-1 n.
g6rnluga-ve8r (magic wiudj 640.
gossamer 783-4.



I gota-betti (altar) 68 ft.
gotes f mint (friend) viii. 93 n.
gotes ouwe (ea) 225 ft.
gotewuoto, godowOde (tyrant) 132.
gotinne (goddess) 250 ft.
got-man (man of God) 174 ft.
gotze (false god, idol) 15.
G6z ( = Gauts) 23. 368.
Grail, the holy 872.
graman, gramir (devils) 990-1.
Grampus (goblin) 515.
grandfather, Atli xlvii. 169.
Grani (GSinn) 147. 392. 244, 9J7JL
Grant 243. 22*.
Gratiae 143.

green meadow, vale 822. 830 n. 260 n.
Grendei 243. 496. 1000. 1016.
grey man (devil) 29JL 1Q2JL
grey mannikin 449.
Grey-mantle 146 n.
gri'Sa-mark (token of peace) 902.
griSa-staSr (sanctuary) 85 n.
griSr (giantess) 526.
griffin 998^ griffin's gold 980.
grlma (mask) 238. 1045.
Grim-hildr, Krtm-hilt 238. 423.
Grimme 556.
Grimming 171.

Grtmnir (CrSinn) xv. 146. 637. 667.
Grimr Oegir 1017.
grindel (bolt, bar) 243.
Gripir 94. 861 n. 979 n.
Gr6a 373-5. 1242.

grom, grummel (thunder) 178. 184.

883.
Gronjette 244^

(irotti (wishing-mill) 531. 871.
Grzmilas (dog's name) 7 n.
guardian angel 874-7.
Giibich 453. 480.
Gucken-berg 953.
Gudens-berg 152. 228.
gudja (priest) 88.
giiete (lovingkindness) 760.
giietel (goblin) 481.
Gull-faxi 655-7.
Gullin-bursti 213-4. 871.
Gullin-tanni 234.
Gull-toppr234.658.
Gull-veig 403.
Gulpe, Blut-gulpe 1248.
Gumir 237 n.

Gunda-hari, Gunnarr 371. 877 n.
gnnde-rebe (ground ivy) 1212.
Gundia, Gunnr, GAS 422. 890.
Gungnir 147. 846. 870.
GunnloS 367. 630. 9m 1133.
Guogo 243. n.

guot, vil guot (right gracious) 1202 ».
Guro-rysse 945-6.
Gustr 461. 630.
Gustrat 743 ft.



12G0



INDEX.



gute holde (elf) 266. 456. 462. 1067 n.

1074. 1156.
gute Lubbe 526.
Gwodan 134.

Gwydion xxix. 150 n. 357 n. 412 n.
gvgr (giant) 525. 551.
Gyllir 658.
Gymir237n.

Habonde 286-7.

Hadburc 428. 434.

Haddingr 342-7.

Hades 313. 335. 804 n. 854-5.

Hading 146.

Hadu 196. 207. 223. 888.
hsften gold 689.

haegesse, hsegtesse (witch) 1040. 1211,
hfern 1244. n.

haf-gvgr, hafs-frua (watersprite) 488.

494-7. 652. 869.
Hagano, Hagene 371. 424-8. 434.
hagazusa, hageti&se (witch) 1010.
HagbarSr 393 n.
hagebart (mask) 1045 n.
hag-ridden, hag-rode 464.
hail! 16.

hail-making 108f>-7.
hainal (dawn) 749.
Hukel 693.

Hakel-berend 146. 021 -3.
Hakel-berg 921i2. 1001-2.
Hakel-block 921.

hakula-bairands (cloak-wearing) 147.
h&le-w&ge (holy water) 1210.
Halfdan the old 393.
haif-risi (half-giant) 533 it.
Halja ( = Hel) 312. 800. 839.
halla (temple) 85.
Hall-biarn 667.
Halle 1041 n. 104H.
hall-feuer (Shrove Tuesday) 628.
Hallin-skiSi 234.
halp-ful (half-grown boar) 900.
Hamad io, Hamdir 196.
hamadryads 653.
Hamar 181. 883-5 n.
Ham-glom 637. 1042.
hamlngja (guardian spirit) 874-7.
hammer 11 n. 180-2. 188. 505. 999. 1221.
hampelmann (goblin) 502-8.
hands, bear on the (make much of) 891.
Hanga-tyr (OSinn) 146. 196.
Hans, Jack 515 n. 552.
•hans, -hansel in goblins' names 506 n.
511.

Hans aftens blnss (Mids. fire) 622.

hant (fashion) : alte, niuwe llflQ.

hapt (god) 2fi.

Har (high) 162.

HarbarSr 147.

Harke, Frau 253.

Harlunge golt 982.



Harthgrepa 555.
haruc (temple) 68.
harugari (priest) 88.
hasehart (chauce) 887.
haspel-holz (spindle- wood) 652.
hatching-dollar 871.
Hati 244. 705.

Haule-mannikins (dwarfs) 456.

Haule-mutter (Holle) 456.

hawthorn 183 n.

Hazel, Dame ; hazel-rod 651-9.

head-uncovering 32. 155. 652.

HeaSo, Hadu.223.

Heardingas 342-7.

heart-worm 1159.

hearth -gods 500.

heathen In.

heatben-pelting 191.

heaven-scaling, -storming 530.

heben-wang (paradise) 821.

Hecate <14iL 1042.

heck-mannchen (homesprite) 513.

HeSinn 424. 1095.

HeiSi 637.

Heifir 98. 403. 1042.

HetS-run 8ia

heila-wac (holy wave) 585-6.
heil-brunnen (healing springs) 587.
heiligen-forst, -holt, -loh 74-5.
Heiling 453.

heilisari (augur), heilisdd (omen) 1106.
heimchen (elf) 275-6. 446. 459 n. 851.
Heimdallar-vatn 235.
HeimSallr xl. 22. 233. 861. 571-4.
Heimdalls-houg 235.
Heimo 387. 527. 689. 851.
Hein, Friend (death) 446. 851.
hein (hone, stone wedge) 373. 533-5.
903 n.

heinchen (elf) 459 n. 851.
heinen-kleed (shroud) 446.
Heinz, Heinzelman 503-9.
heiss-hunger (dog-hnnger) 1159.
Hekel-berg, -vekle ] 001-2,
Hekla, Heklu fiall 92JL 1002. 1052.
hekla-maSr (GSinn) 146. 223. 246. 312.
800.

Hel 839. 844. 1183.
Hel-blindi 246.

hel-grind (-grating, -rail) 802.

hel hest (-horse) 844.

hel-kappe (cloak of darkness) 462.

Hel reiS (-ride) 802.

hel sk6 (death-shoe) 835.

hel viti ( tormont) 313. 805.

Hel-voet (-foot) 315 n. 804. 834.

held (hero) 341.

Helena 560 n. 90JL DLL 1194.

Helga-fell 645.

Helgi 388. 818.

Helias 370.

Heligo-land 230.



INDEX.



1261



Helium 315 n. 634.

hell-bar 243. 1000.

bell-constable Kml.

hell -gate 802-3.

hell-goat 995.

hell-hound 996-7. 814 n.

hell-jager (-hunter) 155. 23JL 1006.

hell-raven 997.

hell-wagen (death-ear) 802.

hell-weg (death-way) 801.

hella-fiur, -wlzi (gehenna) 800-5.

helle-grave (devil) 993.

helle-kruke (witch) ldf.t ».

Helle-put (-pit, -well) 804-7.

helle-ware, -wolf (devil) 99JL

helle-warte, -wirt (devil) 1001-2.

Hellenes 534.

Hellequin, mesnie de 9-1 1 ,

helli-runa (necromancy) 1225-8.

helot-helm (cap of darkness) 463. 870.

Hemmerlin 181. 1004.

Hemming Wolf 381.

hen and chickens (Pleiades) 728.

henbane, see bilse.

Hennil (dawn) 749.

Henricns, bonus (chenopodiuro) 1213.

Heofon-feld in Northumbria 234.

Hephiestna (Vulcan) 241. 308. 378. 472.

571. 9ftL
Hera (earth 7) 254.
Hera (Juno) 306-8. 321-2-6. 680.
Herbont 888.

Hercules 103. 111-9. 121. 161 n. 227 n.

353. 363 4. 516n. 547 n. 1148.
Hercules Saxanus 365.
Heremod 164-5. 224.
ber-faSir (father of hosts) 22. 133.
Herfiotr 401. 422.

Herimuot 224.

Herja-fofcr, Herjan (OSinn) 22. 817.

Herkja 253.

Herlaugr 394.

Hermen sla derroen 355.

hermae (pillars of Hermes) 118.

Hermes xxviii. 111. 149. 150. 321-7. 343.

354. 516n. 841-3. 869. U7A 1125.
Hermino 345. 351.

Hermder 224. 802.

Hermunduri 118. 359.

Heme the hanter 942.

Herodias 283. 632. 883. 233, 1055-7-8.

heros, hero 341.

herra-waga (Charles-wain) 724.

herre (not her, for God) 22.

Hertha 256 n.

hertinga (heroes) 342.

Heru 204. 885 n.

Her-v5r 424-5.

her-wagen (Charles-wain) 151.
Hestia 611.
Hesus xxix. 204. 663.
heran 698.



heven-ring (rainbow) 359 n.
hexe (witch) U):v.).
hexen-tusch (witches' rout) 279 n.
HiaSntngar 94fL 1095.
hi&lm-mey (valkyr) 418.
Hickenild 356 n.
Hidimbas (a giant) 555.
Hilde 285. 422 n. 632.
Hilde-grim, Grlm-hildr 238.
Hilden-straet (milky way) 285. 357 w.
Hildr, Hiltia 422-4.
Hille 1247.

Hille-snee (Holle-sne?) 268 n. 304.
Hillegers-berg 537.
Hilta 208. 1247.

Himeles-berg, Himin-biorg 238. 669 n.
himel-wagen (Charles- wain) 151. 701 n.
himmel-tatl (-daddy) 168.
hinke-bein (devil) 998.
Hinze, Hinzelman 503.
hiona-gras (conjugalis) 302-4.
hirrlig-spor (devious track) 9_lfL
Hisi 552.

Hiuki and Bil (man in moon) 717.

hiuri, geheuer (snug, safe) 914.

HlaS-guSr 424-5.

Hladolet (planet Saturn) 130 n.

hlaut-bollar (blood-bowls) 55.

Hler 240 1. 631. 883.

Hles-ey 240.

HlrS-skiAlf 135-6. 817 n.

Hllf, Hlif-bursa 1149.

Hlin 874. 884-9.

Hlock 401. 422. 887.

HloSr 76. 389. 874 n.

H16*yn 167 n. 256.

H16r-riSi, Eind-riSi (Th6rr) 167 n. 187.
257.

Hludana 256. 266 n. 883.

Hnikarr, Hniku«r (Q«inn) 489. 0m

Hnoss 886.

hoard-lifting 970.

hobgoblin 503 n. 504 n.

Hodeken 463. 508, conf. 641.

HoSr 220-3. 823.

Hoenir xl. 151. 162. 241-2. 823.

hof (temple) 85.

Hflf-varpnir 896-7.

h5gbergs-gubbe (giant) 189. 536-7.

Hogni (Hagano) 424.

hoho !

Holda xv. xx. 265-272. 285. 456. 487.
596. 883. 911-2. 933-4. 946-7-9. 968.

IOJkL 1 !<;•>.
holden 272. 487. 1073-4.
Hdlgi, Holga-bruSr 637.
Holle, Frau 267-8 n. 273 n. 456. 840.

934-5. 1088.
Holle-frau 269 n.
Holle-peter, -piipel 269. 506. 515.
Hollen-zopf (plica Polon.) 464. UIHL
Holle's pond 268 n.



Digitized by Google



1262



INDEX.



holta-J>6rr (fox) 177.
Holywell 587.
Holywood 74.

holz-frowe (wood-wife) 433. 483.
holz-muoja, -rfina (wood-wife) 433.
1 135.

home-sprite 499-515.
Honour, Dame 891.
Hood, Robin 504.
hoop-trundling 628.
hoopoo 681-2.
Hopfen-hutel 505 n. 508.
hdpt (gods) 26.
Horaut 908.

horga-bruSr, -troll (giantess) 114. 637.

horn-blase, -Jmta (witch) 1061.

horn of plenty 869-872.

horn-troll (beetle) 183. 692.

horse 392. 655-664.

horse-flesh 47. 1049.

horse footed 994. IQML

horse's head 47-8. 618. 659. 660-1.

787 n. 841-4-9. 850. 1U.~>0.
horses' heads on gables xxix. 660-1.
horses sacrificed 47-8.
Horsel-berg 959. 1052.
hors-gdk (snipe) 184.
Hotherus 180. 220. 431.
Hottr (OSinn) 146. 1025/1.
household gods 500.
houseleek, stonecrop 183.
Hne-svelgr 633-5.
hraiva-dubo (corpse-dove) 1134.
HreSa 206. 290.
Hrede 289. 885-6.
Hrede-monaS (March) 206. 248.
Hregg-mlmir (heaven) 700.
Hrim-faxi 328 330. 641. 655-6.
Hrim-ger5r, Hrtmnir 532.
hrim-)>ur8 (giant) 532.
Hrodo 206. 248-9.
Hro5-vitnir 244.
Hromolan 171.

HrOpta-tyr, Hr6ptr (OSinn) 196.

hrossa-gaukr, horse-gowk (snipe) 184.

Hross-hars-grani (OSinn) 858.

Hrungnir 321. 527. 633.

Hruoda 290.

Hruodo 206. 248-9.

Hug-dietrich 393.

Huginn 147. 671.

Hugleich, Hygelac vii.

Huldana xi. xx. 266 n.

huldi (favour, grace) 18.

Huldra 271. 452 3. 946.

Huldre-slut (-lay) 271. 470.

Huldu-folk 272. 452.

human sacrifices 44.

Hunding 696.

hiine (giant) 522-4. 529 n.

Hunger 888.

hunger-spring 590-1.



Huns 523.

hunsl, husel, housel 39. 40.

hunter, the wild, furious (devil) 1006.

buorco (ogre) 486.

husing (homesprite) 600.

Hiitcben (-Hodeke) 508.

Hiitt, Frau 533.

huzd (hoard) 970.

Hvergelmir 558. 563. 796. 803.

hvita qvinna (white woman) 955 n.

Hyfja-berg 114JL

Hymir 529.

Hyndla 98. 813 n. 1051.
Hyrieus xxxix.

Hyrrokin (a giantess) 542. 1054.

Iafn-har (co-equal) 162.
Ialkr 366.

IarSar-megin (earth's might) 642.

IarSar-men (sward) 307. 643.

iarkna-steinn (orphan us, opal?) 1217.

iarn-greipr (Th6r's gloves) lUMn.

Iarn-haus 528. 533.

Iarn-saxa 321. 530-3.

iarn-viSja (wood- wife) 483.

Ibor 362.

Ida 336.

I«av6Ur 822.

Idisia-viso 401.

idol-pelting 190-1. 782-3.

ISunn 236. 319. 871.

Iliya (Elijah) 166. 173-4.

illumination 630.

Ilmarinen xxxi.

image 104-5 n.

images of gods 104-119.

ImelOt 385 n.

Imelunge hort (hoard) 982.
incarnation 336-8.
incense 57.

incubo, incubus 481. 511.
Indra xxxiii. 145. 733.
ineihan (vow an offering) 37-8.
infern, 'fern (hades) 802.
in -Reside (house-god) 500.
Ingo 345-9.

in-goumo (homesprite) 500.

Ino 374. 496 n.

insaken (sacrifice) 37.

inveitan (worship) 29.

Io 338. 343. 666.

Iofur, Ibor 362.

iohdi (ghosts) 9JiL

iol (yule) 702.

IorS (earth) 251.

Iormun-gandr 118. 182. 246. 794.

Idrmun-grund 118.

iotull (giant) 520.

lotun-heimr 375. 530.

idtun-md^r (giant's rage) 530.

iotun-ox (beetle) 692.

iotunn (giant) 519.



INDEX.



1263



Iriug 234-5. 358-362. 11 1*.
Iris 733. 1122.

Irman-sul 101. 115-9. 353. 799.

Irraenfried, Irnvrit 358-9.

irmin 118. 353 n.

Irmino 351-36*2.

Irpa 98. 113-4. 445. 637. 1088-9.

irprottan (tranced) 1083.

Irre-gang 917.

irr-kraut (fern) 1210.

irr-licht, irr-wisch (ignis fatuus) 91G.

Isan-grln (wolf) 238.

Isarna 372.

Isarno dori 80.

Isco 345-9. 571.

IsLs 103. 120. 257-265.

Iakrzycki 513 n. 917.

ispolfn 527.

Issi (self) 1027.

Istaevones 350-1.

Istio 351.

Itermon 165.

itis, ides, dis (nymph) 97. 400-1.
Iuwaring 358-9 n.
I-valdi 454.

l-vi*5r (grove, firmament) 483. 795.
i-viSja (wood- wife) 483.

Jack giant-killer 531 n.

o' lantern 212.

player xvi. xli. 818. 1007.

pudding, Uans-warst 515.

James's road (milky way) 357 n.

staff (Orion's belt) 727.

Janus 22 n.

Jemshid 872.

Jesus 1248.

Jettha 96 n. 520 it.

John (Baptist) 281. 1202. 1210- 1-3.

John's eve 588-590.

fires 43. 604. 612. 617-624.

girdle (mugwort) 1211.

head 285. 631.

minne 60-1-2. 628.

wort (hypericuui) 121 1.

judel (goblin) 481.
Judgment day 815 6.
juger (witch's worm) 1071 ;j.
juggler, gaukler Has,
ju-glans (acorn) 172.
Jagula (Orion) 726.
jul (yule) 702.
jul-bock (goblin) 516.
Julius Cffisar 85 n.
jumping into 55 n., j. out 252 n.
jung-brunne (fount of youth) 433. 588.
Juniper, Dame 652.
Juno 306. 637. 96L 1176.
Jupiter 22. 41 n. 72. 107. 121-2. 168-9.
175. 189. 190-1. 859. 1101.

Apenninu8 169.

ardens 110.



Jupiter dapalis 1236.

-geld (-money) 190.

niger 222*

Jfiterbock, smith of, xli.
Jutes, Jutland 519.

kabout (goblin) 502.
kaiser, the old 958-9 n.
Kalewa 552.
Kali 315. 773 n.
Kalis 1015-

kalledos (Christmas) 627 n.
Kallewepoeg 553.
Kamaduh 871.

kamban (human sacrifice?) 44.

kapel-trete (hypocrite) 35 n.

Kara 423-4-7.

Kari 240. 631-6. 883.

karo, karawi (sacrifice) 41.

kater-man (goblin) 503.

Katzen-veit (wood-sprite) 480. 503.

kelkropf, kielkropf (changeling) 468.

K-flP (fate) 426. 435.

K-QpuKuoy (Hermes' staff) 976.

Kettil Runske 1226.

key-turning 110U.

khoda (god) 14.

kidnapping 466-8. 1059. 1073.

kieBen (choose, divine) 1037.

Kifhauser 955.

kilchen, vor (outside of church) 1227-8.
klnan (yawn, gape) 320. 558 n.
kirke-grim 493 n.
kirkonwaki (dwarfs) 457 «.
Kirt 248 9.
kissing 1101.

klag-mutter (owl, woodwife, witch) 432.

lias,

Klaubauf (goblin) 515.
Klinte-konig 94Qn.
klopfer, knocker (homesprite) 505.
kl6-sigi (claw-sinking) 633.
klucke, klnck-henne (Pleiades) 728-9.
kobolt (homesprite) 500-1.
koleda (midwinter) 628.
koltki (hom^sprites) 480 n.
korr, korred, korrigan (elf) 447. 455.
469 n.

Kotar (man in moon) 719 n.

kotz ! (for Gottes) 15.

Kralemoc (planet Jupiter) 130 n.

Krampu8 (gobhn) 515.

kres (midsummer) 623.

Krimhilt 238.

Krishna 384.

Krodo 206 n. 218-9.

Kronos (Saturn) 219. 318. 833 n.

Kuga 1188.

kukavitsa (cuckoo) 682.
Kullervo 552.
knmlr (idol) 105 n.

kupalnitsa, kup61es (John's wort) 624.



1264



INDEX.



Kupalo (Midsummer fire) 621.

Kurt 212 n.

kuu (moou) 725-9.

Kuvera (god of wealth) 322.

Kvasir xxxix. 319. 902-5.

kveld-ritfa (witch) 1053-4-7.

Kveld-ulfr lu54 n.

lac (sacrifice) 39.

laces, tying the 1073. 1115*

Lachesis 414-5.

Lada 130 n.

Lady-, tre frauen-, Freyja , Mary's.

ladvbird, ladycow 303. 094.

Lieraflr 818.

Laertes 365-6.

Laima 416n. 877.

lake -herd, see-hirt 480.

Lakshmi 303. 664 n. 11%.

Lamia 500 n. 514.

land-as (national god) 188. 217.

land-vaett (guardian spirit) 877.

Lang-barSr (OSinn) 953.

Lang-"bein (giant) 533. 556.

lar (house-god) 500. 912*

1 irva (mask, spectre) 500 n. 913.

Lauf-ey 246. 483 n.

laaghiug 1101.

Lauma's girdle (rainbow) 733.

Laurin 448-9 n. 453. 465-6. 470.

lea, leigh 69 n.

lead, pouring melted 1118-9.

league- boots 871.

leber-mer (liver-sea) 363.

Leda 338. 848. 666.

Leiptr 600.

lekeis. leech 1150.

Lei 366. 783.

Lemminkaimen 185 n.

Lent, Lenz 754.

Leto (summer) 754. 770-1.

Leucothea 496 n. 747-8.

Leviathan 182. 9-9JL

Liber 212. 306.

Libes, priest of the Catti 91.

Liebino, Modus 561. 9il2n.

liezen (cast lots, divine) 1110.

life restored 184-6 n.

ligaturae 1173-5.

Lilith 575.

liud-wurm (dragon) 688.
lios alfar (light elves) 444.
liuflingar (elves) 456. 471.
Liumending, Liumet (fame) 898.
lock, fastening tbe 1073. 1175.
Lofl-fafnir 372.
Lo«r 162. 241-2.
log pelting 190. 783.
Logi 240-3. 631. 883. 1017.
Loka-daun (ignis fatum) 242. 916.
Loki xl. xli. 162. 241-6. 308. 327. 338.
547. 883. 1011-7.



Loptr 246. 632. 882.

lot-casting, -drawing 1037. 1110.

love-apple, -cake, -drink 110JL

loving-cup 60 n.

lnbbe, lubber 525-6-9.

lubi, lyf (drugs) ll.'.l.

Lucifer 723 n. 98JL

Lucina 1176.

lucus, ldh. leah 69 n.

ludara, luflr (ark) 559 n. 580. 983.

ludegheer (man in moon) 720.

ludki (elves) 452-5.

Luna 103 n. 119. 705.

luoti (changeling) 469 n.

Lupus, St 175 n.

Lurlen-berg 982.

lutin (homesprite) 508.

Lutter-born 691 n.

Lutz, Frau (St Lucy) 274 n.

Ivncurius (lynx stone) 1219.

tyng-ormr, 15*ngvi (dragon) 689.

Macabre, danse 851.

machan del -boom (juniper) 652.

Machaon 1148.

Madalger 387. 434. 1209.
'Mrcre (fame) 897.
•magan-wetar (whirlwind) 332. 632.

magic, magician 1031. 1106.

Magila (plague) 11S5.

Maglore 412-3 n. 1203.

Magni 189. 321. 823.

Magonia 638-9.

magpie 675.

mabte, mahmina (mother) 22.
maiden-summer, prop. Mattchen-som-

mer (gossamer) 784.
mai-kafer (cockenafer) 693.
maira nocturna 1246.
majalis sacrivus 50.
majority, going to the 847.
Malagis, Maugis xlvii.
malannus (boil ; plant) 11 GO. 1235.
mal-feu (hell-fire?) 602.
malleus (devil) 999.
Mallina (sun) 703. 716.
mammelainen (dragoness) 691.
Mamurienda (death) 771.
man in the moon 716-720.
man, mannisko 344-5.
Mana-garmr (moon dog) 244, 705.
Mana-gplt 531. 1209.
Manala (hades) 806 n. 855.
mana-sOps (world) 793-5.
mandragora 1 '202-4.
manducus (ogre) 514. 1082.
manes (ghost) 913,
man-ezze (ogre) 520 n.
Man -hart (moon wood) 708.
mani, men (uecklace) 306-8.
Mani (moon) 705. 716.
Manin-seo (moon lake) 708.



Digitized by LiOOQle



INDEX.



1265



man-leika (image) 104 n.
mann-sta (man-eater, witch) 1051.
Mann us vii. xi. 344-5. 579.
man on (adjure) 1228.
mano-ratba 870-2.
Mansnetus, St 175 n.
mantel-fahre (witch) 1QZL
Manas 345. 571-8

mara, meara, mare (nightmare) 464.

1154- 12ifi,
Marena (death) 771. 841.
mar-g_?gr (watersprite) 488. 492.
mari-greoz, mer-griez (pearl) 1219.
Mari-rok (Orion's belt) 270. 303. 726.
mari-saivs (ocean) 601.
Marko 392-3. 436.
Markolfus (spectre) 944.
mar-mennill (watersprite) 434. 487.
Marpalie 1026 n. 10'JH.
Mars 84. 103-7. 111-9. 133. 196-9. 204-7.

260. 353. 650. 673. 912 n. 1U06. 1046-7.

11*13.
Marso 362.
Marspiter 196.

Martin, St.. cattle's guardian 124L.
Martin's fowl (martin) 1131-2.
Martis fanum, Fa-mars 84. 198.
Marv xxxvii. 174. 182. 268 n. 270. 303-6.

416 n. 883. U4H. 1 192-4.
Mary's chafer (ladybird) 694.

grass (maidenhair) 303.

image 76 n. 114 n. 313 it. 595.

shoe (lady's slipper) 1121,

snow 268 n.

thread, yarn (gossamer) 471. 784.

Marzana (death) 771. 841.
masca fwitch) 1082.
mater deum (Cybele) 254.
mathematici (magicians) 1031.
matres, matronae 417. 1246.
Matnta 496 n.
man-fez (devil) 9_8jL
May 759-762.

-drink 778 n.

fires 43. 612-4. 628.

-grave, -king 775-7.

pole 614 n. 778.

-riding 774-9.

measuring the sick 1163-5.

megin-giarSar (Thor's belt) 1094 n.

megir HeimSallar (created beings) 234.

mein-weke (common week) 298.

meisa (titmouse) 683. 897.

Melde, Frau (fame) 898.

mel-dropi, mele-deaw, mil-tou 641.

Meleager 415. 853-4.

mella (giantess) 526.

Mellonia 697.

Melusiua 434.

Memerolt 526.

Memnon 742.

Mendel-berg 170 n. 820.



Menelaos 8.22.

Men-glo* 96n. 272n. 307 n. 423-4. 1111).
Menja 531. 864.
Mennor 345.

Mercurius 103-7. 111. 120-2. 128. 132-3.

149. 150-1. 164. 353-4. 385 n. 216. { ML

1016-7.
mer-fei (sea fay) 434.
meridianus daemon 478 n. 1162.
meri-minni (mermaid) 433-5. 487.
Merlin 469. 507 n. UQL
Mer-meut 636.
Merovings 391.
Mers-berg, -burg 198-9. 205.
Merseburg Lays 224. 1231.
mer-wip, mer-wunder 4H3. 488.
mcrza-fblli (woodpecker) 673 n. 678. 113L
Mesitch 215.

metamorphosis, metempsychosis 951.
metod, meotod, miotuo'r (creator) 22.
26-7.

metten (fate) 408 n.
meume-loch (nix's lake) 490.
mezzen (to shape) 22-3. 106 n. 142.
Michael 836-8. 859. 876. 1029. 1235.
Mi5-gar5r (abode of man) 560. 794.
MiSgarSs-ormr (world-snake) 182. 244 n.

601. 794.
midjun-gards (world) 794.
Midsummer, Midwinter 757.

fires 43. 617-624.

milk-mother (snake) 687.
milk-stealer (witch) 1072.
Milky way 356-8.
millwheel water 592-3.
milzinas (giant) 526.
Mima-mei*r (-tree) 76. 379. 670.
Mime 380.
Miming 379.

Mimir 94. 378-9. 700-2. 1148.
Mlmis-brunnr (-fount) 379. 687. 796.
Mimminc, 376 n.
Minerva 1192.
Minne (love) 893.
minne-drinking 59-63.
minui (nymph) 433-5.
minniB-veig (loving-cup) 60.
Mioll 631. 641.

Miolnir 180. 238 n. 813. 870. 12:1.
missere (half-year) 756.
Mist (a valkyr) 421. 883.
mistil-teinn, mistletoe 220. 1205.
Mithothin 163 n.
Mithras 323.
mock-piety 35 n.
mock-sun 708.

m6dra-necht (Christmas night) 753.
mfrSur-iett (lap of earth) 642.
moirai (fates) 414. 435.
molken-toversche (witch) 1072.
moluiva (lightning) 1221.
moly 1122.



Digitized by Google



12GG



INDEX.



monks-hood 1193.
month 708.

mont-joie, munt-giow 170 n. 820.
moon 700-720.
moon's spots 716-720.
mora, mnra (elf) 464 n.
morbleu! 15 n.
Morena (deatb) 771. 841.
morgan, niorwen 748.
Morgana xlvi. 412 w. 641. 820 n.
Morgue 412.
Mormo 500 n.
moss-folk 483-4. 929^
mother earth 253-4. 642. 1238,
mother of gods 254-5.
mountain-wights 454-5.
mouse-maker 1090.
mud-spelU (tire) 808-9.
muemlein, aunty (cat) 1123,
mugwort 624. 1811-2.
mumhart (goblin) 506.
Mumling It. 490.

mummel (water-lily) 489. 506. 654. 915.

Mummel-see 490. 597.

Mundil-fori 703.

Muninn 147. 671.

muni6n (adjure) 1228.!

Munn-harpa, -rifta l 1 ■

Munya 178 n. 883. 1221.

muome (aunt) 490.

Muotes her (furious host) 15 n. 921*

Musa 902, 910.

Muspell, Muspilli 11. 558. 601. 807-8.
myrk-ri-Sa (witch) 1054-7.
myrk-viSr (-wood) 430.

nack-ros, -blad (water-dock) 489.
Nadala 246. 887.
nafn-festi (naming feast) 135 n.
Nagl-far (nail-ship) 814.
Nagl-fari 736.

naht, niht, n6tt (nightj 736.

naht-fara, -frowa (witch) 1057-b'.

Naht-olf 1Q54 «.

nahwe (death) 841.

naiad (fountain-sprite) 435 n.

Nainn (a dwarf) 453. 841.

nair (elves) 445.

Nal 246. M

Nanna 220. 232 n. 810. 490.

Napf-haus (gobhn) 511.

nappel-fang (mating method) 1112 8.

Nan 246.

Narren-berg (fool's bill) 681 n.
Nascentia 858.
nature-worship 243 n.
Nautf (necessity) 410.
navel-stone, omphalos 806.
nebel-kappe (cloak of darkness) 462.
Neckar K. 490.
nectar 317.
need-fire 603-612.



Nehea, Nehalennia 257. 419 n. 489.
neiges, notre dame aux 268 n.
neigbing of horses 658. LLLL
Nemesis 866. 890.
nennir (watersprite) 490.
Nentiger 232 m.

neorxena-wong (paradise) 405 w. 821.
Neptunus 110. 121-2. 148. 260. 489.

497.
Neri 408.
Nertereani 252 n.

Nertbus (Sansk. Nritus) xi. xx. 217.

251-256. 487. 596.
nesso (worm) 1162. 1225,
NiarSar-vottr (spongia marina) 218. 1191 .
NibelOt 385 n.
Nibelunge 564. 979.
Nibelung's board 371-2. 9_2&
Nibling iffiL

nichus, nicker, nicor (watersprite) 148.
488.

Nick, Old 488. 982. ISM.
nickelmann (watersprite) 488.
Nicolaus, Niclas (goblin) 505. 514-5.
ni*8 (old moon) 710.
Nideck castle 538.
NiS-hoggr 796. 800.
Ni«i 454. 710.

ntS-staung (spite-stake) 659. 660.
Nielsen 504-5.

Nifl-heimr 558. 564. 800-3-6.
Nifl-hel 313. 803.
night 736.

night-folk (elves) 470 ; (spectres) 921=3.
night-mare, naht-mar 464. 1058 n.

1246-7.
nigbt-riding 1053-4.
nigromancy 1036 n. lllln.
nikuz, nix (watersprite) 148. 489.
nimbus 323.
nimidas (groves ?) 648.
nines 48. 421. 602. 641. 795. 1157.

1 1 H1-2. 1214.
Nioro'r 216-9. 252-6. 347. 630.
Nissen 504-8. 511.
niujihs, niu-mani (new moon) 709.
nix, nixe (watersprite) 488.
nix-blume (waterdock) 488.
Noah's flood 576.
N6a-tun 217.

nobis- krattcn, -krug (bell) 805-6. 1002,
nod-fyr, ndt-fiur (need fire) 603-4.
niinnor O"o*ins (valkyrs) 418.
Norna-gest 409. 853-4.
norns (fates) 405-417.
north 34. 493. 802. IDOL
Norvi 735.

N6tt (night) 656. 735-7.
novem capita 53.
nundinae (week) 123.
n* (new moon) 710.
Nyji, Nyr 454. 710.



ed by Googl



INDEX



1267



nymphae 415-6. 431-6. 480.

oaks, holy 72-7. 171-2. 651.
Ober-land 180.

Oberon, Auberon xlvi. 453. 872.

obor (giant) 526.

Oceanus 237.

October equus 1050 n.

O-dains-akr 823n.

Odas-hdm (paradise) 821.

Oddiner 15 n.

Oddrun 115iL 117JL

odebero (stork) 672.

Oden (a giant) 543.

Oden-berg 95JL

Oden-wald 159 n.

Odens-fors (-(all) 159.

Odens-kalla (-spring) 158.

OS-hrcerir 319. 902-4.

OSinn xl. 131. 318. 320. 347-9. 417-9.
489. 840. 858-9. 873-4. 902-4. WL
1018-9. Hl'2-3. 1133. 1226. 1232.

Oflins-ey (-isle) 158.

flisor (-flints) 154 n.

-hani (-hen, a waterfowl) 159.

-salr (-hall) 158-9. 817. 1133.

-sten 155 n.

ve (-temple) 158-9.

Odoacer 373.

odolian (valerian) 1208.

OSr 305. 905.

Oegir 237-240. 311-2. 529. 531. 636. 883.
Oegis-dyr (R. Eider) 239.
Oegis-bialmr (-helmet) 237-8. 870.
Oesc, Oescingas 350. 572.
Offa 388.
Ofnir 685.

0-f6ti (unfoot) 1043-4.
Ogautan 640.
Oggewedel (devil) 1003.
Ogier, Otger 936 n. flfiL
ogre 486. 554-5.
Ogyges 578.
Okkupeernis 637.
Oku-fcorr 166. 243 n.
Olaf 531. 548-9.
Olafs-kalla (-spring) 588 n.
olbrzym (giant) 526.
old, the 21-2. 529. 989,
Olda 271.
Oleg 949 n.
ulgotze (idol) 15.
Ollerus 163 n. 228 n.
olp (elf) 443.

Olrun 380. 404. 424-5. 1226.
•olt in giants' names 502. 527.
Olympus 336.
O mac mica 500 n. 514.
omaya (mill wheel water) 593.
Omi 144-5. 208. 237.
6minnis-61 (oblivion's ale) llul.
On 46. 1153.



Onar, Anar 735.
ondur-dis (wise woman) 402.
Ons-angar (OSin's ings) 156.
on-secgan (devote, vow) 37.
Onsike 159.

opfer (sacrifice) 35. 41.
Ops mater 254.
OrboSa 1149.

orcne, orken (woodsprite) 486 n.
Orcus 314. 463. 486.
ordeal 1108.
Orentel xxviii. 374.
Orgelmir 629. 532. 559. 663.
Orion xxxix. 726. 730. 948-9.
6r-16g, ur-lac (destiny) 410. 857.
ormr f auga (basilisk glance) 238.
Ormuzd 984.
Orpheus 90S.

tirvandils-ta (-toe) 375. 723.
Os-beorn, Os-pirin 25 n. 668.
oscillum (mask, head ?) 78 n.
Osen-berg 420.
Oska-byr (fair wind) 144-9.
Oska-steinn (philosopher's stone) 144*

Oski 138. 144. 419. 888.

Osk-meyjar (valkyrs) 144. 419.

Osk-opnir 144.

Osna-briick 117 n.

Osning 117.

Ossa (rumour) 896.

Ostacia 1055.

Ostara, Eastre 290-1. 616. 780-1. 9G&
dater-sahs, -spil, -stuopha 780-1.
otawa (bear, Ursa major) 725-9.
Othar 305.

Othin 113. 337. 9J& 1031 n.
Oti-geba, Ead-gifu 890 n.
otter-kraut (fern) 1210-1.
ouwe, ea 140. 225. 600.
Ovelgunne (hell) 100L
oven 629. 883.
Ovida 372.
owl 1135.

oxen 664, sacrificed 49.

Paeon, paeony 1148. 1193.

piiiwa (sun) 725-9.

Pakuls (devil) 1014 n.

Pales, palilia 227. 625.

Pallas (Athena) 173.

Pallor 207-8. 436.

PAlna-t6ki 381. 944,

Paltar ( = Baldr) xix. 220. 738. 990.

Pandora 571-5.

Papa-luga 593 n.

par son l'aube (dawn) 745-6.

paradise 821.

parawari (priest) 88.

parbleu! 15 n.

parcae (fates) 406. 858. 99JL 11 4*.
Parjanyas 171 n.



VOL. III.



B B



1268



INDEX.



paro (temple) 69.

Paron (dog's name) In.

parst uk. perstnk (dwarf) 448 n. 450.

Parthenium 1122,

path -crossing, etc. 1119-1133.

path of birds (milky way) 357 n. 828.

path of clouds (sky) 701.

Pavor 207-8. 436.

peacock -tail (comet) 722.

pearl 1218.

Pedauque, la reine 281.
Pegasus 892 n.

pehrkones (ground ivy) 184. 1212,

peklo (pitch, hell) 805.

perms (house god) 500.

Peninus 169.

Perahta, Berhta 272-282.

Perendan 130.

Perhten-naht, -tac 281.

Perkunas xxii. xxxix. 171-5. 184.

Perleih at Augsburg 293-5.

perpetual fire 611.

persona 880.

Perun xx. xxx. In. 130 n. 171. 773. 1000.

perunika (iris) 183-4. 1191.

pesadilla (nightmare) 464.

petasuB (Mercury's hat) 463. 869.

Peter xl. 161. 667. 1225.

Peterle, Peterken IQQL

Peter-mannchen 610 n.

Peter's dog 667.

Peter's staff (Orion's belt) 727.

peukalo (thumbling) 450 n.

pfal-graben (-dike) 229 n. 1023.

phallus-worship 213 n.

Pharaildis xx. 284-5. 357 n.

Philemon and BauciB 580.

Phcebus (Apollo) 121.

Phol xix. 224-8-9. 285 n. 614.632. 882-3.

992-6. 1023. 1231-2.
Pholes-ouwa (-ea) 225.
Pholes-piunt (-enclosure) 225-6.
Pboles-prunno (-spring) 226.
Pholidi 227.

Phol's day 614, Phol's month 788.
phylacteria 117.3.
Picker (thunder) 176.
Picus (Jupiter) 249. 369. 673.
pifelahan (sacrifice) 38.
Pikullis (devil) 805. lfilAti.
piladi, bild (image) 105n.
pileati (priests) 91.
pilma-schnitt (crop-lifting) 475.
Pilnitis 308.

pilosua (woodsprite) 478-482.

pilwiz (spectre, witch) 472.

pina til sagna (compel to prophesy) 1043.

pipping a loaf 484-5.

Pitkainen 176.

plague iiHi-9.

playing sickness away 331.

plechir (phylacteries) 1173.



Pleiades 728.

plica Polonica 464-5. 474. 1156.
plompe (waterdock, sea-lily) 654.
plough carried about 263-4.
plover, pluvier 674.
pluostrari (priest) 89.
Pluto 801. 993 n.
Pogh6da (weather) 637.
Pohjola 873.
polar star 723.
Polel 366. 783.
pol-graben (-dike) 1023.
Pollux 119. 366. 783.
polter-geist (noisy sprite) 505. 614.
poludnice (noon -spirit) 478 w. 1 1 68.
Polyphemus 529. 554. 1028.
pompe, see plompe.

popel, pop-hans, pop-hart (bogie) 505-6 ».
Poseidon (Neptune) 219. 321-6. 335. 345.

692. 817.
possessed 1015.
Posterli 933.
potz ! (for Gottes) 15.
Powietrze (plague) 1186.
Pramftimas 580.
prayer 29-35.
Precht (-Berhta) 277.
Prechtolterli 279. 932.
prein-8cheuhe (goblin) 477.
Priapus 213 n.
priest li. 88, priestess 94.
Prithivi (earth) 303. 642.
Priye 218. 303.

Prometheus 245-6. 317. 1011. 1148.
proof against shot, steel 1099.
proper names given to elves 504. 017.
Proserpina 313 n. 314. 840 n.
proserpinaca (waybread) 1192-8.
prosopon (person) 880.
Protestantism, germ of xlix. 1.
Proteus 434 n. 616.
przipolnica (noon-spirit) 478 ». 1102.
Puck, puck, puki 500. 512.
Pulletag 614.
Pulloineke 229 n. 285 n.
Puncher 382.
pura hcrba 643.

pusilin, pyssling (dwarf?) 449 n.
Puss in boots 503-9.
Putraka xxxiii.
pygmaei 450.

Pyrperuna (rain-maker) 594.

quail-bone (decoy-whistle) 997 n.
quec-prunno (-spring) 688 n.
querhch (dwarf) 455.
queste (garland) 58.
quiet folk (elves) 452-6.
qveld-rioa (witch) 1053-4-7.

rft (sprite) 496.
racketing sprites 505. 514.



Digitized by Google



INDEX.



1269



Radbod 230.

Radigast xxx. liv. 130 n. 248-9. 661. MA.
radar (sky) 699.
ragin (deity) 26.

ragna-rokr (twilight of gods) 813.
Banana ( = Ran) 311. 496.
rahus (demon) 706.
rai (paradise) 821.
rain-bird 674.
rain-bow 731-4.
rain-making 593-5. 175.
rakshasa (giant) 527. 555.
rakud, reced (temple) 85.
Rama-priya (lotus) 303. 11%.
rams sacrificed 52.
Ran 311. 496.
Rata-toskr 796.
Rati 903.

RauS-grani (OSinn, Thorr?) 147.

rau$-skeggja$r (red-bearded) 177.

Rauhe Els, Rauch-els xxviii. 433. 588.

Raasch, Friar Rush 517 n. 994.

raven 147-8 n. 576.671-2. JiflL LLLL 1U0.

Redbeard 177. 550 1. 95JL 9JiL

redbreast, redstart 183 n. 682.

red etin (giant) 528.

regano-giscapu (decreta fati) 26-7. 857.

regin (gods) 26.

ptla (easily) 320.

ReiSar-tyr (ThOrr) 196.

Reisarova 945.

relics li. 1177-9.

renn-pfad (spirit's track, beat) 508-9.
Rerir 367.

Ret-monat (March) 289.
Reuker Uder 779 n,

reynir, ronn (service-tree) 128fe&

Rhea's bath 254.

Rheda, rhedo 289. 885.

Rhine 600.

rib 561-2.

Ricen 291 n.

rich God 20.

riese, risi (giant) 525.

Rigr 234. 361.

Riks-gata (-road) 361.

Rinda, Rindr 251. 665-6.

road, bowing to the 31 n.

Robigo 477.

Robin goodfellow 504.

Rocken-stal 939.

Rockert 477 n.

Rode n -stein, Roden-thaler 939.
rodor (sky), roSull (sun) 699.
roggen-mdme (corn spectre) 477.
rognir (gods) 26.
rdk (darkness) 813.
rokindusta 7 n.
Roland 119. 394.942.
Romove 77.

roof, sitting on 1078 n. lQdti. Illfi. UlilL
rose-garden 653. 465.



rose-langhing 1101.
rowan-tree (rune?) 651. 1215.
Roydach, Roysel 154. 248 n.
Riibe-zahl, Rube-zagil (woodsprite) 480
Rulla 1085.
Rumor 898.

rumpel-geist (noisy sprite) 505.
Rumpel-stilt 505 n. 548 n.
runes 149. 150.

Ruprecht (goblin) 504. 614-5. 936-7.
rusalka (water-nymph) 492.
Rutze 556.

ruwwe, de (the shaggy) 495 n.

sacrifice 35-63 ; idea of 41-2.

sacrificial vessels 55-6. 62-3.

Sa«r (OSinn) 248.

Ss-fugel 165. 367.

Sis-hrimnir 185 n. 386.

Sail, (fortune) 863-9. 943. 1202 n.

Saelde's child, messenger, hat, horn 869.

Sffi-lundr, Zealand 76.

Somiingr 368. 106L

SsBtere, Sceteres-byrig 247.

Saga 310. 9Q2, 910.

Sago-nes (-cape) 910.

Sahs-n6t 161-4. 203-7. 216. 365. 885.

saint-eaters 85 n.

saint's glory, halo 323.

saints, worship of xxxvii. 341.

saivala, sdola, sawl 826.

sal (temple) 85.

Salida (fortune) 865-9.

saljan, sellan (to present) 38.

salt 1046-9.

samo-diva, samo-vila (elfin) 436 n. 1150.

samolus (anemone) 120JL

Sampo 873.

Samr (dog's name) 7n.

sapaude (wise woman) 110 n.

Sarakka xxxi.

saribant (serpent) 685.

Satan 985-7.

Satjar 248 n.

Saturnus 107. 121-3. 125-6-8. 246-9.
Satya-vrata 249. 579.
satyrus 480.
sau'Sr (wether) 52.

sau-zagel, sow-tail (devil) 285 n. 632. 9'JG.

s&uil (sun) 701.

stut-s (victima) 40. 52-6.

saver (chafer) 693n.

Sax-neat 164-5. 203. 365-7, see Sahsnot.
'sblood! 15 n.
Scamander 600.

scate baren (eagle's shadow) 1133.
scea{$a (devil) 989. 920.
Sceaf 165. 369. 370. 429.
sceld-byrig 700. 818-9, see skialdborg.
Sceldwa 165. 369. 370.
Schalks-berg (rogue's hill) 681.
schandle-bach (intermittent spring)591 n



Digitized by Google



1270



INDEX.



Scharmac 542.
Bchelme (plague) 1181.
schembart (mask) 1045 n.
Schenzerlein (devil) 1007-
schepfe (shaper, fate) 407 n. 413.
Schilbunc, Schiltuno 370. 979.
Schlemihl 1021 n.
schmagostern (sousing) 590 n.
Schmutzli 515.
Schnellerts n.
schrat (woodsprite) 915.
schrat-weg (-track, -beat) 479. 508-9.
schrawaz (woodsprite?) 479 n.
schrudel, geschrudel (spectre) 'JIG.
Scilnngas 188. 870.
Bcin-leih (apparition) 482. 015.
Hcocca, sceocca (demon) 1003.
scop (shaper, poet) 407-8 n. 900.
scrat, scraz (woodsprite) 478-9. 915.
seamless coat 792 n.

sedal-ganc, setel-gong (setting) 701.
739

Sefa-fioll 863.

Segemon xxix. 371.

segil (sun) 701.

seiSr (magic) 1036. 1012-4.

Seifrieds-burg 979 w.

selago 1207.

self done, self have 451 n. 1027.
self-trust 6.

selken-stert, sellen-tost (plica Pol.)

464-5.
Bemi-deus 340.
Semper (goblin) 515.
Sess-rymnir 305.
seven-league boots 871.
seven-sleepers 952 n.
Sevo mons 363.
shadow lost 102 1
shamir (rock-blasting plant) 973 n.
shaved by a ghost 891.
Shelly-coat (goblin) 512.
shield-burg, -maid, tee sceld-, skiald-.
ship carried about 258-265.
ship of fools ? 258. 638.
shooting star 722. 917 n.
shoulder-blade inspected 1113.
shrew-ash 1168,
Shrove-fire 627.
Stbilja 665.

SiS-grani, -skeggr (OSinu) 147. 953.

SrS-hottr (OSinn) 146.

Siegfried zlviii. 371. 552. 688. 979.

sieve-turning 1108.

Sif liv. 244 n. 309. 322. 569.

Sifjar-haddr (maidenhair) 309.

Sige-berg 198.

Bige-fagel, -gar, -geat 165. 367.
Sige-her 893.

Unt 393. 428. 431-4. 490.

minne 398. 433-4.

sige-wif (wise woman) 431.



Sig-foSr (OSinn) 134.

sigh-brog (faerie) 410 n.

sigh-gaoithe (whirlwind) 633.

sighe, ban-sighe (fay) 444 k. 614.

Sigi 367. 888.

Sig-mundr 371. 830-1.

signs (zeichen) 200. 847. 1105.

Sigovesus 614.

Sigr-drifa 423-5. 890.

Sigr-lami 368.

Sigr-linn, Sigrun 423-4.

SigurSr 387. 372 n. 425 n. 672. 978-i>.

Sig-tyr (OSinn) 134. 152. 106.

Sigyn 246.

sihle (titmouse) 683. 1134.
sihora (domine) 27. 134.
Silfrin-toppr 658.
silvanus 376-9. 480-2.
simulacrum 104-5.
Sindgund 224. 308. 705. U&L
Sindn ML
Sin-fiotli 830-1.
sin-flut (Deluge) 576 n.
singing match 909. 910.
sinista (elder, priest) 88.
Sinnels 453.
Sintar-fizilo 371.
Sippia ( = Sif) 309.
Sisuthros 577.
Sitivrat 130 n. 249.
Siva (= Sif?) 309.
Sivard Snarensvend 775.
sjo-ra (watersprite) 496.
Sjur 282,

SkaSi 331. 348. 368. 530. 675. 723.

skald (poet) 94. 2QQ.

skapa (shape, destine) 407. 861.

skass, skessa (giantess, witch) 526. 1003.

1041.
Skelkingr 1043.

skiald-borg 423, tee sceldbyrig.
skiald-mey (valkyr) 418. 424.
SktS-blaSnir 216. 870-1.
skin, jump out of my 25_2n.
Sktn-faxi 328. 655-7. 738.
Skioldr 161. 368-9. 370.
Sklrnir 309. 335. 341 n.
skog-snerte (woodsprite) 487.
skogs-ra (woodsprite) 496. 633.
skohsl (demon) 487. U»u3.
Skoll 705. 244.
skorungr (valkyr) 418n.
skratti (demon, giant) 479.
Skrvmir 541.

Skuld (the norn) 405. 421-2. 1042-4.
skurd-goS (idol) 112-3.
skur-goS (homesprite) 113. 500.
Slag-fiSr 380. 424-5.
Slavs, gods of the 130 n.
sleep 331.
sleep-thorn 1204.
slegel (cudgel) 137 n.



Google



INDEX.



1271



Sleipnir 154. 655-6.

smela (hell) 805.

Smertis (death) 846.

Smertnitsa (plague) 1189.

Smrt, Smiere (death) 770-1. 841.

8mrto-n6s (planet Mars) 130 n.

smyl (devil) 1005.

snackr (milk-stealer) IQ'Jl.

Sna r, the old 393. 631.

snake 684-8. 228, 99&

snake-stone 1219. 1220.

snakes, queen of 686.

sneezing 1116-7.

snipe 184.

Bnotra 889.

snow 268. 304.

snow-child 902 n.

sobotka (Midsummer fire) 623.

soe-drouen (sea-sprite) 491.

Soini 552.

Sokqva-bekkr 910.

Sol (Latin) 103 n. 119. 602. 705.

861 (ON.) 308. 701-5.

Solomon 247 n. 923 n.

solstice 617. 720.

solstitial fires 43. 617-624.

8ompar 71 n. 615 n.

Son 902 -1.

sdnar-goltr (atonement boar) 51.

soothsayer lu .s 1,

sorcerer 1032. sorceress lOiiiL

sortiarius, sortilegas 1037.

souche de nocl (yule-log) 627.

souhait, dehait 951 n.

soul as flower 826-8; bird, butterfly

828-9; mouse, snake, weasel (chap.

34) ; will o' wisp 918j spectre 91M-950.
sowthistle 1208.
spae-wife 400.

spa-kona (prophetess) 94. 409. 1034.
Spati 527.

spa-ma$r (prophet) 94. 10.il.
Spange (bracelet) 886-7.
sparrowhawk 675.
Spehtes-hart 1192.
spirit, ghost 439. 461.
spitting 514. 1102- 3,
Sporkel (February) 789.
sprain -spells 1231-4.
spring-wuxzel (key to hidden treasure)
973.

spuk (spectre) '.114.
squirrel 616. 796.
Sretia (fortune) 877.
Sri 664 n. 1196.
Srt bhratri (horse) 664 n.
stabs (stuff, element) liii.
stag-beetle 183.
Stalo 554-5.

stan-weorSung (stone-worship) 645.
StarkaSr 387-8* 893. 531. 858-9.
stars 700. 721-731.



Staufenberger 419. 429 n.
stein-alt (old as tho hills) 533.
stelbom (evening star) 723.
Stempe 278. 124fL
Stempfel (Jack Ketch) 9liL 1001.
Stepchen (devil) 1003-4.
Stephanus 1235.
steti-got (genius loci) 500.
stilles volk (elves) 452-6.
stollen-wurm (snake) 685.
st6ma (element) liii.
stone, creation out of 572-3.
stone, turning into 548. 551-2.
Stonehenge 552.
stopke (devil) 1003.
stork 672.

storm-raising 1086-8.
Straggeli (spectre) 1039 n.
Strakh (terror) 208.
straszydlo (homesprite) 508.
Strecke-fuss (death) 852.
Stribogh 631.

striga, strix (owl, witch) 1039 n. 1046.

stromkarl (watersprite) 488. 492-3. 907.

stuflala (Bootes) 725 n.

Suap, Suapo 354 n. 363.

Suardones 885.

submersion 981.

subterraneans (dwarfs) 454.

Suculae (Hyades) 730 n.

snS-nautar (sacrilicers) 56. 101";.

Suevo mons 363.

Sum ar 758.

sumer-late (same year's shoot) 975.

sun 701-8. 720-1.

sun -rise. Bun-set 738-743.

son's hatred 19.

sun's wheel 620. 701.

sune-wende, sun-giht (solstice) 617.

Sunia (justice?) 310. 889.

Sunna 224. 308. 705. 1232.

Sunnen-froh 741.

superstitio 1105.

superventa (omen) 1119.

Suptungr 522.

S dry as liv.

Surta-logi (burning of the world) 815.

Surtar-brand (coal-stone) 809. 1222.

Surtr 808-815. 824. <J6G\ 1132,

8usl (torment) 807.

su-stert (devil) 632. 996.

Suttungr 367. 522. 902.

sva-datta (self-made) 14.

SvaSil-fari 547.

Svafnir 363. 685.

Svan-hvita 425.

S van tew it 591. 662. 844.

Svart-alfa-heimr 445-6.

svart-alfar (black elves) 444-5.

Svart-hofSi 1042.

SvasuSr 758.

Svatopolk 9JLL



1272



INDEX.



Svatovit xzx. liv. 130 ft. 663 «.
Svava 363. 423-4.
Svend Falling 372 n. 420.
SviSr, Svi&ur 133.
Svin-fylkja 133.
swallow 672.
swan 427-9.
swan-garb 891. 427.
swan-knight 370.
swan-maiden 281. 426-430.
Bwan-ring 428-9.
Swan-witchen xvi.
swanneblommc (water-lily) 654.
swart 1 1 (wraith, double) 877.
Swefda;g, Svipdagr 165. 222. 744.
swine sacrificed 50.
swine-tail (devil) 285 n.
sword-dance 780-1.
Syn (truth) 310. 889.
Syr 305.
Syrinx 827.
Syritha 305.

tacen (sign) 200. 847.
Tictwa 165.

Taga-rod (dawn) 747-8. 889.

talamasca (mask, spectre) Ul.">.

tall (deal, pine) 652.

tamanito (gobhn's hat) 512.

Tamfana, Tanfana xi. 80. 257. 278.

1109 H.
Tamlane 23fin.

tams-vondr (taming wand) 976.
Tanaqvisl 218.
Tanfa 266 n.
Tanhauser 935.

Taranis, Tarnodurum xxix. 168.

tarn-kappe (cloak of darkness) 462. 870.

Tartarus 804 n.

taterman (goblin) 501-2.

Taunasis 384.

Tcherni-bogh 985 w.

Tchud 527.

Tell xxxiv. 380-2.

tempel-trcte (hypocrite) 35 n.

temperle (medicine) 1151 n.

tcmpestarii (wind-raisers) 638. 1080.

temples xlix. 66.

tempus 790-1.

Termagant 150.

Ters (Priapus) 213 n.

Thanatos 840-1.

Tharapila 77. 669. 326.

thegathon (highest god) 74.

i>eibs (time) 790.

Mhv6 (thunder) 178.

theophania 281.

Tbeophilus vicedominus 1017.

Thetis 344. 496 n. 626. 1059 n.

Theuth 149.

Thiassi 531-2. 723-4.

thief's thumb 1073 u.



ThioS-varta 1140.
Thiota 96. 813 n.

Hal (thill of Charles-wain) 151. 724.
Tb6r biota (heathenism) 188.
Th6r-dSs, -biorg 97-8.
Thor-gerSr 98. 113 4 n. 637. 1043. lOfet-
9.

Thfir-hialm (monks-hood) 1193.
Th6r-ketill 63.
Th6r-vi*r 188.

Thorr xl. 7n. 113-5. 160-2. 166. 318.

3201. 530 1 6. 541-5. 554. 858-9.

1031 n. 1215,
Th6rs-bru (bridge), -mdrk (wood), -nts

(cape) 186.
Thor's pillars 119.
Th6rs-vinr (friend) 93.
ThriSi (third) 162.
Thronax 680.
ThruSgelmir 559. 563.
*>ruts-fill (leprosy) 11<K),
Thruflr, Thry6 421-3.
Thrymr 529. 531-3. 882.
thumbkin 448 n. 450- 1.
Thunar, Thunor 161-6. 813.
thunder, see donner-.
thunder-bolt, -stone 168 n. 179. 122L
Thundr 162 «.

Thunres-dajg, Thnrs-dag 126.

Thuro longus 394.

thurs (giant) 520.

byrel stan (thirl stone) 116JL

tibr (sacrifice) 40.

Tils 928.

time, tlmi, tempus 791.

Tina (Jupiter) 168 tu 195. 736.

tin-egin (needfire) 609.

Ur (glory) 195.

Tise, Tisen-dach ( day) 298.

Tis-velde ( well) 198.

Tityos 321.

Tius, Tiw 193. 200.

tiuvel-winnic (possessed) lQJiL

tivar (gods) 194.

Tivisco 195. 344.

tivor (god) 195.

Tiw, Tiwes-dag 126. 193.

tjusa (conjure) 1037.

T6ki, Toko 380-1.

Toledo 1037 n.

tomte, tomte-karl, tomt-ia (homcaprite)

496. 500. 512.
Tonans 168.
torch-procession 629.
Torden-veir 189.
tor-don (tbunder) 166.
tord-wifel (dung-beetle) 693.
trami, tremil (devil) 243.
trance 1083.
transformation 1004 -6.
transmigration 655. 826.
Tfas (tremor) 208.



d by Google



INDEX.



1273



treJue (yule-log) 627.
Trempe 278.

tremse-mntter (corn bogie) 477.

trick, triegen 464.

Trip (the blasted tree) 258".

Tris-megistos 150.

Trito-geneia 162 n.

Triuwe (fides) 892.

trold, troll (elf, witoh) 526. 552. 1054-6.

troll (spectre) 526. 1004. 1036. 1041.

troll-tram (devil) 243.

trotsch (elf) 443.

trua & matt sinn (self trust) 6.

truge-tievel (spectre) 464 n.

truhttn, dryhten (ruler) 22.

truone e lampe 182.

trute (witch, goblin) 423.

Truth 892.

Tuesday 123-6. 193-9.
Tuisoo vii. xi. 195. 344.
Tumbo, the holy 628-9.
Tumme 543.
tungol (star) 700.
tunkel- sterne (evening star) 723.
Tuonela (hades) 855.
tuonen-koira (dragonfly) 1074 n.
Turisaa 940.
Turris 176. •

turse, tiirse (giant, devil) 521.
turtle-dove LLM.
Tutela 889.

Tut-osel (night owl, witch) 222, 1061.

Tveggi (second) 162.

twelves li. 26.

tylwyth tdg (fairies) 452.

Typhon 637.

Tvr, Tiw, Zio liv. 193.

-tyr in gods' names 196. 339.

Tvr hialm (monks-hood) 11 ( .'3.

Tyrrheni 522.

Ty-viSr (daphne mezer.) 188. 199. 1193.

udde hat (cap of darkness) 458 n. 463.

nfar-skafts (firstfruit) 39.

Ugarthi locus 244. 1Q2SL

uht-scea'Sa (dragon) 688.

uhta (early dawn) 747.

Ukko xxxi. 62 n. 169 n. 176. 793 n.

Ukon-kivi (thunderbolt) 122L

Ukon koira (butterfly) 1073 n.

ulf, iilve, iilfen (elf ?)442n.

ulf-he«inn (wolf-beltod) 1U',H.

Ullr228n.

Ulysses 365.

unbaptized 271. 288. 918, 220. 1070 n.
unborn 388.
Unfalo (devil) 922,
Un-fuoge (indecorum) 311 n.
un-gezibel 40 n.

un-hiuri, un-gehiure (unoanny) 914.
un-holda (demon) 266. 090-1. 1007.
unholdaere (sorcerer) 1018-9.



nnke (frog, snake) 686 n.
unnar-steinn (holy stone) 645.
un-quethand (dumb nature) 647.
Un-sffilde (misfortune) 878.
Uogo 237.

Uoke-sahs (-sword) 238.
Uoke-wedel (devil) 1003-4.
Uote, Frau 371. 889.
upp-regin (gods) 26.
Uranus 194. 249 n. 575. 700.
Urban 20. 453 n.

UrSar-brunnr ( fount) 407. 427. 587.
796.

Ur5r, Wurd, Wyrd (the norn) 405.
ur-fol (full-grown boar) 9JHL.
ur-lac, 6r-l6g (destiny) 410. 857.
Ursa major 151. 724.
UtgarSa-loki 243-4.
utter-bock

Vadi, Wada, Wate 376.

va'tt, va>ttr (wight, elf) 441.

vafr-logi (quivering flame) 423-4. 602.

Vaf-l>ruSnir 529.

vaggs, wang (paradise) 821.

Vagn-hSf5i 533.

vaihts (wight, whit) 440.

Vala 98. 403. 813 n. 1042.

Valadamarca, WaladericuB (Falada ? )

95 n. 403 n.
v&lant, v&lantinne (devil, she-devil) 9'.H.
Vala-skiAlf 817 n.
valditoyes (fates) 416 n.
vale of tears 795.
valerian 1207-8.
val-faSir (OSinn) 133. 817.
Val-freyja 305. 420.
Val-holl 145. 802-3. 817. 840.
Vali the avenger 163. 321. 823.
Valis 371.

val-kyrja 145. 400. 417-426. 817. 840.
val-ravn (demon bird) 99J. 1025 n.
Val-tamr 314 n.
Vana-dis (Freyja) 402.
Vaningi 218.

Vanir 218. 233 n. 443-4 n. 902,
vanishing 951.
Varunas 249 n.
Vasa«r 758.

vatni ausa (pagan baptism) 592.
vatte-lys (ignis fatuus) 917.
ve, vi (temple) 67-8. 159.
Ve 162-3.
Ve-biorg 424.

ve5r-belgr (weather-bag) 640.
Ve«r-f61nir 796.
ve^r-hattr (windy hat) 641.
Ve-freyja 300 n.
Veg-tamr (OSinn) 163 n. 314.
vema (priest) 89.

Velands-urt (valerian) 1194. 1208.
Veleda xi. 95. 403.



Digitized by Google



1274



INDEX.



Veneris capillus (maidenhair?) 1 r.i 1.
Venus 114 n. 255 rt. 260. 302 n. 306. 32f.

344. 444 n. 455. 935. 95JL
Venus- berg 935. 1056,
Veorr (Th6rr) 187.
VerSandi (the norn) 405.
Ver-elde (Hilda, Holda) 285.
Vergiliae (Pleiades] 728.
Ver-goden-deel-struss (reaper's offering)

253.

Versiera (devil) 288 n.

verwazen, verwilnschen (curse, ban)

951. 1221.
veshtitsa (witch) 1077-8.
Vesna (spring) 773. 781.
Vesta 232 n. 611. 1236.
Vestri 461.
vet-mlmir (sky) 700.
Vetr (winter) 758.
vetr-h«i (bear) 668.
vettar (wights, elves) 457 n.
vezha (ignis (atuus) 017. 1056 n.
Victoria 435. 890.
victory, stone of 1220,
VfSar the avenger 823.
Vi«-blainn 808 n.
ViS-f6rull 163 n.
ViS-olfr 1042.

ViSrir (OSinn) 637. 667. 882.
Vidug&uja 876-9.
Vlga-gu* (T?r, Zio) 198.
vikd, week 126 n.

vfla (fairy sister) 436. 470 n. 1150.

Vilanders 207 n.

Vil-biorg 864.

vilcodlao (woodsprite) 480.

Vili 162-3.

Vilkinus 376.

Vil-meiSr 1042.

vince Luna ! (win Moon) 706.

Vind-alfr 461.

vind-flot (cloud) 639.

vind-hialmr (wind-hat) 641.

Vind-16ni, Vind-svalr 758-9.

Vingnir 187.

Vin-gnlf (hall of goddesses) 820.

Ving-frorr 187. 910,

Vinland 640.

Virgunt (Fiorgyn ?) 172.

vfs-g&ssar (devil's boys) 1078.

Vishnu xxxix. 249. 825. 384. 579. 630.

vita (to bow) 29.

vitdd (law) 39.

vola, vOlva (prophetess) 97-8. 103. 1012.

Volant, Volland (devil) 992.

Volker 908.

Volmar 509.

Volos 625 n. 115JL

Volot 1081 n.

Vdlsungs, the 371.

Vdlundr 377-8. 403. 424. 444.

Volu-spA 97-8.



V5r (faith) 310. 889.

vor-kiekers (foreseen) 1107.

vrag, vdrog (devil) 996.

Vrene 306 n.

vrid-eld (needfire) 607.

Vron elde (Hilda, Holda) 285. 357 n.

Vulcan in 103 n. 119. 602. 705 tee He-

phjestus.
vultur and vulturnus 634.
Vut (false god, Wuot) 131.

WAc-hilt 376. 434. 496.
Wada, Wate 376. 114ft.
wadel (lunar phases) 711-2.
waenes )As\ (Charles- wain) 151.
Wetlinga-stret 356-7.
waidelot (priest, magician?) 1185 n.
Wainamuinen xxxi. 902-7.
Waizgantho8 1241.
waking, watching 584. 863-4.
waking a hedge-stick 1085.
waking one's luck 864.
Wfilburgis-kraut (fern) 121L

-nacht (Mayday eve) 10 ■">().

wald-bauer, -gebure (giant) 533.
Waldemar's way 943.
waldes tore (elf) 483, (giant) 533.
waldin, walledein (witch) 403 it.
wallala (nightmare) 1247,
wal-rider, waal-riiter 418 n. 1152.
waltant, wealdend (mighty) 21.
wait-man (wild man) 483.
walt-minne (wood-wife) 434-5. 482-3.
Wandel-muot, Wankel-muot. (fickk •

ness) 895.
Wandu (water) 579.
Waus-borough, -dike, etc. 153.
Wara (faith) 310. 889.
warg (wolf) 926.
Warheit (truth) 892.
Warns 131 n.

Wartburg war of poets (a. p. 1207) '.tin.
wasch-weiberl (wood- wife) 485 n.
wasser-luss (watersprite) 488 ».
Wate, Wada 376. 1148.
water-bird 595. 785.
water-kelpie 491.
water-kind (-child) 495 n.
water-lily 654.

water-mom (-sprite) 489. 490.

Waude, Wauden 156 n. 157.

wax.figures 1091-3.

Wayland smith, tee Wielant, Vdlundr.

waywarden 407.

wazzer-holde (nymph) 266-8.

weasel 1127-8.

Weather 548. 630.

weather-bird 184.

-cock 670.

-witch 1088.

Weckolter, Frau (juniper) 652.
Wedekind 954.



jd by Google



INDEX.



1275



wedel (lunar phases) 711-2.
Wednes-bury, -ham, etc. 158.
week 126 n.

week, days of the 122-130.
weg-breite (waybread) 1215*
Weg-dag 165.

wege-warte (plantain) 828. 1215.

weichsel-zopf (plica Pol.) 464. 474.

weird-lady, -sisters 407. 412.

weise (orphanus, opal ?) 1217.

Wela, Welo (weal) 163. 862-3.

Welan-ao (-owa ?) 862-3.

Weletabi 10iil».

Welf (whelp) 373.

Welisunc, VolsQngr 371.

Welnas, Wels 854.

wel-recke 418 n. 1152.

Wendel (devil, etc.) 375 n.

wendil-meri (ocean) 601.

wer-alt, wer-old, world 792.

were-wolf 1093-7.

werpeya (fate) 416n.

Werra 273 n. 288. 1012.

Wester-falcna 165. 367.

Wester-gibel 739.

Wester-wald 469.

wester-wat (child's caul) 874 n.

wetter-aas (cat) 304.

Weyas (wind) 579. 630.

wheel of fortune 866-9. 871.

while 790.

whirlpool 592.

whirlwind 229 n. 285 n. 632.

whit, wight 440 n.

white lady 279. 280. 962-8.

Whitsun fowl 674.

king 595, queen 787.

sleeper 785.

Wich, wig (war) liv. 203. 888.
wichtel-zopf (plica Pol.) 464. 474. 1156.
Widolt 556.

Widu-kind (wood-child ?) 432.
widn-minna (wood- wife) 434-5.
Wiegles-dor (R. Eider) 239.
Wielant 376-8. 428. 552. 1148.
wiesen-hiipfer (will o' wisp, ghost) 829.

wig-weor5ing (idolatry) 67.
wights 439.

wih, weoh, Te (temple) 67. 159.

wihseling (changeling) 468.

wiht, wight, whit 440.

wihtel, wihtelin 441. 459 n. 464. 474.

wild fire 179. 603-5.

wild host, hunt xv. 918-950.

wild man 486. 92iL

wildiu wlp 431. 483. 92JK 1148.

Will o' the wisp 916-H.

William of Cloudesle 382.

wil-salda, hutl-salida (fortune) 857. 863.

wil-weorSunge (well-worship) 584.

Wind-and-weatber 548. 630. 1024.



Wind-helm 641.

Windis-prut, wind's bride (whirlw.)

632.

winds, four dwarfs 461.
wind-selling 640.
wing-coat 329.
Wintar, Wintarolf 759.
Wippeo 300 n.
Wipune xxxi.
"Wish, see Wnnsch.
wish-wife 419. 429.
wish-wind 149.
wishing-gear 870.

— -hat 463. 869. 870.

mill, -cloth 871.

rod 419. 870-1. 974-7.

Wislau 785.

witch, wicce 1033.

witches 1038-1104.

witches' dance 1050.

witohes' offspring 1073.

Wittich, Witugouwo 876. 482.

wizago, witega (prophet) 94. 1034-

wizards 103*2.

wiz6d, vitod 39.

Wod 132. 156 n. 924-8.

W6dan xv. 56. 131. 224. 301. 924-H.

1231-2.
W*6danes-dag 125.
Wode 155-6. ML
Wodel-beer 156.
WOdel-ge&t 367. 872.
Woden 110. 121-8. 131, Mi Wuotan.
Woden- duvel 155.
Wddenes-weg 151-2-9.
W r odens-torp 154.
Wodesterne (a plant) 159.
WOdnes-beorfi, -feld 152-3.
Wbeden-spanne, Woens-let 154. 160.
Woens-drecht. Woen-sel 153-4-8.
Wohhanda 176 n. 598.
woit! 928 n.

Wolchan-drut 423. UXBL
Wold 156.
Woldar 699.

wolf 147-8 n. 244-6. 668. 705-6. 814. 296,

1140 : she-wolf 807.
Wolf-bizo, Wolf-gang 1140n. 1241.
Wolf-dietrich xxii. xxviii. 893.
Wolf-hetan 1094-5.
wolf-riding 1054.
wolfs-bane 1193.
Wol-gemut 1063.
Wolmar's street 943.
Wolterken, Wouterken 504. 510.
W r 6ma 144-5. 208. 237. 745.
woman reverenced 397.
wonder-flower 871. 971.
Wons-beke, W6n-stock 154.
wood-hound I2.il,
wood-mower (death) 852.
wood-pecker 673. 683 n. 973.

C C



Digitized by Google



1276 yy INDEX.



wood-wife (wald-fran) 430-5.

wood-wives, little (holz-weibel) 488. 929.

world 790. 850.

world, burning of the 815.

world-tree 790-800.

Woudan 132.

wraith 877 n.

Wris-berg, wrisiUc 525. 534.
wudu-aelfen (dryad) 480. 653 n.
wiieterich (tyrant) 132.
Wiietunges her (host) 132.
wunder-burg (enchanted castle) 981.
wunderer (wonder-worker) 91iL lQfllw.
wunni-garto (paradise) 821.
Wunsch (wish) xii. win. zxxi. xlviii.

In. 138-144. 419. 869-873. 888. 977.
wnnsch-wint (fair wind) 149.
Wuotan xvii. 62. 124. 181. 160. 636-7.

882. 918-9. 931. - 1047 n.
WuotanB-berg 152. 1024*
Wuotana-wagan (Charles- wain) 151.
Wuotil-g6z 367 n.
Wuotuno 132. lGQfL

Wurd, Wurt, Wyrd (fate) 26. 405-6 n.
415.

wnrdh-giscapu (fate's decrees) 408 n.
Wusc-frea 144. 165. 211. 367.

Tama-priya (ficns indica) 303.
year 754-7.

Ygg-drasill (world-tree) li. 76. 796-800.
Yggr (QSinn) 144. 208. 888.
ylfa-gescot (elves' shot) 460. 1211,
Ymir 532. 559. 561.



Yngvi 346.

youth, fountain of 433. 588.
yule 702.

yule-boar 51. 215. 1240.
yule-fire, -log 627-8.
Yumala xxxi. 176n.
Yutri-bogh 749.

Zalmoxis 145.

zart-garto (paradise) 821.

zauber, tover, teafor (magic) 1032=3

zeit, Ud (time) 791.

Zemenyle 253 n.

zepar, tifer (sacrifice) 40.

Zephyr 461 n. 631.

Zeus (Jupiter) 22. 136. 168-9. 173-6.

193-4. 816-8. 321. 335. 636. 680. 859.

'JUL 1133.
ziefer (sacrifice) 40. 693 n.
Zies-berg 198. 201.
Zies-tac (Tuesday) 123-4.
Ziewonia 773.

Zige-linta (daphne mezereum) 1193.
Zio, Tins, Tiw xix. 123-4. 193. 882-3.

1047 «. 1193.
Zio-wari (-worshippers) 199. 201.
Zisa, Ziza 265. 291-8.
Zisen-berc 296-8.
ztt-vogel (time-bird) 678.
ziu (turbines) 203. 285 n. 632.
zounds! 15 n.
zunder (snake) 685.
Zuti-bure, Swiety-bor 76.
Zyvie (god of life), zywiec (cuckoo) 679.



Sutler & Tanner, The Selwood Printing Works, Frome, and London. ,



id by Google



August 1888.

A CLASSIFIED LIST

OF

EDUCATIONAL WORKS

PUBLISHED BT

GEORGE BELL & SONS.



Full Catalogue will be tent pott free on application.



BIBLIOTHECA CLASSICA.

A Seriet of Greek and Latin Author*, with English Notes, edited fry

eminent Seholart. 8vo.

JEsohylus. By P. A. Paley, M.A., LLJ). 18*.

Olcero'B OratlonB. By O. Long, M. A. 4 Tola. 16*., 14m., 16*., 18*.

Demosthenes. By B. Winston, M.A. 2 vols. 16*. each.

Euripides. By P. A. Paley, MJL, LL.D. 8 vols. 16*. each.

Homer. By P. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. Vol. L 12*. ; Vol. IL 14*.

Herodotus. By Rev. J. W. Blakesley, B.D. 2 Tola. 82*.

Heslod. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. 10*. 6d.

Horace. By Rev. A. J. Macleane, M.A. 18*.

Juvenal and Persius. By Rev. A. J. Macleane, M.A. 12*.

Lucan. The Pharsaha. By C. E. Haskins, M.A. 14*.

Plato. By W. H. Thompson, D.D. 2 vols. 7*. 6d. each.

Sophocles. Vol. I. By Rev. F. H. Blaydes, M.A. 18*.

Vol. LL Philoctetes — Electra — Ajax and Trachiniaj. By

P. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. 12a. Or the 4 plays separately, 3* 6d. each.

Tacitus : The Annals. By the Rev. P. Frost. 16*.
Terence. By E. St. J. Parry, M.A. 18*.

VlrglL By J. Conington, M.A. Revised by Professor H. Nettleship.
3 vols. 14*. each.

An Atlas of Classical Geography; Twenty-four Maps. By
W. Hughes and George Long. M.A. New edition, with coloured Outline*.
Imperial 8to. 12*. &

Uniform with above.

A Complete Latin Grammar. By J. W. Donaldson, D J). 8rd
Koiven. 14*.



2



George Bell and Sons'



GRAMMAR-SCHOOL CLASSICS.

A Series of Greek and Latin Authors, with EnglUh Notes.

Fcap. 8vo.

Omar : De Bello Gallioo. By George Long, M. A. is.

■ Books I. III. For Junior Classes. By G. Long, M.A. It. C>d.

Books IV. and V. 1*. 6d Books VI. and VIL It. 6d.

Oatnllus, Tibullns, and Propertiua. Selected Poems. With Life.
By Ber. A. H. WratUUw. 2«. 6<L

Cioero: De Seneotnte, De Amicitia, and Select Epistles. By
George Long, M.A. S*.

CornelluB Nepos. By Rev. J. F. Macmichael. 2s.

Homer: Iliad. Books I.-XH. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D.
4*. 6d. Also in 2 parte, 2a. 6d. each.

Horace. With Life. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. 3t. 6d. In
2 parts, 2*. each.

Juvenal : Sixteen Satires. By H. Prior, M.A. 8#. 6d.

Martial : Select Epigrams. With Life. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D.
4s. 6d.

Ovid: the Fasti. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. St. Gd. Books L

and II. It. 6d. Book* III. and IY. li. 6d.

Sallust: Catilina and Jugurtha. With Life. By G. Long, M.A-

and J. G. Fraser. 3«. 6d., or separately, 2«. each.

Tacitus : German ia and Agricola. By Bey. P. Frost. 2s. &d.

Virgil: Bucolics, Georgics, and .Eneid, Books I.-IV. Abridged
from Professor Coninjrton's Edition. 4s. 6d.— JSnoid, Books V.-XII. 4a. 6d.
Also in 9 separate Volumes, as follow* . In. 6d. each :— Bucolics — Georjrics,
Land II.— (leorgics, III. and IV. — .Eueid, I. and II.— ^Jneid, III. and
IV.— J5neid, V. nnd VI.— iEnoid, VII. and VIII.— iEneid, IX. and X.—
JEneid, XI. and XIL

Xenophon: The Anabasis. With Life. By Ber. J. F. Macmichael.

3*. 6d. Also in 4 separate volumes, 1*. 6rf. each :— Book I. (with Life,
Introduction. Itinerary, and Three Maps)— Books II. and III.— IV. and V.
—VI. and VIL

The Cyropiedia. By G. M. Gorham, M.A. 3«. 6d. Books

L and II. Is. 6d.— Books V. and VI. Is. 6d.

Memorabilia. By Perciral Frost, M.A. 8#.

A Grammar School Atlas of Classical Geography, containing

Ten selected Maps. Imponal 8\ o. St.

Uniform with the Series.
The New Testament, in Greek. With English Notes, Ao. By

Rer. J . F. MaomichaeL 4§. 6d. In parti, sewed, Gd. each.



Digitized by Google



Educational Works.



3



CAMBRIDGE GREEK AND LATIN TEXTS.

.Esohylua. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. 2#. 6d.
Cfsaar : De Bello Qallloo. By G. Long, M.A. 1#. 6d.

Cioero : De Senectuto et De Amloitia, et Epiatolse Selectee.

Bj Q. Long, M.A 1ft 6d.
Gloeronia Orationea. In Verrem. By G. Long, M.A. 2s. Gd.
Eurlpidei. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. 8 vols. 2*. each.
Herodotus. By J. G. Blakesley, B.D. 2 vols. 5s.
Homerl niaa. I.-Xn. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. 1*. 64.
Horatius. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. Is. 6d.
Juvenal et Persiua. By A. J. Macleane, M.A. 1*. 6d.
Lucretlua. By H. A. J. Monro, M.A. 2s.

Salluatl Crispl Catllina et Jugurtha. By G. Long, MA. Is. &d.
Sophoclea. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. 2s. 6d.
Terenti Comcedia. By W. Wagner, PhJ). 2s.
Thuoydldea. By J. G. Donaldson, D.D. 2 vols. it.
Vlrgiliui. By J. Conington, M.A. 2*.

Xenophontis Expeditio Gyrl. By J. F. Macmichael, B.A. Is. 6d.

Novum Teatamentum Grsece. By F. H. Scrivener, M.A., D.C.L.
k6d An edition with wide margin for notes, half bonnd, 12s. Emtio
Major, with additional Reading, and References. 7«. 6d. Seepage 9.



CAMBRIDGE TEXTS WITH NOTES.

A Selection of the most usually read of the Greek and Latin Author; Annotated far
Schools. Edited by it ell-known Classical Scholars. Fcap. 8vo. It. 6d. each,
with exceptions.

££sohylus. Prometheus Vinctns. — Septem contra Thebaa. — Aga-
memnon. — Pome. — Enmenides. — Choephoror. By F. A. Paley, MA., LL.D.

Euripides . Alcestis. — Medea. — Hippolytus. — Hecuba. — Baochw.
— Ion. 2s. — Orestes. — Phoenusaa. — Troades. — Hercules Furens. — Andro-
mache. — Iphigonia in Tauris.— Snpplices. By F. A. Paloy, M.A., LL.D.

Homer. Iliad. Book L By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. 1«.

Sophoclea. GMipus Tyraunus. — GSdipus Coloneus. — Antigone.
— Electra— Ajax. By F. A Paley, M.A., LL.D.

Xenophon. AnabaBis. In 4 vols. By J. E. Melhuish, M.A.,

Assistant Classical Master at St. Paul's School.

Xenophon. Hellenics, Book U. By L. D. Dowdall, M.A., B.D.

[Shortly.

Cioero. De Senectute, De Amicitia, and Epistol® Selectas. By
Q. Long, M.A.

Ovid. Fasti. By F. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. In 3 vols., 2 books

in each. 2*. each vol.
Ovid. Selections. Amores, Tristia, Heroides, Metamorphoses.

By A. J. Macleane, M.A.
Terence. Andria.— Hauton Timorumenos.— Phormio.— Adelphoe.

By Professor Wagner, Ph.D.

"Virgil. Professor Conington's edition, abridged in 9 vols., 2 books

Others in preparation.



Digitized by Google



4



George Bell and Sons'



PUBLIC SCHOOL SERIES.

A Series of Classical Texts, annotated by well-known Scholars. Or. Bvo.

Ariatophanes. The Peace. By F. A Paley, M. A, LL.D. is. to.

The Acharnians. By P. A. Paley, MA., LL.D. is. 6d.

The Frogs. By P. A. Paley, M.A., LL.D. it. to.

Oloero. The Letters to Atticus. Bk. I. By A. Pretor, MA. is. 6d.
DemoBthenea de Falsa Legatlone. By B. Shilleto, M.A. 6*.

The Law of Leptinea By B. W. Beatson, MA. 8*. to.

Livy. Book XXI. Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and Maps,

by the Rev. L. D. Dowdall, M.A., B.D. S». 6d. [Book XXII. in the prwj.
Book XXII. Edited, Ac., by Rev. L. D. Dowdall, M.A.,.

B.D. 3*. 6d.

Plato. The Apology of Socrates and Crito. By W. Wagner, Ph.D.

10th Edition. 3*. 6d. Cheap Edition, limp cloth, 2*. 6d.

The Ph»do. 9th Edition. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 5s. to.

The Protagoras. 4th Edition. By W. Wayte, M.A is. to.

The Euthyphro. 3rd Edition. By G. H. Wells, MA 8*.

The Euthydemus. By Q. H. Wells, M.A. is.

The Republic. Books I. * EE. By O. H. Wells, MA. 3rd

Edition. 5*. 6*U

Plautus. The Aulularia. By W. Wagner, PhJ). 3rd Edition. 4*. to

Trinnmmus. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 3rd Edition, is. to.

The Menaechmei. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 2nd Edit. 4*. to,

The Mostellaria. By Prof. E. A. Sonnenschein. 6#.

The Rudens. Edited by Prof. E. A. Sonnenschein.

[In th§ prtM.

Sophoolia TraohlnlsB. By A. Pretor, M.A. is. 6d.
Sophocles. Oedipus Tyrannus. By B. EL Kennedy, D.D. 5s.
Terenoe. By W. Wagner, Ph.D. 2nd Edition. 10». 6d.
Theooiitua. By P. A. Paley, M.A, LL.D. 2nd Edition, if. to.
Thucydidea. Book VI. By T. W. Dougan, M.A, Fellow of St.
John's College, Cambridge. 6*.

Other* in preparation.



CRITICAL AND ANNOTATED EDITIONS.
Arlstophanis Comcadias. By H. A Holden, LL.D. 8yo. 2 vols.

23*. 6d. Plays sold separately.

Calpuxniua Sloulua. By C. H. Kcene, M.A. Crown 8vo. 6*.
Corpus Poetarum Latinorum. Edited by Walker. 1 vol . 8vo. 18*.



Digitized by Google!



Educational Works.



5



Horace. Quint i Horatii Flacci Opera. By H. A. J. Monro, M. A.
Large 8to. 11. 1*.

Llvy. The first five Books. By J. Prendeville. 12mo. roan, 5*.

Or Books I. III. 3b. 6d. IY. and V. 3a. 6d.
Iiucretiua. With Commentary by H. A. J. Munro. 4th Edition.

Vol*. L and II. Introduction, Text, and Notes. 18«. VoL III. Trans-

lation. 6*.

Ovid. P.OvidiiNasonisHeroidesXIV. By A. Palmer, M. A. 8vo.6i.

P. Ovidii Nasonis Ara Amatoria et Amores. By the Rev.

H. Williams, M.A. 3s. 6d.
Metamorphoses. Book XIII. By Chas. Haines Keene, M.A.

2s. 6d.

Epistolarum ex Ponto Liber Primus. By C.H. Keene, M.A. 3*.

ProperUua. Sex Aurelii Propertu Carmina. By F. A. Paley, M.A.,

LL.D. 8ro. Cloth, 9s.
Sex Propertii Elegiarum. Libri IV. Becensnit A. Palmer,

CoUejrii SacrosancUo et Individual TrinitatU juxta Dublinum Socius.

Fcap 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Sophocles. The AJax. By C. E. Palmer, M.A. 3*. 6d.
The Oedipus Tyrannus. By B. H. Kennedy, D.D.

Crown 8vo. 8h.

Thuoydides. The History o£ the Peloponnesian War. By Richard

Shilloto, M.A. Book I. 8ro. 6s. 6d. Book II. 8to. 5s. 6d.



LATIN AND GREEK CLASS-BOOKS.

Faciliora. An Elementary Latin Book on a new principle. By
the Rev. J. L. Seaper, M.A. [In the press.

First Latin Lessons. By A M. M. Stedman, M.A. 1*.

Miscellaneous Latin Exercises. By A. M. M. Stedman, M.A.
Fcap. 8vo. Is. 6d.

Easy Latin Passages for Unseen Translation. By A. M. M.

Stedman, M.A. Feap. 8vo. Is. 6d.

A Latin Primer. By Rev. A. C. Clapin, M.A. 1*.

A axilla Latin a. A Series of Progressive Latin Exercises. By
M. J. B. Baddeloy, M.A. Fcap.8vo. Part I. Accidence. 3rd Edition, revised.
2s. Part IL 4th Edition, revised. 2s. Key to Part II. 2s. 6d.

Scala Latina. Elementary Latin Exercises. By Rev. J. W.

Davis, M.A. New Edition, with Vocabulary. Fcap. 8vo. 2». 6d.
Latin Prose Leasona. By Prof. Church, M.A. 8th Edition.

Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

Latin Exeroiaes and Grammar Papers. By T. Collins, M.A. 5th

Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. Gd.
Unseen Papers in Latin Prose and Verse. With Examination

Questions. By T. Collins, M.A. 4th Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

in Greek Prose and Verse. With Examination Questions.

By T. Collins, M.A. 3rd Edition. Fcap. 8vo. Ss.

Easy Translations from Nepos. Ca3sar, Cicero. Livy, &c, for
Rctranslation into Latin. With Notes, by T. Collins, M.A. [Preparing.

Tales for Latin Prose Composition. With Notes and Vocabu-
lary. By G. H. Well*, M.A. 2s.



Digitized by Google



6



George Bell and 80ns 1



Latin Vocabularies for Repetition. By A. M. M. Stedman, MJk-

2nd Edition, revised. Fcap. 8ro. Is. 6d.

Analytical Latin Exercises. By C. P. If aeon, B.A. 4th Edit.
Put I., Is. 6d. Part II., 2a 6d.

Latin Examination Papers in Grammar and Idiom. By
A. M. M. 8 ted man, M.A. Crown 8ro. 2s. 6d. Key (for Taton sad
Private Students only), 5a

Greek Examination Papers in Grammar and Idiom. By

A. M. M. Stedman, M. A. 2s. 8d.

SoalaGreeoa: a SerieB of Elementary Greek Exercises. By Rev. J. W.
DaTis,M.A.,andB.W.Baddeley.M.A. 3rd Edition. Fcap. 8ro. 8s. 64.

Greek Verse Composition. By O. Preston, M A. 5th Edition.

Crown 8to. 4s. 6d.

Greek Particles and their Combinations according to Attic Usage.
A Short Treatise. Br F. A, Paley, M. A., LL.D. 2s. 64

Greek Testament Selections. By A. M. M. Stedman, M. A. 2nd
Edition enlarged, with Notes and Vocabulary. Fcap. 8to. 2s. 6d.

RudimenU of Attio Construction and Idiom. By the Bev.

W. C. Compton, M A., Assistant Master at Uppingham School. 3s.

Passages for Translation into Latin Prose. By Prof. H. Nettle-
ship. M. A. 3s. Key (for Tutors only) , is. 6d.

By the Rkv. P. Frost, M.A., St. John's Colleob, Cambridge.

Eologse Latinse ; or, First Latin Beading-Book, with English Notes
and a Dictionary. New Edition. Foap.Sro. la 6d.

Materials for Latin Prose Composition. New Edition. Foap.8va

2s. Key (for Tutors only) , 4s.

A Latin Verse-Book. An Introductory Work on Hexameters and
Pentameters. New Edition. Fcap. 8ro. 2s. Key (for Tutors only), 5s.

Analeota Grssoa Minora, with Introductory Sentences, English
Notes, and a Dictionary. New Edition. Fcap. 8ro. 2a

Materials for Greek Prose Composition. New Edit. Fcap. 8vo.
2a 6d. Key (for Tutors only), Sa

Florilegium Poetionm. Elegiac Extracts from Ovid and Tibullus.

New Edition. With Notes. Fcap. 8ro. 2a



Anth ologia Grssoa. A Selection of Choice Greek Poetry, with Notes.
By F. St. John Thackeray. 4tA and dvapwr Edition. 16mo. 4s. 6d.

Anthologla Latina. A Selection of Choice Latin Poetry, from
NseviustoBoethius.withNotea By Ber. F. St. John Thackeray. Berised
and Cheaper Edition. ISmo. 4s. Sd.

Bt H. A. II OLDEN, LL.D.

Foliorum Silvula. Part I. Passages for Translation into Latin
Elegiac and Heroic Verse. 10th Edition. Post 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Part II. Select Passages for Translation into Latin Lyric

and Comic Iambic Verse. 3rd Edition. Poet8ro. 5s.

Folia SilvulsB, sive Eclogte Poetarnm AngUoorom in Latinom ei
OrsBcum oourerasa. 8ro. Vol. II. 12a

Foliorum Centuries. Select Passages for Translation into Latin
and Greek Prose. 10th Edition. Post 8ro. 8a



d by ( jbh^^



Educational Works.



7



TRANSLATIONS, SELECTIONS, &o.

%• Many of the following books are well adapted for School Prizes.
JBsohylus. Translated into English Prose by F. A. Paley, M.A.,

LL.D. 2nd Edition. 8to. 7*. 6d.



Translated into English Verse by Anna Swan wick. 4th

Edition. Post 8ro. 5«.

The Odes and Carmen Saeculare. In English Verse by
J. Conington, M.A. 10th edition. Foap. 8to. 5a. 6d.

The Satires and Epistles. In EngUsh Verse by J. Coning-
ton, M.A. 7th edition, (k. 6d.

Gorgias. Translated by E. M. Cope, M.A. 8vo. 2nd Ed. 7t .

Philebus. Trans, by F. A. Paley, M.A . LL.D. Sm. 8vo. At.

Theastetns. Trans, by F. A. Paley, M. A., LL.D. Sm.8vo. 4*.

Analysis and Index of tbe Dialogues. By Dr. Day. Post8vo. 5*.



Sophocles. (Edipus Tyrannus. By Dr. Kennedy. 1«.

Theocritus. In EngUsh Verse, by 0. S. Calverley, M.A. New

Edition, revised. Crown 8to. 7: 6d.

Translations into EngUsh and Latin. By C. S. Calverley, M.A.
Port 8to. 7a. 6d.

Translations into EngUsh, Latin, and Greek. By R. C. Jebb, M.A,
H. Jackson, Litt.D., and W. E. Carrey, M.A. Second Edition. 8a.

Extracts for Translation. By R. C. Jebb, M.A., H. Jackson,

Litt.D., and W. E. Carrey, M.A. 4a. 6d.

Between Whiles. Translations by Rev. B. H. Kennedy, D.D.
2nd Edition, revised. Crown 8to. 5a.



REFERENCE VOLUMES.

A Latin Grammar. By Albert Harkness. Post 8vo. 6*.

' By T. H. Key, M.A. 6th Thousand. Post 8vo. St.

A Short Latin Grammar for Schools. By T. H. Key, M.A.
F.R.8. 16th Edition. Post 8vo. St. 6d.

A Guide to the Choice of Classical Books. By J. B. Mayor, M.A.

3rd Edition, with a Supplementary Li**. Crown 8to. 4*. 6d. Supple*
meotary List separately, 1*. 6d.

The Theatre of the Greeks. By J. W. Donaldson, D.D. 8th



Keightley's Mythology of Greece and Italy. 4th Edition. 6s,



Digitized by Google



8



George Bell and Sons 1



CLASSICAL TABLES.

Latin Aooldenoe. By the Bey. P. Frost, M.A. It.
Latin Versification. Is.

Notabilia Qusodam ; or the Principal Tenses of most of the

Irregular Greek Verbs and Elementary Greek, Latin, and French Con-
struction. New Edition. Is.

Richmond Rules for the O vidian Distich, Ac By J. Tate,

M.A. Is.

The Principles of Latin Syntax Is.

Greek Verbs. A Catalogue of Verbs, Irregular and Defective ; their
leading formations, tenses, and inflexions, with Paradigms for ooni oration,
Euleslor formation of tenses, 4c Ac. By J. 8. Baird, T.C.D. 8th Ed. 2». 6d.

Greek Accents (Notes on). By A. Barry, D.D. New Edition. Is.

Homeric Dialect Its Leading Forms and Peculiarities. By J. S.
Baird, T.C.D. New Edition, by W. G. Butherford, LL.D. Is.

Greek Accidence. By the Bey. P. Frost, M.A. New Edition. Is.



CAMBRIDGE MATHEMATICAL SERIES.

Arithmetic for Schools. By C. Pendlebury, M.A. 2nd Edition,
revised, U. 6d. Or in two parts, 2«. 6«L each. Examples (nearly 8000),
without answers, in a separate voL Ss.

Algebra. Choice and Chance. By W. A. Whitworth, M.A 4th

Edition. 6s.

Euclid. Books I. -VI. and part of Books XL and XII. By H.
Deighton. 4s.6d. Books I. and II., 2s. [4 Key to the Exercises in tnepras.

Euclid. Exercises on Euolid and in Modern Geometry. By
J. McDowell, M.A. 3rd Edition. 6s.

Trigonometry. Plane. By Rev. T.Vyvyan,M.A. 3rd Edit. 3*. 6d.

Geometrical Conic Sections. By H. G. Willis, MJL Man-
chester Grammar School. 7a 6d.

Conies. The Elementary Geometry of. 5th Edition, revised and
enlarged. By C. Taylor, D.D. 4s. 6d.

Solid Geometry. By W. S. Aldis, M.A. 4th Edit, revised. 6*.

Geometrical Optics. By W. S. Aldis, M.A. 2nd Edition. 4s.

Rigid Dynamics. By W. S. Aldis, M.A. 4#.

Elementary Dynamics. By W.Garnett, M.A..D.C.L. 4th Ed. 6s.

Dynamics. A Treatise on. By W. H. Besant, D.Sc., F.R.8. 7*. 6d.

Heat. An Elementary Treatise. By W. Garnett, M.A, D.C.L. 4th
Edition. 4«.

Elementary Physics. Examples in. By W. Gallatly, M.A.

fin fa* prm.

Hydromechanics. By W. H. Besant, D.Sc., F.R.S. 4th Edition.

Part I. Hydrostatics. &s.

Mathematical Examples. By J. M. Dyer, M.A., and R. Prowde

Smith. M.A., Assistant Masters at Cheltenham College. [In the prwu.

Mechanics. Problems in Elementary. By W. Walton, M.A. 6*.



Educational Works.



CAMBRIDGE SCHOOL AND COLLEGE
TEXT-BOOKS.

d Series of Elementary Treatises for the use of Students.

Arithmetic. By Rey.O.Elsee, M.A. Fcap. 8vo. 13th Edit. 9s. U.
By A. Wrigley, M.A. 8*. to

A Progressive Course of Examples. With Answers. By

J. Watson, M A. 6th Edition. 2s. 6d.

Algebra. By the Rev. C. Elsee, M.A. 7th Edit, is.

< Progressive Course of Examples. By Rev. W. F.

M 'Michael, M A. , and R. Prowde Smith, M.A. 4th Edition. 3*. 6d. With
Answers. 4s. 6cL

Plane Astronomy, An Introduction to. By P. T. Main, M.A

5th Edition, is.

Oonio Sections treated Geometrically. By W. H. Besant, D.Sc
6th Edition. 4s. 6d. Solution to the Examples. 4s.

• Enunciations and Figures Separately. I*, to

Statics, Elementary. By Rev. H. Goodwin, DJ). 2nd Edit. 3».

Hydrostatics, Elementary. By W. H. Besant, D.Sc. 12th Edit. if.

Mensuration, An Elementary Treatise on. By B. T. Moore, M.A. 5s

Newton's Prinoipia, The First Three Sectione of, with an Appen-
dix; and the Ninth and Eleventh Sections. Bj J. H. Evans, M.A. Kb
Edition, by P. T. Main, M.A. 4s.

Analytical Geometry for Schools. By T. G.Vyvyan. 4th Edit. 4s. to.

Greek Testament, Companion to the. By A. 0. Barrett, A.M.
5th Edition, revised. Fcap. ovo. 5s.

Book of Common Prayer, An Historical and Explanatory Treatise
on the. By W. O. Humphry, B.D. 6th Edition. Fcap. 8to. 2s. 6d.

Music. Text-book of. By Professor H. C. Banister. 13th Edition,
revised. 5s.

Concise History of. By Rev. H. G. Bona via Hunt

Mus. Doc. Dublin. 9th Edition revised. Ss. 6d.



ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA.

See the two foregoing Series.



BOOK-KEEPING.

Book-keeping Papers, set at various Public Examination*.
Collected and Written by J. T. Medhurst, Lecturer on Book-keeping in
the City of Loudon College.

A 2



10



GEOMETRY AND EUCLID.



Euclid. Books I.- VI. and part of XI. and XII. A New Trans-
lation. By H. Deighton. (Fee Cambridge Mathematical Series, p. 8.)



and an Appendix of Exercises on the First Book. By K Webb, M A.
Crown 8to. la 6d.

Book L With Notes and Exercises for the use of Pre-
paratory School*, Ac. Bj Braithwaite Arnett, M.A. 8vo. i«. 6d.

The First Two Books explained to Beginners. By C. P.

Mason, B.A. 2nd Edition. Foap. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

The Enunciations and Figures to Euclid's Elements. By Rev.
J. Brasse, D.D. New Edition. Foap. 8ro. Is. Without the Figures, 6d.

Exercises on Euclid and in Modern Geometry. By J. McDowell,

B.A. Crown 8vo. 3rd Edition revised. 6*.

Geometrical Conic Sections. By H. G. Willis, M.A. (See p. 8.)

Geometrical Conic Sections. By W. EL Besant, D.Sc. (See p. 9.)

Elementary Geometry of Conies. By C. Taylor, D.D. (See p. 8.)

An Introduction to Ancient and Modern Geometry of Conies.
By C. Taylor, D.D., Maxtor of St. John's Colh. Camb. 8vo. 15s.



Solutions of Geometrical Problems, proposed at 8t John'*
College from 1830 to 1846. By T. Gaskin, M.A. 8vo. 12s.



Trigonometry, Introduction to Plane. By Rev. T. O. Vyvyan,

Charterhouse. 3rd Edition. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d

An Elementary Treatise on Mensuration. By B. T. Moore.

M.A. 6s.



ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY
AND DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS.

An Introduction to Analytical Plane Geometry. By W. P.

Tumbull, M.A. 8vo. 12s.

Problems on the Principles of Plane Co-ordinate Geometry.

By W. Walton, M.A. 8vo. 16s.

Trilinear Co-ordinates, and Modern Analytical Geometry of

Two Dimensions. By W. A. Vt Lit worth, M.A. 8vo. 16s.

An Elementary Treatise on Solid Geometry. By W. 8. Aldis,
M.A. 4th Edition revised. Cr. 8vo. 6s.

Elliptic Functions. Elementary Treatise on. By A. Cayley, D.Sc.

Professor of Pure Mathematics at Cambridge Dniversiity. Demy8vo. 15».


TRIGONOMETRY.



Digitized by Google



Educational Work*.



11



MECHANICS & NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.



Statics, Elementary. By H. Goodwin, P.P. Fcap. 8vo. 2nd

Edition. 3a.

DynamlcB, A Treatise on Elementary. By W. Garnett, MA ,

ILLLL. 4th Edition. Crown 8vn.

Dynamics. Rigid. By W. 8. AJdis, M.A. 4s.

Dynamics. A Treatise on. By W. H. Besant, D.80. .F.R.S. 7s. 6d

Elementary Mechanics, Problems in. By W. Walton, M.A. New

Edition. Crown Svo, 6*.

Theoretical Meohanlcs, Problems in. By W. Walton, M.A. 3rd
Kdition. Demy 8to, 16*.

Hydrostatics. By W.H. Beaant. D.Sc. Fcap.8vo. 12th Edition, is.

Hydjomechanlca, A TreatiHO on. By W. H. Beaant, D.Sc. F.R.8.

Hyp. 4th Kdition. revised. I'lirt I. Hydrostatics. 5».

Optica. Geometrical. By W. 8. Aldis. M.A, Crown 8ro. 2nd

K ( 1 : 1 1 - ■ 1 1 . I.-.

Double Refraotlon, A Chapter on Fresnel's Theory of. By W. 8.
Aid in, M.A. 8vo. 2s.

Heat, An Elementary Treatise on. By W. Garnett, M.A., D.C.L.

Crown 8vo. 4th Kdition. 4».

Newton s Prlncipla, The First Three Sections of, with an Appen -

dii ; and the Ninth mid Eleventh Suctions. By J. H. Evans. M.A. 5th
Edition. Edited by P. T. Main, M.A. U.

Aatronomy, An Introduction to Plane. By P. T. Main, M.A.

Fcap. 8vo. cloth. 5th Edition. 4a.

Practical and Spherical. By R. Main, M.A. 8yo. 14j.



Elementary Chapters on, from the ' Astronomic Physique
ofBtot. By H. Goodwin. P.P. 8to. 3s. 3d.

Pure Mathematics and Natural Philosophy, A Compendium ol
Facts and Formula in. By O. R. Bmalloy. 2nd Edition, revised by
J. McDowell, M.A. Fcap. 6vo. 3s. 6d.

Elementary Mathematical Formula. By the Bev. T. W. Open-

shaw. M.A. Is. txt.

Elementary Course of Mathematloa. By H. Goodwin, P.P.
6th Edition. 6vo. 16*.

Problems and Examples, adapted to the ' Elementary Course of

Mathematics.' 3rd Kdition. 8to. 5s.

Solutions of Goodwin's Collection of Problems and Examples.

By W. W. Hutt, M.A. 3rd Edition, reriaed and enlarged. 8vo. 8a.

A Collection of Examples and Problems in Arithmetic,

Algebra, (teometrv. Logarithms. Trigonometry, Conic Sections, Mechanics,
At", with Answers. By Rev. A. Wngley. 20th Thousand. 8». 6d.
Key. 10*. 6JJ



Google



12 George Bell and Sons 1



TECHNOLOGICAL HANDBOOKS.

Edited by H. Tbueman Wood, Secretary of the Society of Arts.

1. Dyeing and Tissue Printing. By W. Crookes, FJLS. 5*.

2. Glass Manufacture. By Henry Chance, MA.; H.J. Powell, BJL;

and H. O. Harris. 8*. 6d.
S. Cotton Manufacture. By Richard Marsden, of Manchester.

3rd Edition, revised. 6*. 6d.

4. Chemistry of Coal- Tar Colours. By Prof. Benedikt. Trans-

la ted by Dr. Knocht of Bradford. 5s.

5. Woollen and Worsted Cloth Manufacture. By Roberts

Beaumont, Assistant Lecturer at Yorkshire College, Leeds. 7$. 6d.
Others in preparation.



HISTORY, TOPOGRAPHY, &o.
Rome and the Oampagna. By R. Burn, MA. With 86 En-

graving* and 26 Maps and Flans. With Appendix. 4to. 31. 3a
Old Rome. A Handbook for Travellers. By R. Burn, MA.

With Maps and Plans. Demy 8to. 10s. 6d.
Modem Europe. By Dr. T. H. Dyer. 2nd Edition, revised and

oontinued. 5 toIs. Demy 8to. 21. 12a. 6d.
The History of the Kings of Rome. By Dr. T. H. Dyer. 8vo. 16*.
The History of Pompeii: its Buildings and Antiquities. By

T. H. Dyer. 3rd Edition, brought down to 1874. Post tvo. 7a 6d.
The City of Rome: its History and Monuments. 2nd Edition,

revised by T. H. Dyer. 5a
Ancient Athens: its History, Topography, and Remains. By

T. H. Dyer. Super-royal 8vo. Cloth . 11. 5*.
The Decline of the Roman Republic. By O. Long. 6 vols.

8to 14s. each.

A History of England during the Early and Middle Ages. By
0 H Pearson, M.A. 2nd Edition revised and enlarged. 8to. YoL L
Ma Vol. II. 14s.

Historical Maps of England- By C. H. Pearson. Folio. 3rd

Edition revised. Sis. 6d.
History of England, 1800-46. By Harriet Martineau, with new

and copious Index. 5 vols. 3s. 6<i. each.
A Practical Synopsis of English History. By A. Bowes. 9th

Edition, revised. 8to. la
Lives of the Queens of England. By A. Strickland. Library
Edition, 8 vols. 7«. 6d. each. Cheaper Edition, 6 vols. 5s. each. Abridged
Edition. 1 vol. 6a 6d. Mary Queen of Scots, 2 vols. 5a each. Tudor and
Stuart Princesses, 5s.
Eginhard's Life of Karl the Great (Charlemagne). Translated,
with Notes, by W. Qlaister, M.A., B.C.L. Crown 8vo. 4s. 6<L

Elements of Qeneral History. By Prof. Tytler. New
Edition, brought down to 1874. Small Post 8vo. 3a 6d.

and Geography Examination Papers. Compiled by
C. H. Spence, M.A., Clifton College. Crown 8vo. 2s. tJd.



Digitized by Googl



Educational Works.



13



PHILOLOGY.



WEBSTER'S DICTIONARY OP THE ENGLISH LAN-
GUAGE. With Dr. Malm's Etymology. 1 toI. 1628 pa<ros, 3000 Illus-
trations. 21*. ; half calf, 30*. ; calf or half rnswia, 31m. 6d. ; russia, 21.
With Appendices and 70 additional paires of Illustrations, 1919 pages,
~\;halfi



31s. 6d. ; half calf, 21. ; calf or half russia, 21. 2s. ; russia, 21. 10..
• Thk BK8T practical Kn'DUBH DjCTIOHART kxtaht.'— <^tw rterly Kevuv, 1873.
Proepectuaei, with specimen pages, post free on application.

Richardson's Philological Dictionary of the English Language.

Combining Explanation with Etymology, and copiously illustrated by
Quotations from the best Authorities. With a Supplemont. 2 vol*. 4to.
it. 14s. 6d. Supplement separately. 4to. 12s.

Brief History of the English Language. By Prof. James Hadley,

LL.D., Yale College. Foap. 8ro. Is.

The Elements of the English Language. By E. Adams, Ph.D.

21st Edition. Post8vo. 4«. 6d.

Philological Essays. By T. H. Key, M.A., F.B.S. 8vo. 10«. 6d.



its Origin and Development. By T. H. Key, M.A.,
F.R.8. 8ro. 14s.

Synonyms and Antonyms of the English Language. By Arch-



Synonyms Discriminated. By Archdeacon Smith. Demy 8va

2nd Edition revised. 14s.



Bible English. Chapters on Words and Phrases in the Bible i

Prayer Book. By Rev. T. L. O. Davie*. 5*.

The Queen's English. A Manual of Idiom and Usage. By the
late Dean Alford 6th Edition. Fcap. 8vo, Is. sowed. Is. M. cloth.

A History of English Rhythms. By Edwin Guest, M.A., D.C.L.
LL..D. New Edition, by Professor W. W. Skeat. Demy 8vo. 18s.

Elements of Comparative Grammar and Philology. For Use
in Schools. By A. C. Price, M.A., Assistant Master at Leeds Grammar
School. Crown 8vo. 2». 6d.

Questions for Examination in English Literature. By Prof.

W. W. Skeat. 2nd Edition, revised. 2s. 6d.

Etymological Glossary of nearly 2500 English Words de-
rived from the Greek. By the Rev. E. J. Boyoe. Foap. 8vo. 3s. 64.

A Syriao Grammar. By G. Phillips, D J). 3rd Edition, enlarged.

8vo. 7*. 6d,



14



George Bell and Sons'



DIVINITY, MORAL PHILOSOPHY, &c.

By the Rev. F. H. Scrivener, A.M., LL.D., D.C.L.

Novum Testamentum Grace. Editio major. Being an enlarged
Edition, containing the Rending* of Wcstcott and Hort , and those adopted
by the Revisers, Jtc 7s. 6d. For other Editions as* page 3.

A Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament.

With Forty Facsimiles from Ancient Manuscript*. 3rd Edition. 8vo. 18a,
Biz Lectures on the Text of the New Testament For English


The New Testament for English Readers. By the late H. Alford,
D.D. Vol. I. Part I. 3rd Edit. 12a. Vol. I. Part II. 2nd Edit. 10*. 6d.
Vol. II. Part I. 2nd Edit. 16s. Vol. II. Part II. 2nd Edit. 16s.

The Greek Testament By the late H. Alford, DJ>. VoL I. 7th
Edit 11. 8.. Vol. H. 8th Edit. 11 4s. Vol. ni. 10th Edit. 18s. VoL IV.
Part L 5th Edit. 18*. Vol. IV. Part II. 10th Edit lit. Vol. IV. It 12*.

Companion to the Greek Testament By A. 0. Barrett, MJL
5th Edition. revised. Foap. 8vo. 5s.

The Book of Psalms. A New Translation, with Introductions, *c.

a the Very Rev. J. J. Stewart Perowne, D.D. 8ro. Vol. I. 6th Edition.
Vol. II. 6th Edit. 16s.

Abridged for Schools. 6th Edition. Crown 8vo. 10«. 6d.

History of the Artloles of Religion. By 0. H. Hard wick. 3rd

Edition. Port 8ro. 5*.

History of the Creeds. By J. B. Lumby, DD. 3rd Edition.
Crown 8to. 7*. 64

Pearson on the Creed. Carefully printed from an early edition.

With Analysis and Index by E. Walford, M. A. Post 8to. 5s.

Liturgies and Offices of the Church, for the Use of English

Bonders, in Illustration of the Book of Common Prayer. By the Eer.
Edward Burhidge, M.A. Crown 8to. 9*.

An Historical and Explanatory Treatise on the Book of

Common Prayer By Bar. W. G. Humphry, B.D. 6th Edition, enlarged.
Small Port 8to. 2s. 6cL ; Cheap Edition, Is.

A Commentary on the Gospels, Epistles, and Acts of the

Apostles. By Bev. W. Denton, A.M. New Edition. 7 vols. 8va 8s. each.

Notes on the Catechism. By Bt Bev. Bishop Barry. 8th Edit
Foap. 2s.

The Winton Church Cateohist Questions and Answers on the
Teaching of the Church Catechism. By the late Ber. J. 8. B. Monsell,
LL.D. 4th Edition. Cloth. Ss. ; or in Four Parts, sewed.

The Church Teacher s Manual of Christian Instruction. By

Bev. M. F. Sa d l e r. 38th Thousand. 2*. 6<t



Digitized by Google



Educational Works.



15



FOREIGN CLASSICS.

A Series for use in Schools, with English Notes, grammatical and
explanatory, and renderings of difficult idiomatic expressions.

Fcap. 6vo.

Bohlller'H Wallensteln. By Dr. A. Bnchheim. 5th Edit. 5s.
Or the Lager and Piooolomini, 2s. 6d. Wallensteln' ■ Tod, 2a. 6d.

Maid of Orleans. By Dr. W. Wagner. 2nd Edit. Is. &d.

Maria Stuart By V. Kastner. 2nd Edition. It. 6d.

Ooethes Hermann and Dorothea. By E. Bell, M.A., and
E.W«lfeL U6d.

German Ballads, from Uhlan J, Goethe, and Schiller. By C. L.
Bielefeld. 3rd Edition. Is. 3d.

Oharles "XTT , par Voltaire. By L. Direy. 7th Edition. Is. 6<f.

Aventures de Telemaque, par Fenelon. By 0. J. Delille. 4th
Edition. 2s. 3d.

Seleot Fables of La Fontaine. By P.E. A.Gase. 18th Edit. l«.6d.
Plodola, by X. B. Saintine. By Dr. Dubuo. 15th Thousand. 1*. 6d.

Lamartine's Le Tailleur de Plerres de Saint-Point. By

J. Bololle, 4th Thousand. Fcap. 8vo. Is. 6d.

Italian Primer. By Rev. A. C. Clapin, M.A. Fcap. 8vo. Is.



FRENCH CLASS-BOOKS.



Frenoh Qrammar for Public Schools. By Bev. A. 0. Clapin, M. A.
Fcap. 8vo. 11th Edition, revised. 2s. 6d.

Frenoh Primer. By Rev. A. C. Clapin, M.A. Fcap. 8vo. 7th Ed. 1*.

Primer of Frenoh Philology. By Rev. A. C. Clapin. Fcap. 8vo.
3rd Edit. Is.

Le Nouveau Tresor; or, French Student's Companion. By

M. E. S. 18th Edition. Fcap. 8vo. Is. 6d.

French Examination Papers in Miscellaneous Grammar and
Idiom*. Compiled by A. M. M. Stedman, M.A. 2nd Edition, revised.
Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

Key to the above. By G. A. Schrumpf, Univ. of France. Crown
8vo. 5s. (For Teachers or Private Students only.)

Manual of French Prosody. By Arthur Gosset, M.A. Crown
8vo. 3s.



16



George Bell and Sons'



F. E. A. GASC'S FRENCH COURSE.

First French Book. Fcap. 8vo. 98th Thousand. 1* .

Second French Book. 47th Thousand. Fcap. 8vo. 1*. 6d.

Key to First and Second French Books. 5th Edit. Fcp. 8vo. 3*. W .

French Fables for Beginners, in Prose, with Index. 15th Thousand.
12mo. 1*. ed.

Select Fables of La Fontaine. 18th Thousand. Fcap.8vo. l«.6d.

Histolres Amusantes et Instmctivos. With Notes. 16th Thou-
sand. Fcap. 8to. 2a. 6d.

Practical Guide to Modern French Conversation. 17th Thou-

sand. Fcap. 8to. Is. fid.

French Poetry for the Young. With Notes. 5th Edition. Fcap.

8to. 2s.

Materials for French Proae Composition; or, Selections from
the best English Prose Writer.. 18th Thousand. Fcap. 8ro. 3*.
Key, 6s.

Proaateurs Contemporalns. With Notes. 10th Edition, re-
vised. 12tno. 8a 6d.

Le Petit Oompagnon; a French Talk-Book for Little Children,
llth Thousand. 16mo. Is 6d.

An Improved Modern Pocket Dictionary of the French and

English Languages. 33 th Thousand, with Additions. 16mo. 2s. 6d.

Modern French- English and English-French Dictionary. 3rd

and Cheaper Edition, revised. In 1 vol. 10s. 6d.

The ABC Tourist's French Interpreter of all Immediate
Wants. By F. E. A. Gasc. Is.



GOMBERT'S FRENCH DRAMA.

Being a Selection of the best Tragedies and Comedies of Moliere,
Racine, CorneiUo, and Voltaire. With Arguments and Notes by A.
Gombert. New Edition, revised by F. K. A. Gasc. Fcap. 8ro. Is. each;
sewed, 6d.

COWTKHTS.

Molikuk : — Le Misanthrope. L'Arare. Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme. Le
Tartuffe. Le Malado Imaffinaire. Les Fcmmes Sarantes. Les Fourhories
de Boapin. Les Precieuses Ridicules. L'Ecole dee Femmea. L'Eoole das
Maris. Le Medocin nialgre Lui.

Racuex Phedre. Esther. Athalie. Iphigenie. Les Plaideura. La
Tb^baide ; ou, Les Freres Ennemis. Andromaque. Britannieua.

P. Oobbtxillx:— Le Cid. Horace. Oinna. Polyeucte.

VoLtai*« :— Zaire.



GERMAN CLASS-BOOKS.

Materials for German Prose Composition. By Dr. Buchheim.
llth Edition, thoroughly revised. Fcap. 4s. 6d. Key, Parts I. and II., St.
Parts III. and IV., is.

German Conversation Grammar. By L Sydow. 2nd Edition.
Book I. Etymology. 2s. 6d, Book II. Syntax. Is. 6d.



Digitized by Google



Educational Works.



17



Wortfolge, op Rules and Exercises on the Order of Words In

German Sentence.. By Dr. P. Stock. Is. 6d.

A German Grammar for Public Schools. By the Bey. A. 0.
Clapinand F. Holl Mailer. 4th Edition. Fcap. 2s. 6d.

A German Primer, with Exercises. By Rev. A. C. Clapin. Is.

Kotzebue's Der Gefangene. With Notes by Dr. W. Btromberg. Is.

German Examination Papers in Grammar and Idiom. By
B. J. Morion. 2s. 6d. [JCs* in tks press.



MODERN GERMAN SCHOOL CLASSICS.
Small Crown 8vo.
German Examination Course. By Prof. F. Lange, Ph.D.

Elementary, 2s. Intermediate, 2s. Advanced, Is, 6d.

Hey's Fabeln Piir Kinder. Edited by Prof. F. Lange, Ph.D. 1#. 6d.
Bechstein's Miirchen. Edited by Prof. H. Hager, Ph.D.
Benedix s Dr. Wespe. Edited by F. Lange, Pb.D. 2s. 6<Z.
Schiller's Jugendjahre. Edited by Prof. H. Hager, Ph.D.
Hoflmans Meister Martin, der Kuf ner. By Prof. F. Lange, Ph.D.

Is. 64

Heyse's Hans Lange. By A A. Macdonell, M.A., Ph.D. 2s.
Auerbach's Auf Wache, and Roquette's Der Gefrorene Kuss.

By A. A. Macdonell, M A. 2*.

Moser s Der Bibliothekar. By Prof. F. Lange, Ph.D. 2s.

Eber s Elne Frage. By F. Storr, B.A. 2s.

Freytag's Die Journaliaten. By Prof. F. Lange, Ph.D. 2s. 6d.

Gutzkow's Zopf und Schwert. By Prof. F. Lange, Ph.D. 2s.

German Epic Tales. Edited by Karl Nenhaus, Ph.D. 2s. 6</.

Humoresken. Novelletten der besten deutachen Humoriaten der
Gegenwart. Edited by A. A. Macdonell, M.A. Oion. Authorised Edition.

[in preparation.



ENGLISH CLASS-BOOKS.
Comparative Grammar and Philology. By A. C. Price, M.A.,

Assistant Master at Leeds Grammar School 2s. 6d.
The Elements of the English Language. By E. Adams, Ph.D.

21st Edition. Post 8ro. 4s. 6d.
The Rudiments of English Grammar and Analysis. By

E. Adams, Ph. U. 16th Thousand. Fcap. 8ro. la
▲ Concise System of Parsing. By L. E. Adams, B.A. Is. Qd.
Examples for Grammatical Analysis (Verse and Prose). Se-

lected, Ac, by F. Edwards. 6d.

Notes on Shakespeare's Midsummer Night s Dream. By T.
Doff Barnett, B.A. Is. Julius Caesar, Is. Henry V., Is.



18



George Bell and Sons'



By 0. P. Mason, Fellow of Univ. Coll. London.

Flnt Notlom of Grammar for Young Learners. Fcap. 8vo.

35th to 40th Thousand. Cloth. 9dL

Flnt Steps In English Grammar for Junior Classes. Demy

ISmo. 44th Thousand. la

Outlines of English Grammar for the Use of Junior Classes.

65th to 70th Thousand. Crown 8 vo. 8a

English Grammar, including the Principles of Grammatical
analysis. 30th Edition. 120th to 124th Thousand. Crown 8 vo. Sa 6d.

A Shorter English Grammar, with copious Exercises. 30th to
33rd Thousand. Crown 8to. 3s. 6d.

English Grammar Practice, being the Exercises separately. 1*.

Code Standard Grammars. Parts L and II., 2d. each. Parts DX,
IV., and V., 3d. each.



Notes of Lessons, their Preparation, Ac. By Jose Rickard,
Park Lano Board School, Leeds, and A. H. Tajlor, Rodley Board
School, Leeds. 2nd Edition. Crown 8ro. 2s. 6d.

A Syllabic System of Teaching to Read, combining the advan-
tages of the ' Phonic ' and the ' Look-and-Say ' Systems. Crown 8to. la

Practical Hints on Teaching. By Bey. J. Menet, MA. 6th Edit.

revised. Grown 8vo. paper, 2s.

How to Earn the Merit Grant. A Manual of School Manage-
ment. By H. Major, B.A., B.Bc. 2nd Edit, revised. Part I. Infant
School, 3s. Part II. 4a Complete, 6s.

Test Lessons in Dictation. 4th Edition. Paper cover, It. 6d.

Drawing Copies. By P. H. Delamotte. Oblong 8vo. 12t. Sold
also in parts at la each.

Poetry for the Schoolroom. Mew Edition. Fcap. 8m It. 6d.

The Botanist's Pocket-Book. With a copious Index. By W. K

Hayward. 5th Edition, revised. Crown 8vo. cloth limp. 4a 6i,

Experimental Chemistry, founded on the Work of Dr. Stockhardt.

By 0. W. Heaton. Post 8vo. 5a
Lectures on Musical Analysis. Sonata-form, Fugue. Illus-
trated f rom Classical Mastera By Prof. H. C. Banister. 7a 6d.



GEOGRAPHICAL SERIES. By M. J. 13 a ruing ton Wabd, M.A

The Map and the Compass. A Beading-Book of Geography.

ForSUndardl. 6d.

The Round World. A Reading-Book of Geography. For

Standard II. lOd.

The Child's Geography. For the Use of Schools and for Home

Tuition. 6d.

The Child's Geography of England. With Introductory Exer-
cises on the British Isles and Empire, with Questions. 2a 6d. Without
Questions, 2a

Geography Examination Papers. (See History and Geography
Papers, p. 12.)



Digitized by



Educational Works.



19



Helps' Course of Poetry, for Schools. A New Selection from
the English Poets, carefully compiled and adapted to the several standards
by B. A. Help*, one of H.M. Inspectors of Schools.

Book I. Infants and Standards I. and II. 134 pp. small 8ro. 9J.
Book II. Standards III. and IV. 224 pp. crown 8to. Is. 6d. •
Book III. Standards V., VI., and VII. 352 pp. post 8ro. 2s.
Or in PARTS. Infanfs, 2d. ; Standard I., 2d. ; Standard II., 2d.
Standard III., 4a.



Picture School-Books. In Simple Language, with numerous

Illustration*. Royal 16 mo.

The Infant's Primer. 3d. — School Primer. 6d. —School Beader. By J.
Tilleard. Is.— Poetry Book for Schools. Is.— The Life of Joseph. Is.— The
Scripture Parables. By the Rev. J. K. Clarke. Is. — The Scripture Miracles.
By the Rev. J. E. Clarke. Is.— The New Testament History. By the Bar.
J. 0. Wood, M A. Is.— The Old TesUment History. By the Rev. J. O.
Wood, M.A. Is.— The Story of Banyan's Pilgrim's Progress. Is.— The Life
of Martin Luther. By Sarah Crompton. Is.



BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS.

A Series qf Reading Boohs designed to facilitate the acquisition of the power
of Reading by very young Children, /nil vols, limp cloth, 6d.
Those with an asterisk have a Frontispiece or other Illustration.

♦The Two Parrots. A Tale of the Jubilee. By M. E.

Wintle. 9 Illustrations.

♦The Old Boathouse. Bell and Fan; or, A Cold Dip.

♦Tot and the Cat A Bit of Cake. The Jay. The
Black Hen's Nest. Tom and Ned. Mrs. Bee.

♦The Cat and the Hen. Sam and his Dog Redleg.

Bob and Tom Leo. A Wreck.

* The New-born Lamb. The Rosewood Box. Poor



SuitabU
fn/onts.



♦The Story of Three Monkeys. >
♦Story of a Cat Told by Herself.
The Blind Boy. The Mute QirL A New Tale of



Babes in a Wood.



■



BuitabU

for



The Dey and the Knight. The New Bank Note.

The Royal Visit. A King's Walk on a Winter's Day. /'Standard*

♦Queen Bee and Busy Bee.
♦Grull's Crag.

*A First Book of Geography. By the Rev. C. A. Johns.
Deuble size. Is.

** W*V» DISV| BMBJSI |



Syllabic Spelling. By C. Barton. In Two Parts. Infants, 3d.

1 1., 3d.



for
Stanford*

in.* iv.



20 George Bell and Sons' Educational Works.



BELL'S READING-BOOKS.

FOR SCHOOLS AND PAROCHIAL LIBRARIES.
Now Ready. Post 8vo. Strongly bound in cloth. It. each.

♦Life of Columbus.
•Grimm's German Tales. (Selected.)

11 Danish Tales. Illustrated. (Selected.)
is tune n . Short Lives for Young Children.
Great Englishwomen. Short Lives of.
Groat Scotsmen. Short Lives of.
*Masterman Ready. By C apt. Marryat. Illua. (Abgd.)

•Scott's Talisman. (Abridged.)

•Friends in Pur and Feathers. By Gwynfryn.

•Dickens's Little Nell. Abridged from the 4 The Old
Curiosity Shop.'
Parables from Nature. (Selected.) By Mrs. Gatty.

Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare. (Selected.)

Edge worth's Tales. (A Selection.)
♦Gulliver's Travels. (Abridged.)
•Robinson Crusoe. Illustrated.
•Arabian Nights. (A Selection Rewritten.)

•The Vicar of Wakefield.

•Settlers in Canada. By Capt. Marryat. (Abridged.)

Marie : Glimpses of Life in France. By A. B. Ellis.

Poetry for Boys. Selected by D. Munro.
♦Southey's Life of Nelson. (Abridged.)
•Life of the Duke of Wellington, with Maps and Plans.
•Sir Roger de Coverley and other Essays from the
Spectator.

Tales of the Coast By J. Bunciman.

• The*t Volume* ore Illustrated.



Standards
IV. iV.



V. VI. t
VII.



I



Uniform with the Series, in limp cloth, 6d, each.

Shakespeare's Plays. Kemble's Beading Edition. With Ex-
planatory Notes for School Use.
JULIUS OESAR. THE MERCHANT OF VENICE. KINO JOHN.

MACBETH. AS YOU LIKEilT.



: GEORGE BELL * SONS, York 8treet, Covent



Digitized by Google



PLEASE RETURN TO
ALDERMAN LIBRARY



DUE



DUE



Digitized by Google



000 6S3 "H?


Digitized by Google



Google
